RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-JAN-1998 16:28:00.00

SUBJECT:   Ruth Kain and her role at the Medicare buy-in event

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
i'll give you the background whenever you want.
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 01/07/98 04:28
PM ---------------------------




Christopher C. Jennings
01/07/98 03:13:43 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Erskine B. Bowles/WHO/EOP
cc:      Carole A. Parmelee/WHO/EOP, Jason S. Goldberg/WHO/EOP
Subject:         Ruth Kain and her role at the Medicare buy-in event

I heard that at the senior staff meeting this morning people were asking
how we came acros·s Ruth Kain for the President's Medicare buy-in proposal
announcement.  I would like you to know about two people who deserve all
the credit for this -- Sarah Bianchi and Christa Robinson of the DPC staff.

Over the Christmas/New Year's break, with very little notice for the
event, we had to find someone who well fit they type of individual who
best personified the type of people who would benefit from this new
proposal. Since many of these individuals are sick or were unavailable
during this period, it was very difficult to find a perfect candidate who
could travel here and be a good spokesperson.  Until the very last moment,
we were all petrified we could not come through for the President and
feared we might let everyone down.  Here's the story:

Christa Robinson, who   helps us do virtually every single one of our DPC
events (whether it be   crime, welfare, education, child care, food safety,
health care, etc.) is   in charge of targeting every "real" person we have
in these events. She    always does a remarkable job, but this event was
special.

Christa was particularly upset about not finding the perfect candidate.
She talked with group after group, individual after individual, but could
not come up with the type of person our communications people (and us
policy folks) wanted.  It wasn't until less than 24 hours before the
President's announcement that we locked in probably one of our best "real
life" people ever -- Ruth Kain. And even after finding Mrs. Kain, because
we thought it would be nice to have two "validators," Christa literally
refused to give up on finding another candidate up until hours before the
event.

Finding Ruth Kain was not easy. Our normal channels of getting help from
HHS, Labor, AARP, and numerous other groups completely failed us.  On
Sunday evening, Sarah Bianchi -- (who as you know works directly with me
and is the key individual who helps us produce every single one of our
health care events), reminded me that Steve Finley of USA Today had done a
very positive article on this subject months ago.  In it, he mentioned a
number of people who were particularly vulnerable to the shortcomings of
our current private insurance market for the 55-65 age group.   Sarah
suggested that I call Steve up and see if I could get him to agree to give
me some of the people's names and phone numbers.   (We have a longstanding
positive relationship and he agreed to do so.)

Sarah then talked to Steve about everyone of the candidates.   She
narrowed them down to the best couple of options -- one of which was Ruth
Kain. Sarah gave the number to Christa and Christa talked Mrs. Kain into
coming. Remember, this all happened one day before the event.

Mrs. Kain arrived yesterday.morning, just a couple of hours before meeting
the President. Both Christa and Sarah worked with Mrs. Kain literally
minutes before the event in developing her remarkable statement.  I
thought it was one of the most moving arguments for a new Presidential
policy that I have ever heard.

Elena and I didn't want these White House heroines to go by unknown to
you. We are really fortunate to have these committed, loyal individuals
on staff.



Ev




