RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-FEB-1998 16:26:23.00

SUBJECT:    Advance copy of the H1-B testimony

TO: Julie A. Fernandes    ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
get a new version from them as soon as they have one.
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 02/23/98 04:25
PM ---------------------------



           Julie A. Fernandes
           02/23/98 01:43:52 PM

Record Type: Record

To: Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc: Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP
Subject: Advance copy of the H1-B testimony

I thought you might want to look at this draft of Labor's testimony for
Wed. on H1B visas that Ingrid just sent over.
---------------------- Forwarded by Julie A. Fernandes/OPD/EOP on 02/23/98
01:51 PM ---------------------------



INGRID M. SCHROEDER
02/23/98 01:39:29 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Julie A. Fernandes/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject: Advance copy of the H1-B testimony



We will circulate this formally with an LRM.




=================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:  0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D1]MAIL49107245M.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750431D100000010A020300000002050000008F650000000200008244C17C7A7476EFFF8EFA
4A44F300507D4AAED13079DB678312A95D6F81B53388E04842F02AB4BF1D7EE846C26F5020AFFF
25F2E8D97477E868E27A70946320F90745FC28C008A987725FE6CA60B212CCABDD665951042A35
71A5C41A7C77A596CCEB6BEE6FOD42845B28602CDC04F5C31BE103EB78342C71900AF5D847026E
                   ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF LABOR
                                 before the
                     THE SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE

                                        February 25, 1998


Mr. Chainnan and Members of the Committee:

        Let me begin today, Mr. Chainnan, by expressing my sincere appreciation to you for

affording me this opportunity to share the views of the Administration regarding immigration,

labor market conditions in high-technology industries, and possible refonns in the H-I B

nonimmigrant visa program. The Administration shares your interest in the infonnation

technology industry, as evidenced by our participation in a recent convocation in Berkeley that

addressed Infonnation Technology (IT) work force needs. Further, as you know from

Administration proposals advanced beginning in 1993, we believe that the H-1B program needs

refonn. This employment-based visa program is seriously flawed in its current fonn and urgently

requires the attention of Congress. I would like to commend the Committee for its interest in

these issues.

                        Tight Labor ~arkets and IT Skills Shortages

       It is clear that IT employment is growing rapidly, IT labor markets are tight, and they are

likely to remain so. Although this is true for the nation as a whole, given our sustained economic

expansion and low national unemployment rate, IT labor markets appear to be particularly

affected. Employment of computer systems analysts, engineers, and scientists has been growing

by 10% a year -- well above the growth of comparable occupations -- and is expected to continue

growing at a comparable rate through 2006. BLS projects that the U.S. will require more than

1.3 million new workers in IT core occupations between 1996 and 2006 to fill job openings


                                                                                        ement System
                                                                 Automated Records Manag
                                                                 Hex-Dump conversion

projected to occur due to growth and the need to replace workers who leave the labor force or

transfer to other occupations.

       The IT skills shortage issue is very controversial. Industry advocates say that hundreds of

thousands of jobs cannot be filled and that these vacancies are hurting U.S. competitiveness.

Critics say the IT industry: (1) drastically overstates any problem by producing inflated job

vacancy data and equating it to skills shortages; (2) continues to lay off tens of thousands of

workers (M., AT&T recently announced large lay-offs); and (3) fails to tap reservoirs of talent

available by using unnecessarily specific recruitment requirements and not providing more

training to current IT workers.

       One point of contention is the confusion between job vacancies and actual skills

shortages. Even if the latest industry survey, which found nearly 350,000 job vacancies in the IT

industry is accurate, it does not mean that there is a skills shortage of that same magnitude.

Nearly all industries and firms, particularly those with rapid employment growth and high worker

turnover, will have large numbers of jobs openings or vacancies without experiencing skills

shortages.

       Evidence from perhaps the best predictor of skills shortages -- wage growth -- does not

suggest acute skills shortages nationwide in the IT industry, but may be consistent with skills

shortages in specialized occupational areas and selected local areas. Broad-based Bureau of

Labor Statistics (BLS) surveys show increases in IT wages in 1996 and 1997 that are only

modestly above comparable occupations, while more specialized industry surveys show much

larger wage increases in more specialized, high-skills occupations.

       The Administration believes it is essential, regardless of the magnitude of the problem, to




                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dwnp Conversion

shape public policy to assure that IT workforce needs are met, but that increased immigration

should be the last -- not the first -- public policy response to skills shortages. Our first response

should be to provide the needed skills to U.S. workers to qualify them for IT jobs.

          Tight labor markets and skills shortages create incentives for employers and workers to

behave in ways needed to achieve many of the Administration's top priorities: moving welfare

recipients, out-of-school youth, and workers dislocated by trade into jobs; providing greater

opportunities for lifelong learning; and raising wages and reducing income inequality. Reliance

on increased immigration, however, would undercut these market incentives and adversely affect

our ability to upgrade the skills of US. workers to meet emerging skills shortages.

          The existence of a tight labor market causes employers to raise wages, improve working

conditions, and provide increased training to enable currently employed workers to keep pace

with technology and induce more workers to enter the labor market. The increased demand for

trained workers induces educational and job training institutions to teach new skills. With more

opportunities for training, workers acquire skills needed to obtain better, higher-paying and more

secure jobs, thereby creating open jobs and career ladders for those just entering or reentering the

labor market -- young people, welfare recipients, displaced workers, and other disadvantaged

groups.

          Labor markets are sometimes slow to respond to skills shortages. In these circumstances,

it is often argued that foreign temporary workers are needed in the short-term to provide

necessary skills while the labor market adjusts and provides US. workers with the requisite

training. Without needed foreign temporary workers, some argue that the IT industry may adjust

to skills shortages in ways that do not serve the short-term or long-term priorities of the country,



                                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

either by reducing job creation or by moving jobs overseas. Further, it is argued that IT

industries are so critical to our competitive edge in an array of industries and services that

disproportionate harm could come to the U.S. economy.

       Even in such circumstances, however, the use of foreign temporary workers will interfere

with labor market adjustments and makes achieving our other priorities more difficult. It

dampens the market signals of increased wages, improved working conditions, and enhanced job

security and growth potential so that fewer U.S. workers will be induced to acquire new skills,

and fewer employers and institutions will be induced to provide more training and education.

       Our primary public policy response to skills mismatches due to changing technologies

and economic restructuring must be to prepare the U.S.

workforce to meet new demands. Importing needed skills should usually be a short-term

response to meet urgent needs while we actively adjust to quickly changing circumstances.

       The Administration already has taken significant steps to increase our capacity for

increasing workforce skills. The President continues to pursue comprehensive reform of the

Nation's employment and training system by working with Congress to enact the principles

embodied in his GI Bill proposal. Moreover, in the historic balanced budget agreement oflast

summer, the President insisted on and achieved the largest increase in 30 years in the Federal

investment to expand the skills of American workers, including:

               the largest Pell Grant increase in two decades -- boosting the maximum from

               $2,700 to $3,000;

               a $1,500 Hope Scholarship to make the first two years of school universally

               available through tax credits;




                                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

              the Lifelong Learning Tax Credit for the last 2 years of college and continuing

              adult   ed~cation   and training to upgrade worker skills;

              a 10 percent increase in employment and training resources for dislocated workers

              and disadvantaged workers and youth to over $5 billion; and

              a $3 billion program to help move 1 million people from welfare to work.

       Further, the Administration announced several new efforts at the recent Berkeley

Convocation to help address the growing demand for information technology workers:

              A Labor Department Technology Demonstration project to test innovative ways of

              establishing partnerships between local workforce development systems,

              employers, training providers and others to train dislocated workers in needed

              high tech skills;

              The expansion and integration of America's Job Bank and America's Talent Bank

              by the Labor Department to allow employers and workers to list and access job

              openings and worker resumes in one integrated system.

              A Commerce Department grant program to bring information technology to poor

              people, particularly to enhance education and life-long learning;

              The convening of four town hall meetings by the Commerce Department to

              discuss IT workforce needs, identify best practices, and showcase successful

              models; and

              Ajoint Education and Labor grant program to expand employer involvement in

              high technology school-to-work programs.

      We think that there is more that we can do to move U.S. workers into high technology




                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

jobs, and we welcome the discussions that may be sparked by this hearing. Given this broader

context, let me tum to the need for reform of the H-IB nonimmigrant program.

                                  H-IB Nonimmigrant Program

       The H-lB program allows the admission of up to 65,000 workers each year (to stay for as

long as six years), ostensibly to meet short-term, high-skills employment needs in the domestic

labor market. In principle, this can be an appropriate purpose, consistent with our overall goal of

giving priority to improving the skills of U.S. workers.

       In practice, however, employers do not have to demonstrate any type of employment need

prior to getting a foreign worker. Exacerbating this problem, the Labor Department is limited

strictly in its ability to enforce the minimum standards that employers must adhere to.

Employers obtain H-IB foreign workers by filing a labor condition application with the

Department affirming that they have complied with four requirements:

               that a wage (not less than the local prevailing rate) will be paid to the foreign

               workers;

               that no strike or lockout exists;

               that notification has been provided to U.S. workers and their unions; and

               that the employment ofH-lB nonimmigrants will not adversely affect the working

               conditions of U.S. workers similarly employed.

By law, the Labor Department can do no more than review these attestations for completeness

and obvious inaccuracies -- to determine whether an employer checked all of the boxes, made no

flagrant errors, and signed the attestation. Once the Department has reviewed the attestation, its

enforcement has been limited by the fact that foreign worker is unlikely to make a complaint.



                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

       Our experience with the practical operation of the H-IB program has raised serious

concerns that what was conceived as a means to meet temporary business needs for unique,

highly-skilled professionals from abroad is, in fact, being used for a totally different purpose.

Some employers -- though a minority of those who use the H-IB program -- seek admission of

foreign workers to compete with qualified US. workers because temporary foreign workers are

tied to one employer and are likely to be willing to work for lower wages and under less

favorable working conditions. As a result, relatively large numbers offoreign workers who may

well be displacing US. workers and eroding employers' commitment to the domestic workforce.

       Many employers, to be sure, use the H-IB nonimmigrant program for its stated purpose:

to provide US. businesses with timely access to the "best and the brightest" in the international

labor market to meet urgent but generally temporary business needs. I want to emphasize that the

Administration recognizes the need for this legitimate use of the program. But reform of the

H-IB program is needed because it does not provide the needed balance between timely access to

the intemationallabor market and adequate protection of US. workers' job opportunities, wages

and working conditions.

       Greater protections for U.S. workers are needed because many employers use the H-IB

program to employ not the "best and the brightest," but rather entry-level foreign workers who

compete with U.S. workers. Minimum education and work experience qualifications for H-IB

jobs are quite low -- a 4-year college degree and no work experience, or the equivalent in terms

of combined education and work experience. Thus, a foreign worker with the equivalent of a

community college degree and a few years of experience can compete with US. workers. These

low educational requirements result in nearly 80 percent ofH-lB jobs paying less than $50,000 a



                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

year and more than 70 percent of the jobs being in computer-related occupations, physical

therapists, RN's and other health-related occupations.

       The H-1 B program is broken in several respects. First, current law does not require any
       ,

test for the availability of qualified US. workers in the domestic labor market. Therefore, many

of the visas under the current cap of 65,000 can be used lawfully by employers to hire foreign

workers for purposes other than meeting a skills shortage. Second, current law allows a U.S.

employer to lay off U.S. workers and replace them with H-IB workers. Third, current law allows

employers to retain H -1 B workers for up to 6 years to fill a presumably "temporary" need. We

simply do not believe this is right. The H-IB program does almost nothing to encourage US.

employers to develop US. workers to perform the jobs for which they are seeking

nonimmigrants, or to limit their dependency on a nonimmigrant workforce.

       As a result of these weaknesses in the program, it has become increasingly evident that

the H-1 B program is being utilized by some as the basis for building businesses dependent on the

labors offoreign workers in relatively low-level computer-related and health care occupations.

This is a clear example of companies using H -1 B visas for foreign workers that are not needed to

meet skills shortages. Such businesses are, in some cases, in unfair competition with US.

workers and those US. businesses that employ mostly US. workers. The growth of "job

contractors" with work forces composed predominantly or even entirely ofH-IB workers, which'

then lease these employees to other US. companies or use them to provide services previously

provided by laid off US. workers, is cause for serious concern.'

       Mr. Chairman, the Administration asked the Congress in 1995 to amend the H-IB

nonimmigrant program to address these problems. Unfortunately for many US. businesses and



                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


                                                        9

      workers, these amendments were not enacted. The amendments requested in 1995 were carefully

      designed to assure continued business access to needed high-skills workers in the international

      labor market while decreasing the H-IB program's susceptibility to misuse to the detriment of

      u.s. workers and the businesses which employ them.     Briefly stated, the amendmehts would

      require employers which seek access to temporary foreign "professional" workers to attest that:

                      they have not laid off or otherwise displaced U.S. workers in the occupations for

                     which they seek nonimmigrant workers in the periods preceding and following

                     their seeking such workers; and,

                     in certain circumstances, they have taken timely and significant steps to recruit

                     and retain U.S. workers in these occupations.

      In addition, the Administration urged enactment of another amendment to reduce tl).e allowable

      period of stay under the H -1 B program from six to three years to better reflect the "temporary"

      nature of the presumed employment need~

             Enactment of these amendments will help employers actually facing skills shortages,

      including those in the IT industry, obtain needed workers through the H-IB program. Under

      existing program rules, employers facing skills shortages are disadvantaged because they must

      compete for available visas (up to the cap of 65,000) on a first-come, first-served basis with other

      employers that do not face such shortages. Enactment of the proposed amendments would

      reduce pressure on the visa cap by screening out employers that are not faced with skills

      shortages and have no interest in recruiting U.S. workers.

             A significant number of such employers use the H-IB program as a probationary program

      for foreign students who graduate from U.S. colleges, without a market test for U.S. workers, to



                                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

determine if they want to sponsor the foreign student for permanent immigration status. By

reducing the use of the H-IB for such purposes, more visas would be available for employers

who need to use the H-IB program for its original purpose -- bringing in foreign workers to fill a

temporary, critical need that cannot be met by U.S. workers.

                                           Conclusion

       Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by repeating that reform of the H -1 B program is integral

and essential to eliminating abuses under the program and providing greater protections for U.S.

workers. At a bare minimum, we must not expand a program as fundamentally flawed as the H-

IB nonimmigrant visa program. Further, enactment of these reforms would effectively allocate a

greater share ofH-IB visas to employers facing actual skills shortages.

       I appreciate the interest shown by the Committee Members and staff in our views, and

your thoughtful consideration of them. The Department looks forward to continuing to work

closely and cooperatively with you and your staff on these issues. Mr. Chairman, that concludes

my prepared statement.




                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
