RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-MAR-1998 14:06:41.00

SUBJECT:   Unz/Bilingual ed

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
fyi.  i went to the meeting last week and pushed for some significant
reforms in our bilingual ed program.  apparently riley is backtracking
from the 3-year approach. right now, he's at three-years with an escape
hatch (which I don't think is bad), but his staff doesn't even like that,
so it's hard to know where he'll come out. mike is supposed to be
drafting a memo from you and riley to the prsident on (1) options on unz
and (2) options on reforms to the federal bilingual ed program.  let me
know if you have any thoughts.
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 03/08/98 02:12
PM ---------------------------




Michael Cohen
03/01/98 02:33:08 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:      Jonathan H. Schnur/OVP @ OVP
Subject:         Unz/Bilingual ed

We are meeting on Wed, March 4 (4:30 in OEOB 211) to review where we are
on Unz and, in particular, to discuss with Mike and Delia from Education
options for possible changes to the bilingual education program.   Over
the past few days I've managed to talk to almost all of you.   In order to
bring everyone up to speed and help focus our discussion on Wednesday, I
thought it would be helpful to try and capture where I think we are right
now.

1. There is an emerging consensus among ourselves for a recommendation to
the President to oppose Unz.
I think we have all concluded that Unz is bad policy, and that it is in
the Administration's long-term political interest to come out against
Unz. This is despite the fact that, with the exception of a number of
advocacy groups in CA, just about everyone we have talked to believes that
Unz will pass.

Assuming the President agrees with this recommendation, we have not yet
come to agreement on who should announce the Administration's position, or
when it should be announced.    Over the past several weeks, our informal
conversations have focused alternately on Secretary Riley or the Vice
President or the President.  With regard to timing, my latest
conversations with Mickey and Karen focused on making our position known
within the next 30-45 days (by mid-April) .

2. There is also an emerging consensus that opposition to Unz must be
combined with a "mend it don't end it" position on bilingual education,
which stresses that helping LEP kids master English is a primary purpose
of bilingual education programs, and which proposes steps to increase the
effectivness of bilingual education programs.
'"
      When we meet on Wednesday we will review Education Department
     recommendations for strengthening bilingual education. The Department has
     been conducting an evaluation of bilingual education.  I'm not certain
     when the results of this evaluation will be available, but, if we can get
     them soon enought they should help inform any changes we propose.

     3.  We are not getting intense pressure yet to take a position on Unz.
     While the California advocacy groups pressed us to help with the fight
     against Unz (by taking a public position and by helping with fund
     raising), the elected officials have not been pushing for the
     Administration to get involved in this battle. The initiative is still
     below the radar screen for the public and for most educators.
     Nonetheless, pressure is likely to build soon, so we shouldn't relax.
     Karen thinks we probably need to take a public position within the next
     30-45 days, by mid-April.

     4.  We are mid-way through the consultation process we agreed we would
     undertake before an Administration position could be announced.
     We've talked with national advocay groups,  and with California elected
     officials and educators, researchers and advocates.   We've talked with Unz
     and some of his supporters in the CA legislature.   Mickey was in CA last
     week 'and had additional conversations with elected officials; Karen is
     staying on top of things as well, and has talked with a number of
     legislators in the past few days as well.

     On Wednesday a number of us are meeting with Dems in the CA Congressional
     delegation.  We also need to meet with members of the Hispanic Caucus
     (though I don't think this is scheduled yet.)  Next week there is a
     meeting with the Hispanic Education Coalition.


     5.  There is some movement on the compromise legislation.
     Karen reports that the compromise legislation we discussed during our
     visit is picking up some momentum, and that Sen. Alpert may be on the
     verge of reaching agreement with members of the Hispanic Caucus on some
     amendments to her bill.

     We still don't know if this legislation will draw Wilson's signature or
     veto, and even if enacted it is not likely to stop Unz.  However, if this
     bill moves it would give opponents of Unz better ammunition and cover.



     I think that covers the main points that have come up in conversations
     over the past few days.  Let me--and everyone else--know if I've gotten
     anything wrong.



     Message Sent
     TO: ________~--~------------------------------------------------
     Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
     Maria Echaveste/WHO/EOP
     Mickey Ibarra/WHO/EOP
     Karen E. Skelton/WHO/EOP
     Janet Murguia/WHO/EOP
     Mike Smith @ ed.gov @ inet
     Deli~_pompa,@ ed.gov @ inet




