RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 12-JUL-1998 16:20:51.00

SUBJECT:   Mike wasn't quite as positive as our Q&A

TO: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on ·07/12/98 04:20
PM ---------------------------




Cynthia A. Rice
07/10/98 07:36:56 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP, Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP, Cynthia Dailard/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         Mike wasn't quite as positive as our Q&A

         Q    Mike, could you talk about tobacco, in terms of
why, if the state attorneys general and the tobacco companies come to
a settlement that does not meet federal action -- why would that be
bad?

             MR. MCCURRY:  I didn't say it would be bad.  I think
that we applaud the state attorneys general and the work that they've
done, and clearly understand exactly why they would want to protect
the citizens of their states by wanting to recover funds from the
companies.to make good on the claims that they've had to pay for
those who have suffered from health effects of tobacco use, tobacco
addition.

             But that's not the same thing as meeting the
requirements of the President's approach to a national public health
policy on tobacco which includes FDA jurisdiction, includes
developing the kind of counterweight advertising that would
discourage people from smoking, and particularly kids, that will
achieve the kind of targets on reducing teenage smoking use that we
want to see, and that provides some protections for rural
communities. None of that are featured in the negotiations that the
states have underway with the tobacco companies, and so they only are
addressing part of the what is a larger problem that needs a national
response.

             Q    -- new talks come to some kind of a settlement,
does that make it harder for the President to push for what he wants
-- take away some of the

              MR. MCCURRY:  Not necessarily, because I think that
those familiar with this would agree that you get the desired result,
which is a public health policy that discourages young people from
taking up the habit of smoking, only with the kind of national
response foreseen in the approach that has been embedded in federal
legislation, specifically through the kind of increase in price that
would discourage use.   And you don't get that from settlements that
deal with claims with the payment of health care payments that states
have made.   You get that when you embrace a new national policy.

             So the work will continue and we will continue to work
hard to try to break the gridlock that the industry and the
Republican leadership of Congress have on the issue at the moment.
They won't keep it forever because they're on the wrong side of.
history.

             Q    Are you telling the attorneys general to go ahead
and make the best deal they can?

             MR. MCCURRY:  We understand that they're going to do
what they think they have to do to protect their citizens, and that's
one consequence of the Republican leaders of congress not giving the
American people what the American people want, which is a new
national health care policy that protects kids from tobacco.




