    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-AUG-1998 16:38:32.00

    SUBJECT:   Welfare weekly

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    could you guys have your talk about the race stuff before you leave? i
    feel uncomfortable leaving this until you get back.
    ---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 08/13/98 04:37
    PM ---------------------------




    Bruce N. Reed
    08/13/98 12:53:24 PM
    Record Type:    Record

    To:      Andrea Kane/OPD/EOP, Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP, Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
    cc:
    Subject:         Welfare weekly

    Assuming we're doing a weekly item on case loads (either this week or
    next), I wanted to throw in a few tidbits from the HHS report: We should
    tell him that two years after the signing, no race to the bottom has
    materialized -- nine states have increased benefits, only eight have cut
    benefits. Almost every state requires personal responsibility contracts,
    and most states have adopted a work-first model, with 32 states expecting
    clients to work within six months.  For the first time, half of all
    low-income single mothers with children under six -- the population most
    affected by welfare policy -- are working, a dramatic increase from 35% in
    1992. State evaluations of welfare programs show employment increases of
    8 to 15 percentage points.  So far, welfare changes do not appear to have
    put nearly as much pressure on the foster care system as some critics
    feared.  A Maryland study found that less than 1/2 of 1 percent of
    families leaving welfare placed a child in foster care, and most of those
    families had already been under investigation for abuse or neglect.

    Andrea, we should talk more about the racial data -- I'm still not sure we
    have a full explanation of what's going on, and I don't want to send him
    something until we do.




    ---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 08/13/98
    12:33 PM ---------------------------



    Andrea Kane
    08/12/98 06:05:27 PM
    Record Type:    Record

        The President's FY99 budget takes further steps to promote work and welfare reform
through a plan to provide 50,000 new housing vouchers to welfare recipients who need housing
assistance in order to get or keep a job. Families could use these housing vouchers to move closer
to a new job, to reduce a long commute, or to secure more stable housing to eliminate
emergencies that keep them from getting to work every day on time. These targeted vouchers will
give people on welfare a new tool to make the transition to a job and succeed in the work place.

         The $283 million proposal will help address the problem, in many regions, that jobs are'
being created far from where many welfare recipients live. Cu.rrently, about two-thirds of new jobs
are being created in the suburbs, but three of four welfare recipients live in rural areas or central
cities. The funding for the Administration's Access to Jobs initiative in the Transportation Equity
Act for the 21st Century (TEA-21) will assist states and localities to develop flexible transportation
alternatives for welfare recipients and other low income workers. But in some cases it makes more
sense for someone to move closer to work -- and this new proposal will make that move from
welfare to work possible.

How It Will Work
        These vouchers will provide States and communities with a new flexible tool to help
families who need housing assistance in order to achieve self-sufficiency.
·       The additional vouchers will be available on a competitive basis to local housing agencies,
        including Indian housing authorities. Applications must be developed in consultation with
        the state, local, or tribal welfare agency and the local Welfare-to-Work formula funds
        grantee (typically the Private Industry Council), to ensure that services are coordinated.

·      The vouchers will be used where they are essential to a successful transition from welfare to
       work--that is, where housing assistance is critical for a family to get or keep a job.

·      Families who receive the vouchers must be eligible for or currently receiving Temporary
       Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) or have received TANF within the past year.

         The initiative recognizes the direct link between affordable housing and self-sufficiency.
Along with the Administration's proposal to increase the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit, this
initiative will make decent, affordable housing available to more Americans.

Current Status
        Congress has recognized the need for housing vouchers to promote welfare reform, but so
far has provided insufficient funding for them. The HUDjVA Appropriations bill passed by the
House provides $100 million for 17,700 Welfare to Work Housing Vouchers. The bill passed by
the Senate provides only $40 million for 7,000 housing vouchers. The HUDjV A Appropriations
conference committee is expected to occur after the August recess.
                                                                                                 08/04/98



                                                                                ManaQement SyStCl11
                                                               AutomatedRecor ds    -
                                                               Hex-Dunip Conversion
