      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL                           (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP                 [ OPD 1

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-DEC-1998 10:46:51.00

      SUBJECT:           stem cell -- press guidance

      TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      ---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 11/30/98 09:35
      ,PM - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




      Jeffrey M. Smith
      12/02/98 10:28:43 AM
      Record Type:     Record

      To:      Christopher C. Jennings/OPD/EOP, Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP, Holly L.
      Gwin/OSTP/EOP, Clifford J. Gabriel/OSTP/EOP
      cc:      Nanda Chitre/WHO/EOP
      Subject:         stem cell -- press guidance




      Chris -- Nanda Chitre has requested press guidance on the Varmus testimony
      by 11:30 a.m.   Pasted below is a "placeholder" because Varmus is
      currently testifying as we speak. We'd appreciate having the benefit of
      your edits and suggestions.

      Rachel Levinson is at the hearing now and is expected to report in
      shortly. A key issue of press interest is whether Dr. Varmus will say
      that the statute does or does not permit NIH-funded scientists to use some
      of the stem cells that were produced by the scientists on the second
      panel. DHHS General Counsel has not reached a decision on this point and
      Dr. Varmus' written testimony does not answer the question, and he will
      probably be pressed on the issue.

      It may make sense to pass this current version along to Nanda -- with your
      edits included -- and then, shortly before noon, update the Q&A section in
      light of what actually transpired this morning's hearing.
",




                                    HUMAN STEM CELL RESEARCH SENATE HEARING
                                                                December 2,1998


        CONTEXT: Dr. Harold Varmus, Director of the National Institutes of Health testifies
        today before the Senate Labor, HHS Appropriations Subcommittee. The subject of the
        hearing is human stem cell research.


     General

     Dr. Varmus will appear as the first witness, followed by the second panel including Drs.
     James Thomson (University of Wisconsin), John Gearhart (Johns Hopkins University) and
     Michael West (Advanced Cell Technology, Inc), the scientists associated with three
     experiments reported recently in which human stem cells were produced from human
     embryos, fetal tissue, and a human somatic cell fused to a cow egg, respectively. A third
     panel will be comprised of ethicists including Dr. Arthur Caplan (University of
     Pennsylvania).

     Dr. Varmus will describe the potential scientific and medical benefits of research using
     human stem cells including the development oftreatments for cancer, heart disease,
     diabetes, Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease, stroke, burns, and arthritis. Additionally,
     Dr. Varmus will discuss some of the ethical issues raised by human stem cell research and
     will reaffirm his commitment to the President's 1994 ban on the use of NIH funds to create
     human embryos for research purposes.

     Beginning in FY 96, annual Congressional appropriations language has extended beyond
     the President's ban in forbidding research in which an embryo is knowingly discarded,
     destroyed or exposed to greater than minimal risk. Patient advocacy groups and scientific
     societies have written Subcommittee Chairman Sen. Specter seeking reversal of the
     Congressional ban and supporting stem cell research.

     Q. What is the Administration's view on human stem cell research?

     A. We are told that human stem cell research has great promise, and we are hopeful that
        these predictions will bear out. Nevertheless, there are a number of ethical, 'medical
        and legal issues that need to sorted out before a policy decision can be made. The
        President has asked his National Bioethics Advisory Commission to undertake a
        thorough review of the issues associated with human stem cell research, balancing all
        the ethical and medical considerations. The Commission's report will assist in defining
        our next steps.

     Q. What is the Administration's view on the Congressional ban on Federally-funded
        human embryo research?



                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex.Dump Conversion




     A. Given the dynamic nature of the science and how that science shapes our ethical
        understanding, we believe the President's 1994 directive banning the use of Federal
        funds for the creation of human embryos for research provides appropriate
        restrictions. Each year, the President's budget has proposed deleting the broade'r
        Congressional ban and has objected to addressing this issue in 'statute.

     Q. Was public funding used to support this research?

     A. No. The human stem cell research discussed at today's Senate hearing was privately
        funded.




                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
