RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-FEB-1997 18:07:41.00

SUBJECT:   Attached memorandum re labor-related issues.

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP      [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
the rest of the memo
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 02/12/97 05:46
PM ---------------------------



        Kathleen M. Wallman
        02/12/97 12:06:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Elena Kagan
cc:
Subject: Attached memorandum re labor-related issues.

Message Creation Date was at 12-FEB-1997 12:06:00

Attached please find a draft memorandum for your review.       Steve Kelman,
will
you please give to Director Raines? Many thanks.



;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
The following attachments were included with this message:

TYPE        FILE
NAME        aflcio5.wpd



;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT   2 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D12]MAIL485157246.016 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D2060000010A02010000000205000000A6810000000200OOBF32F6DB9CDD46E2346E9A
D99BC7714EBA50E05876D3F708F21329COC690B39C657E5F6AE18F317B765A8A2083ACF94BFBC2
355B85580B9CF6D7A2C8DOE1AD30D819AOBF5827C09E3654E9BE98D16C6DF66C214D1D9BB8497C
9E287022C273E3D3DE7C3837FBC4A703EBA505EEFC2639E4DE675BB10D2C2BF7FBE41639F6182B
66771E2189C1103EF3944FF88C37A391AC6F1B22C16DB9B6AB43CEFOA9A7AB1B27BOD637772598
82DBD744383F70762A11F2A855BF53B4870A6EFD5DCD71D926EFCO96B5D1F9B3A2D36FF8ECCF64
664AD30F69ED933C39A02315ED52F965EC1ADDEDB877BF73A2BDE26AA14FF3898F3CB53DA74E42
4966FAOFABB148C913BB5E1783DAFE4800A008F3CC70B87F9106A2A89057F8635F08622C20E9C9
6EBBA8754FB54DE9CF1E8CE6908D5819D376AB76326E68559409D93526F8D17E4080820E8DC299
D9DFCFF47A1AF60C04666DBAFCB7EB3C29DE57AA663E791F7F848BA1A6AOA2675681B87136A491
84885FA369D3F1A34A704B30369BBBF6493A7C23921E48939BOECB322A2EAC0483476962D237CB



MEMORANDUM FOR                 Ken Apfel
                               Andy Blocker
                               Maria Echeveste
                               Kitty Higgins
                               John Hilley
                               Elena Kagan
                               Steve Kelman
                               Sylvia Mathews
                               John Podesta
                               Frank Raines
                               Doug Sosnick
                               David Strauss
                               Daniel Tarullo
                               Wendy White

FROM:                          Kathleen Wallman

SUBJECT:                       Draft Decision Memorandum Concerning Labor-Related Issues

COPY:                  Gene Sperling

DATE:                  February 12, 1997

         I am sending you a draft of the decision memorandum that we discussed yesterday. I think
that this draft should not be disseminated. In view of the time pressure, Gene has authorized me
to share their preliminary draft prior to his review of it. I do not yet have two sections that Elena
Kagan has graciously agreed to draft, but thought I should send around this portion to ensure that
people agree that it properly reflects the nuances of yesterday's discussions. I will circulate
another draft as soon as I am able that includes Elena's work.

      I will consult with the Cabinet Departments, too. If there is anyone else in the White
House who should see this draft whose name does not appear above, please alert me.

       Please e-mail comments.to me -- I am KM Wallman, not K Wallman -- or phone me at
65803. Thanks.




                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          GENE B. SPERLING

SUBJECT:       POSSIBLE POLICY ANNOUNCEMENTS RELATED TO LABOR ISSUES

DATE:FEBRUARY 12, 1997

        On February IS, the Vice President will address the Executive Council of the AFL-CIO at
its Winter Convention in Los Angeles. The NEC has met and deliberated the merits of several
possible executive actions and possible announcements of legislative positions that are of interest
to the AFL-CIO and that the Vice President could announce at the convention. Our
recommendations are offered below.

         In general, the AFL-CIO acknowledges the unlikelihood in the near term of significant
legislative changes that would improve labor and employment laws. Indeed, they acknowledge
that their legislative agenda will be largely defensive in the coming months and years. But, as
exemplified here, they seek the Administration's expression of support, in both symbolic and
concrete ways, for the principle that unions have been and still are valuable forces in the
workplace.

1.     Possible amendments to federal procurement regulations.

         Federal law provides that the government should maintain a position of neutrality in labor
disputes between unions and federal contractors. Nevertheless, under current federal contracting
policies, contractors may be reimbursed for the costs ofresisting unionization efforts and
litigating against unfair labor practice charges, and remain eligible to receive new contracts.

        To address what it perceives as the unfair "tilt" against unions that these federal
contracting policies embody, the AFL-CIO has urged that the Administration direct the Federal
Procurement Council, which operates under the auspices of the Office of Federal Procurement
Programs within OMB, to initiate a notice and comment rulemaking to amend the Federal
Acq uisition Regulations (FAR) in three respects. We summarize the actions under consideration
and the pros and cons of each. Since all three proposals go to the unions' neutrality principle,
and since some members of your NEC believed it important to consider their impact together, we
summarize the Cabinet Departments' recommendations at the end of this section rather than at
the end of the discussion of each individual proposal.

       a.     Amend the FAR to cease reimbursement to contractors for costs incurred to
              defend against unfair labor practice allegations that are in litigation.




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
be reimbursed for the costs of defending criminal and certain civil proceedings brought by the
government, as well as penalties resulting from those proceedings. In the case of civil
proceedings, reimbursement is disallowed, however, only where a monetary penalty could have
been imposed. Since the National Labor Relations Act does not include monetary penalties, the
current regulations have often been construed to permit reimbursement of defense costs
associated with unfair labor practice proceedings initiated by the General Counsel of the NLRB.

        Proposal: Amend the FAR to make clear that any and all costs relating to defending
unfair labor practice charges and complaints brought by the NLRB General Counsel are now
allowable, both in evaluating bids for fixed price contracts as well as reimbursement for cost
reimbursement contracts

       Pro:    Taxpayers' dollars should not be used to "tilt the playing field" in favor of
               employers against unions and employees. Eliminating this reimbursement will
               bring treatment ofNLRB litigation costs in line with other kinds of litigation
               costs.

       Con:    No serious objections or downsides were identified, although a negative reaction
               from government contractors who have been permitted thus far to treat these costs
               as reimbursable is predictable.

       b.      Amend the FAR to cease reimbursement for costs incurred to try to persuade
               employees not to unionize.

        The FAR currently provides that costs incurred by a contractor in maintaining satisfactory
labor relations between the contractor and its employees, including costs of shop stewards, labor
management committees, employee publications, and other related activities, are allowable costs.
 Under this provision, contractors have sought and been reimbursed for activities that undermine
rather than promote satisfactory labor relations. On occasion, the costs that are being paid for by
the taxpayers are for persistent anti-union organizing activity.

        Proposal: Amend the FAR to provide that contractor costs incurred for activities related
to influencing employees respecting unionization are specifically unallowable.

       Pro:    Taxpayers should not be subsidizing an employer's efforts to defeat union
               organizing activities and that these activities are now designed, and do not have
               the effect of, "maintaining satisfactory labor relations." A number of other
               statutes explicitly prohibit the use of government funds to promote, assist, or deter
               union organizing activities, such as the Job Training Partnership Act, the National
               Community Service Act, Head Start, and Medicare. Accordingly, there is
               precedent for this kind of provision and auditors having to concern themselves
               with these other statutes have had to determine whether an employer's labor


                                                 2

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

        Con:   Disallowing costs for employee meetings by contractors would be characterized
               by the business community as pulling the rug out from labor-management
               cooperation. They will argue that it will not be possible in practice to separate
               legitimate activities from anti-union persuasion. This provision will require
               auditors to make decisions about what costs are allowable that they are not well
               equipped to make. In addition, this provision will likely be viewed by the
               contracting community as an unnecessary and burdensome requirement not
               otherwise imposed in the private sector.

       c.      Amend the FAR to allow government contracting officers to consider, when
               deciding whether a contractor is a "responsible" contractor (a term of art
               under the existing FAR), the bidder's record of labor and employment
               policies and practices.

        The FAR provides that a prospective government contractor must be found to be a
"responsible contractor" before being awarded a government contact. "Responsibility" requires
that a prospective contractor be capable of performing the contract, that it has a satisfactory
performance record, and that it has satisfactory "integrity and business ethics".

         Under current practice, a prospective contractor may have engaged in egregious activities
relating to labor or employment practices and still be eligible to receive federal contracts. These
activities currently do not call into question any aspect ofthe prospective contractor's
responsibility. In some cases, the egregious activities may have been adjudicated and found
illegal, but more commonly, a contractor has no such finally adjudicated violations, and there are
instead pending charges -- sometimes many of them -- that will take time to wend their way
through the administrative process at the NLRB, the EEOC or through the courts. Sometimes the
allegations are never adjudicated; for example, most unfair labor practice complaints are
ultimately settled.

        Proposal: Add to the FAR language indicating that the responsibility determination must
take into account whether the bidder has "a satisfactory record of labor and employment policies
and practices." (This language parallels the existing provision requiring "a satisfactory record of
integrity and business ethics".)

       Pro:    The existing FAR already allows contracting officers to weigh the bidder's
               "business ethics", its "integrity" and its "capability" to perform the contract.
               Factors that may be considered in assessing capability include "safety" and
               "energy/environmental considerations". Labor relations and employment
               conditions are and equally important and appropriate consideration, and the
               Administration ought to say so clearly in the FAR.



                                                 3

                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
               qualitative judgment that contracting officers are not well equipped to make,
               especially where the disputed actions or conditions have not been adjudicated.
               Compliance will also be burdensome for contractors who will have to worry about
               meeting a non-quantifiable standard.

        Positions: Labor recommends that you authorize all three actions. Commerce
recommends that you authorize (a) ("defense costs") but not (b) ("persuading costs") or ©
("responsible contractor" amendments). Commerce believes that persuading costs will be too
nettlesome to implement as a practical matter; contracting officers will not be able adequately to
discern reimbursable activity from non-reimbursable activity. SBA urges that you authorize (a)
but not (c). As to the responsible contractor amendments, SBA urges that the Procurement
Council issue interpretive guidance indicating that labor and employment practices and policies
should be taken into account, but that the FAR should not be amended. (This approach was
explored with AFL-CIO, but was deemed by them inadequate to reach the goal since such
interpretive guidance has no force of law.) OMB concurs with SBA. Treasury recommends
that you authorize (a) and (c), but not (b) for the same difficulty of implementation reason
offered by Commerce.

        Recommendation: I recommend that you authorize all three initiatives. There is no
disagreement as to (a). The second initiative is described by those who oppose it a~ difficult to
implement, but not impossible. Ifwe go forward with (a) and leave (b) undone, we will be
subject to the reasonable criticism that we are continuing to allow the use of taxpayers' money
to underwrite anti-union proselytizing even though we have gone to the trouble to eliminate
reimbursement of defense costs. The third initiative, the responsible contractor amendments, is
a reasonable policy choice that puts the Administration clearly on record, through regulatory
amendments that have the force oflaw, that a contractor's practices and policies with respect to
labor and employment are important considerations. Its practical effect will be to afford unions
a "hook" in the regulations to present relevant information to contracting officers about truly
egregious situations involving a pattern of abusive labor and employment practices.

_ _ Agree                     _ _ Disagree                          Let's Discuss

2.     Possible executive order encouraging the use of project labor agreements

        Project labor agreements, also known as "pre-hire agreements," are specially negotiated
agreements between a project owner or construction manager and one or more labor
organizations. The agreements are reached at the outset of a project in order to ensure efficient,
timely and quality work; establish fair and consistent labor standards and work rules; supply a .
skilled, experienced and highly competent workforce; and assure stable labor-management
relations throughout the term ofthe project. These agreements have long been used for public
and private construction projects that involve a large volume of work, extend over a substantial
period of time, include a substantial number of contractors, and entail substantial costs. It is


                                                 4
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
and public sector for construction industry projects.
         Proposal: Issue an Executive Order that directs Executive departments and agencies
authorized to implement or fund a project for the construction of a federal facility to determine
on a project-by-project basis whether a project labor agreement will promote labor-management
stability; advance the public interest in economical, efficient, quality and time project
performance; and assist project compliance with applicable legal requirements governing health
and safety, equal employment opportunity, and labor standards. The Executive Order would
not require the use of a project labor agreement on any particular project.

         Pro:   Project labor agreements are useful and lawful, but federal agencies may not be
                aware of their availability and have not been using them in a significant way.
                Issuing an Executive Order would make clear that federal contracting agencies
                have this authority and should consider using such agreements in appropriate
                circumstances.

         Con: . No serious objections or downsides have been identified, although this action, in
                combination wjth other actions on the list of labor-related initiatives and
                announcements you authorize could send a signal as to the tone you intend to
                take on labor-management issues.

       Positions: All of the agencies support issuance of an executive order that encourages but
does not require the use of these agreements.

         Recommendation: I recommend that you authorize issuance of the proposed executive
order.

_ _ Agree                      _ _ Disagree                         Let's Discuss

3.       Possible linkage of flex time legislation to legislation that expands the FMLA

       The two comp time bills currently being considered on the Hill -- both Republican-
sponsored -- fail to address FMLA expansion, and provide fewer guarantees of employee choice
and fewer protections against potential abuse than your flex time bill, which was sent to
Congress last September.

        Specifically, the bills do not exclude vulnerable workers; do not include special
protections for workers whose employers go bankrupt; do not guarantee real choice for
employees; among other shortcomings. The Ashcroft comp time bill in partiCUlar has provisions
that would effectively eliminate the 40-hour week. The labor movement strongly opposes the
Republican comp time bills, and finds these Ashcroft provisions to be particularly offensive.

         With respect to FMLA, Democrats in both houses have introduced bills to expand the


                                                 5

                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
hours for the purposes of routine medical care for children and elderly parents or school related
activities. Other Democratic bills would lower the threshold ofFMLA applicability from 50 to
25 employees, a provision that was not included in your bill. Predictably, while most
Republicans oppose FMLA expansion, the bills have support from women's groups and the labor
movement. The Democratic legislative strategy is to try to add FMLA expansion to the
Republican bills while criticizing their comp time components.

       In light of this strategy, the labor movement has urged that the Administration threaten to
veto any bill that does not (1) link FMLA expansion and flex time, and (2) improve the comp
time provisions to provide real choice and real protections for employees (as in your flex time
bill).

        Proposal: Our proposal is different from what AFL-CIO is urging in that we think you
should stop short of saying that you will veto any flex time bill that does not include FMLA
expansion. Rather, we would establish as the Administration's position that there should be a
link between FMLA expansion and any flex time legislation; that any flex time proposal should
address our principles, as spelled out in your bill from last year (i.e., real choice for employees;
real protection against employer abuse; and preservation of basic worker rights, such as the 40-
hour work week); and that you will veto any comp time bill that does not address these flex time
principles in a meaningful way.

       Pro:    This position would strengthen the position of congressional Democrats to
               improve the Republican bills. It would also be welcomed by constituency groups
               that view the Republican bills as a weakening of employee protection laws. Since
               this strategy does not threaten a veto ifFMLA expansion is not in a final bill, the
               strategy does not lock you in to a veto of an otherwise acceptable flex time bill.

       Con:    AFL-CIO would prefer that you threaten to veto any bill that does not include an
               expansion ofFMLA. Under this strategy, you might have to veto a comp time
               bill, although it would be one that falls far short of the family-friendly principles
               you have laid out.

        Recommendation: I recommend -- along with the NEC members -- the proposal
discussed above that you (I) express support for FMLA expansion and flex time and (2) threaten
to veto a comp time bill if your principles are not addressed. I recommend that you not lock
yourself into saying that you will veto any flex time bill that does not include FMLA expansion.

       _ _ Agree                      _ _ Disagree                           Let's Discuss


       [Does Legislative Affairs want to offer a different recommendation?]



                                                 6

                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

4.     Position on Beck legislation aimed at limiting the use of union dues in political
       activity

       [DPC (Elena) is writing this section of the memo]

       Status and positions:

5.     Restating last year's veto threats on (i) TEAM legislation (ii) Davis-Bacon
       legislation and (iii) legislation to weaken OSHA.

       Last year, you indicated you would veto the TEAM bill and the other two legislative
proposals. It is proposed that the Vice President would restate your position in Los Angeles,
with language that leaves room for improvements in TEAM legislation that you may conclude
somewhere down the road that you may wish to sign.

       Positions: There was consensus among the members of your NEC that restating your
previous positions with carefully crafted language that does not prevent you from considering an
improved TEAM bill would be the right path to take.

       Recommendation: I recommend that we go ahead' and restate YQur previous positions.
The exact wording used will be vetted beforehand.

       _ _ Agree                     _ _ Disagree                 - -.Let's Discuss
6.     Welfare reform and minimum wage

       [DPC (Elena) is writing this section]




                                               7
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
