RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME:18-FEB-1999 12:42:02.00

SUBJECT:   Draft provisional guidance on racial/ethnic data tabulations

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO I    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
please print
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 02/18/99 12:43
PM ---------------------------


   Katherine K. Wallman                    02/17/9907:30:53'PM

Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:      Donald R. Arbuckle/OMB/EOP, Suzann K. Evinger/OMB/EOP, Nancy
Kirkendall/OMB/EOP
Subject:         Draft provisional guidance on racial/ethnic data tabulations

As promised in my note of last Friday, I am providing below the full text
and appendices of the Draft Provisional Guidance on the Implementation of
the 1997 Standards for the Collection of Data on Race and Ethnicity.  The
first of the documents, R&ETAB, begins with an overview and then addresses
the three major areas of data collection, data tabulation, and building
bridges. Please let me know if I can provide additional information.
Thanks.




Message Sent
TO: ____________~--~-----------------------------------------------
Maria Echaveste/WHO/EOP
Sylvia M. Mathews/OMB/EOP
Joshua Gotbaum/OMB/EOP
Robert B. Johnson/WHO/EOP
Minyon Moore/WHO/EOP
Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
Karen Tramontano/WHO/EOP
Ann F. Lewis/WHO/EOP
Thurgood Marshall Jr/WHO/EOP
Mickey Ibarra/WHO/EOP
Lynn G. Cutler/WHO/EOP
Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
Sally Katzen/OPD/EOP
Linda Ricci/OMB/EOP


;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

                    Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting
                            Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity

                       (Excerpt from Federal Register, October 30, 1997)

        This classification provides a minimum standard for maintaining, collecting, and
presenting data on race and ethnicity for all Federal reporting purposes. The categories in this
classification are social-political constructs and should not be interpreted as being scientific or
anthropological in nature. They are not to be used as determinants of eligibility for participation
in any Federal program. The standards have been developed to provide a common language for
uniformity and comparability in the collection and use of data on race and ethnicity by Federal
agencies.

       The standards have five categories for data on race: American Indian or Alaska Native,
Asian, Black or African American, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and White. There
are two categories for data on ethnicity: "Hispanic or Latino," and "Not Hispanic or Latino."

1. Categories and Definitions

      The minimum categories for data on race and ethnicity for Federal statistics, program
administrative reporting, and civil rights compliance reporting are defined as follows:

       American Indian or Alaska Native. A person having origins in any of the original
       peoples of North and South America (including Central America), and who maintains
       tribal affiliation or community attachment.

       Asian. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast
       Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan,
       Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.

       Black or African American. A person having origins in any of the black racial groups
       of Africa. Terms such as "Haitian" or "Negro" can be used in addition to "Black or
       African American."

       Hispanic or Latino. A person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central
       American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless ofrace. The term, "Spanish
       origin," can be used in addition to "Hispanic or Latino."

       Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. A person having origins in any of the
       original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.

       White. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of Europe, the Middle
       East, or North Africa.
Recommended forms for the instruction accompanying the multiple response question are "Mark
one or more" and "Select one or more."

2. Data Formats

        The standards provide two formats that may be used for data on race and ethnicity. Self-
reporting or self-identification using two separate questions is the preferred method for collecting
data on race and ethnicity. In situations where self-reporting is not practicable or feasible, the
combined format may be used.

        In no case shall the provisions of the standards be construed to limit the collection of data
to the categories described above. The collection of greater detail is encouraged; however, any
collection that uses more detail shall be organized in such a way that the additional categories can
be aggregated into these minimum categories for data on race and ethnicity.

        With respect to tabulation, the procedures used by Federal agencies shall result in the
production of as much detailed information on race and ethnicity as possible. However, Federal
agencies shall not present data on detailed categories if doing so would compromise data quality
or confidentiality standards.

a. Two-question format

        To provide flexibility and ensure data quality, separate questions shall be used wherever
feasible for reporting race and ethnicity. When race and ethnicity are collected separately,
ethnicity shall be collected first. If race and ethnicity are collected separately, the minimum
designations are:

Race:

        --   American Indian or Alaska Native
        --   Asian
        --   Black or African American
        --   Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
        --   White

Ethnicity:

        -- Hispanic or Latino
        -- Not Hispanic or Latino

        When data on race and ethnicity are collected separately, provision shall be made to
report the number of respondents in each racial category who are Hispanic or Latino.

        When aggregate data are presented, data producers shall provide the number of
categories. In addition to these numbers, data producers are strongly encouraged to provide the
detailed distributions, including all possible combinations, of multiple responses to the race
question. If data on multiple responses are collapsed, at a minimum the total number of
respondents reporting "more than one race" shall be made available.

b. Combined format

        The combined fom1at may be used, if necessary, for observer-collected data on race and
ethnicity. Both race (including multiple responses) and ethnicity shall be collected when
appropriate and feasible, although the selection of one category in the combined format is
acceptable. If a combined format is used, there are six minimum categories:

       -- American Indian or Alaska Native
       -- Asian
       -- Black or African American
       -- Hispanic or Latino
       -- Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
       -- White

        When aggregate data are presented, data producers shall provide the number of
respondents who marked (or selected) only one category, separately for each of the six
categories. In addition to these numbers, data producers are strongly encouraged to provide the
detailed distributions, including all possible combinations, of multiple responses. In cases where
data on multiple responses are collapsed, the total number of respondents reporting "Hispanic or
Latino and one or more races" and the total number ofrespondents reporting "more than one
race" (regardless of ethnicity) shall be provided.

3. Use of the Standards for Record Keeping and Reporting

       The minimum standard categories shall be used for reporting as follows:

a. Statistical reporting

        These standards shall be used at a minimum for all federally sponsored statistical data
collections that include data on race and/or ethnicity, except when the collection involves a
sample of such size that the data on the smaller categories would be unreliable, or when the
collection effort focuses on a specific racial or ethnic group. Any other variation will have to be
specifically authorized by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) through the information
collection clearance process. In those cases where the data collection is not subject to the
information collection clearance process, a direct request for a variance shall be made to OMB.

b. General program administrative and grant reporting
       These standards shall be used for all Federal administrative reporting or record keeping
 must request a variance from OMB. Variances will be considered if the agency can demonstrate
 that it is not reasonable for the primary reporter to determine racial or ethnic background in terms
 of the specified categories, that determination of racial or ethnic background is not critical to the
 administration of the program in question, or that the specific program is directed to only one or
 a limited number of racial or ethnic groups.

c. Civil rights and other compliance reporting

      . These standards shall be used by all Federal agencies in either the separate or combined
format for civil rights and other compliance reporting from the public and private sectors and all
levels of government. Any variation requiring less detailed data or data which cannot be
aggregated into the basic categories must be specifically approved by OMB for executive
agencies. More detailed reporting which can be aggregated to the basic categories may be used at
the agencies' discretion.

4. Presentation of Data on Race and Ethnicity

        Displays of statistical, administrative, and compliance data on race and ethnicity shall use
the categories listed above. The term "nonwhite" is not acceptable for use in the presentation of
Federal Government data. It shall not be used in any publication or in the text of any report.

       In cases where the standard categories are considered inappropriate for presentation of
data on particular programs or for particular regional areas, the sponsoring agency may use:

a.      The designations "Black or African American and Other Races" or "All Other Races" as .
                                                    I
        collective descriptions of minority races when the most summary distinction between the
        majority and minority races is appropriate;

b.      The designations "White," "Black or African American," and "All Other Races" when the
        distinction among the majority race, the principal minority race, and other races is
        appropriate; or

c.      The designation of a particular minority race or races, and the inclusion of "Whites" with
        "All Other Races" when such a collective description is appropriate.

        In displaying detailed information that represents a combination ofrace and ethnicity, the
 description of the data being displayed shall clearly indicate that both bases of classification are
.being used.

        When the primary focus of a report is on two or more specific identifiable groups in the
population, one or more of which is racial or ethnic, it is acceptable to display data for each of
the particular groups separately and to describe data relating to the remainder of the popUlation
by an appropriate collective description.

        The provisions of these standards are effective immediately for all new and revised record
keeping or reporting requirements that include racial and/or ethnic information. All existing
record keeping or reporting requirements shall be made consistent with these standards at the
time they are submitted for extension, or not later than January 1, 2003.

                    Procedural Implementation of the New Standards for
                          Data on Race and Ethnicity -- Phase I Report


An interagency committee was established to develop guidelines that will assist Federal
agencies in their implementation of the Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and
Presenting Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity issued on October 30, 1997. The
procedural implementation guidelines address three areas: (1) wording and format of
questions that ask for self-reported race and Hispanic or Latino origin; (2) wording and
format of instructions and forms that collect aggregate race and Hispanic or Latino
origin data; and (3) instructions and training procedures for field interviewers and
administrative personnel who will be using these questions and forms.


Members of the committee represent the Departments of Health and Human Services,
Commerce, Education, Labor, and Veterans Affairs, and the General Accounting Office.
    An OMB Clearance Package was approved in March 1998 which authorized the
pretesting of different questions and forms. This report describes the study objectives
of the three areas, the research design, and the progress to date for Phase I. A second
phase will focus on additional issues not resolved in Phase I.


1.       Development and Testing of Self-Reported Race and Hispanic or Latino Origin Ouestions


A goal ofthis research is to provide guidance on the wording and format of self-reported race
and Hispanic or Latino origin questions used in a variety of data collection efforts. Following
are three of the most significant changes to the ways in which race and Hispanic or Latino origin
questions are to be asked by Federal agencies.


        Self-report or self-identification using two separate questions is the preferred method for
         collecting data on race and ethnicity. When race and ethnicity are collected separately,
         ethnicity shall be collected first.


      Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander is to be treated as a distinct category from
       Asian.


The committee's primary objective is to develop and test a series of questions that agencies can
use to guide the design offuture data collection instruments. To design the test questions, the
committee reviewed current survey practice, prior research on measuring race and ethnicity, and
the survey literature on questionnaire design. This led to the identification of three factors which
influenced the general design, format, and wording ofrace and ethnicity test questions. First,
questions needed to be as similar as possible to those that were subjected to extensive testing
prior to the issuance of the revised standards. In particular, questions used in previous research
from the Current Population Survey, the National Content Survey, and the Race and Ethnic
Targeted Test (see Federal Register Notice July 1997 for discussion of the results of those tests)
were considered. Second, questions needed to be tested in both face-to-face interviews as well as
telephone interviews. I And third, both .short and long versions of questions needed to be
developed--short in that the question should seek to collect the minimum information specified in
the revised standards and long in that the question should collect subgroup information.


The minimum level of detail for race questions is the five revised categories--American Indian or
Alaska Native, Asian, Black or African American, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander,
and White. Long versions of the race question provide for reporting of subgroups such as
Chinese, Japanese, Samoan, and so forth. For Hispanic or Latino origin questions, the minimum
level of detail is a Yes or No response indicating Hispanic or Latino origin background. Long
versions of the question provide for reporting of subgroups such as Puerto Rican, Cuban, and so


        IMode can also include whether the question administration is done using a computer; at
this time, there is no plan for testing computer-administered instruments.




                                                 2


At this time, there are no plans to assess comparability of responses across modes; that is, the
final report will offer guidelines on ways to ask a question when using a particular mode rather
than provide an analysis of the effects of response distributions when using a particular mode. It
will be incumbent upon individual agencies to make final determinations on the exact wording
and format of questions and the potential measurement error that may be associated with a given
design should be assessed.


1.1      Research Design


Qualitative research using cognitive pretesting methods are b~ing used to test race and Hispanic
or Latino origin questions. The research plan includes two phases. Phase I is still in progress;
most of it has been completed and took place during 1998 in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan
area. Eventually, Phase I will include approximately 50 laboratory interviews conducted face-
to-face or by telephone. Phase II will be similar in scope to Phase I, will begin in 1999, and will
be conducted in selected geographic sites outside of the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area.


Phase I does not include tests of self-administered race and ethnicity questions since the Census
Bureau has already conducted considerable research in preparation for Census 2000. The Census
Bureau conducted cognitive research as well as large scale field interviews as part of the Census
Bureau's National Content Survey, Race and Ethnicity Targeted Test, and Census 2000 Dress
Rehearsal test. Therefore, the self-administered format options contained in Section 1.3.2 of this
report are based mostly on the research accomplished by the Census Bureau.


Phase I cognitive testing is conducted as part of a 10-20 minute survey which asks general
household information (such as who lives in the household, the age, gender, education level,
marital status, and income level of household members) followed by Hispanic or Latino origin
and race questions. After the survey is completed, the subject is debriefed by a cognitive
interviewer to discuss the meaning of the words and phrases in the race and Hispanic or Latino


                                                 3


It is important to remember that only a few questions have been selected for testing; other
variations of ethnicity and race questions could certainly have been tested and may, in fact, work
just as well or better in a particular survey. For example, all of the Hispanic or Latino origin test
questions include the word Spanish in the question; that is, the test question asks Are you
Spanish. Hispanic. or Latino? rather than Are you Hispanic or Latino? It is relevant, then, to
note that the options on the following pages reflect what worked well among the different
questions tested, not what is the best way to ask a race or Hispanic or Latino origin question.
Phase I test results and the examples presented should not imply limitations or constraints to
other question designs that comply with the revised standards.


The research design for Phase I has been modified over the past six months and currently has six
experimental conditions. Two conditions test the questions by telephone and four conditions test
the questions face-to-face. Optimally, each test condition will include at least 8 subjects, 1
whose parents are both American Indian or Alaska Native, 1 whose parents are both Asian, 1
whose parents are both Black or African American, 1 whose parents are both Native Hawaiian or
Other Pacific Islander, 1 whose parents are both White, 1 whose parents are both Hispanic or
Latino (regardless of race), and 2 whose parents are different races (regardless of the particular
race combinations).2 Participants are recruited mostly by newspaper advertisements and flyers.
Some additional recruitment efforts may be directed at community centers or other organizations
in order to reach individuals who are Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, American Indian
or Alaska Native, and individuals who are more than one race. Subjects are paid $25 for one
hour, and interviews are audio-taped or video-taped, depending on the interview site.
Attachment C shows the progress to date by test condition.


         2Participants are not asked to report their race or ethnicity during the telephone
screening interview. Rather, they are asked to report the race and ethnicity of their mother and
their father. along with a few other demographic questions about each of their parents. The
reported race of their parents are used to assign subjects to a particular test condition. Also. it is
compared with the race(s) individuals report themselves to be in order to provide further
information on the process of self-identification of race and Hispanic or Latino origin.


                                                  4


Thirty-two cognitive interviews (25 face-to-face and 7 telephone) have been completed.
Generally, subjects were able to provide answers to both long and short versions of race and
Hispanic or Latino origin questions. As expected, subjects who were interviewed face-to-face
seemed to use and rely on the flashcards to select a response. Subjects interviewed by telephone
had a bit more difficulty answering the race questions since they had to listen to a relatively long
list of response options.


1.2.1   Testing Hispanic or Latino Origin Questions


Two subjects answered "Yes" to the Hispanic or Latino origin question and 30 answered "No. "
 During debriefings, all subjects were asked their impressions of the other Hispanic or Latino
test questions and were shown various versions of the Hispanic or Latino flashcard. Subjects
were generally familiar with Hispanic or Latino origin questions, regardless of the particular test
condition. As found in previous research, subjects define Hispanic and Latino differently but
they are comfortable with both terms used in the same question. Since the test questions also
included the term Spanish (which is aIIowed by the revised standards), subjects were asked their
opinion about including the word Spanish; most stated they thought that the word Spanish was
important to include. Subjects commonly defined Hispanic as indicating geographic location or
Spanish origin, Spanish as indicating European origin or coming from the country of Spain, and
Latino as a cultural concept associated with Latin American cooking, dress, and language.


Face-to-face interviews: All of the 25 subjects interviewed face-to-face seemed to find the
Hispanic or Latino origin flashcards useful. Two flashcard versions were tested; Flashcard 7A
and Flashcard 7B each list the detailed Hispanic or Latino origin subgroups but in different ways.
When shown both flashcards, subjects preferred Flashcard 7A which lists the subgroups under
the main category "Yes, Spanish, Hispanic, Latino."




                                                 5
                    o    Not Spanish, Hispanic, Latino

                         Yes    Spanish, Hispanic, Latino
                         Includes Mexican, Mexican American,
                         Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, or
                         other Spanish, Hispanic, Latino




                   IFlashcard 7B                                      I
                   No   Not Spanish, Hispanic, Latino
                   Yes Spanish, Hispanic, Latino
                        Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano
                        Puerto Rican
                        Cuban
                        Other Spanish Hispanic Latino




Telephone interviews: For the 7 subjects interviewed by telephone, 4 were asked a short


           Short         Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?




Hispanic or Latino question and 3 were asked a long version, both shown below.




          ILong          Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?




                                               6

                          Which one of the fol/owing are you? Are you Mexican,
                          Mexican American, Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, or of
                          another Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino group?




Regardless of version, all of the telephone subjects were able to answer the first part of the
question without difficulty. The second part of the long version has not been tested with enough
Hispanic or Latino subjects, since one needs to answer "Yes" to the first part in order to test the
second part. However, interviewers expressed concern that the long version may present some
response problems since respondents will have to recall six possible categories without use of a
flashcard or other visual aid.


1.2.2   Testing Race Questions


Among the 32 subjects interviewed, 13 reported their race as Black, 3 reported Asian, 2 reported
Native Hawaiian, 4 reported more than one race, and 10 reported White, of which 2 also reported
Hispanic or Latino origin. No American Indians or Alaska Natives were interviewed in Phase 1.
Two of the 4 subjects who reported more than one race for themselves reported their parents as
both being the same race. These two subjects based their multiple race reports on the
backgrounds of grandparents or great-grandparents which is consistent with prior research. Of
the four subjects who reported more than one race, three reported combinations of Native




                                                 7
one race replied White and Asian.


Face-to-face interviews: Subjects who were interviewed face-to-face heard the question read
and were handed a flashcard containing the response options. Several subjects indicated initial
surprise at not seeing a Hispanic or Latino category or its equivalent. For example, one subject
said "Given the choices here, I don't see what I should put down. I guess Thave to say White,
but that's not right." When asked the meaning of certain race terms, some subjects referred to
geographic origin, some mentioned facial or skin color characteristics, and others mentioned a
particular culture or heritage.


Among the three flashcards tested, subjects preferred Flashcard 9 or Flashcard 10 (see below). In
one case, a Filipino subject responded differently depending on the flashcard used. She was first
shown a long version (Flashcard 10) and responded "Filipino, I guess under Asian." In the
debriefing, she was then shown a short version (Flashcard 9) and again was asked her race. She
responded "Other Pacific Islander because the Philippines are a Pacific Island. So I guess my



            IFlashcard 9
answer would be different depending on the list used. "




       3Several subjects were specially recruited through a Native Hawaiian source which
accounts for the frequency of Native Hawaiian responses.




                                                8
      Black or African American
      American Indian or Alaska Native
      Asian
      Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander




IFlashcard10                                      J
      White
      Black or African American
      American Indian or Alaska Native
      Asian
             Asian Indian Japanese
             Chinese         Korean
             Filipino Vietnamese
             Other Asian
      Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
             Native Hawaiian
             Guamanian or Chamorro
             Samoan
             Other Pacific Islander




                                 9
race question as shown below.


           Short         I'm going to read a list of racial categories. Please select
           one or more to best describe your race. Are you White, Black or African
           American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, or Native Hawaiian
           or Other Pacific Islander?




There was some indication that hearing a list with alternative terms representing one category
(i.e., Black or African American is one category, not two) may result in confusion. Specifically,
two subjects thought the interviewer asked them to choose between Black or African American
and commented that they did not like having to make a choice. This problem can be addressed
through interviewer training that teaches the interviewer to pause longer after saying each category
term or phrase; that is, if the interviewer is reading a list of "... White, Black or African American,
Asian, ... " shelhe should pause between the words White and Black, not pause between Black or
African American, and pause again between African American and Asian. This should help the
telephone respondent hear that Black or African American is one choice, not two. There was
some evidence that the instruction to " ... select one or more... " was misunderstood on the
telephone to mean that the subject had to select more than one race. Interviewers will need to be
trained to perceive and correct for this.


1.2.3   Concepts of Race and Ethnicity

                                                  10
between the terms used in describing race, ethnicity, nationality, and ancestry. In the cognitive
interviews, understanding of the intent of a race or Hispanic origin question was shared but
individual differences in the interpretation and meaning of terms used was found, as was
confusion regarding the separation of Hispanic or Latino origin from race. The following
examples from the cognitive interviews illustrate these findings.
              It means ethnic background. Not the country. I think people tend to cross quickly
               between using the terms race and country. When I say "Yes, 1 am Hawaiian" I
               mean that in my bloodstream I have Hawaii. My blood inheritance.

              Race I guess means the color somebody is. Or, their cultural heritage.

              The word race means the biological heritage from which you descend.

              Race means the culture that someone is from.

              The way 1 think of race, 1 think of it as a negative, probably because of what we've
               read about in the 60's--race riots, etc. It always seems to have a negative
               connotation. I prefer to use ethnicity.

              1 answer differently sometimes, depending on what's beneficial to my family or me.

              Sometimes you see Hispanic as a choice for race.     If Hispanic had been offered as a
               race then 1 would have chosen that.

              The race question is difficult because it doesn't have enough categories, it's too
               restrictive. With only five categories, there are two that are too specific--American
               Indian and Native Hawaiian--and there's a list of countries for the Asians. It
               doesn't specify anything about Central or South American descent. Everybody
               comes from different backgrounds; even White Americans can probably check off
               Irish, etc.


1.3    Guidelines for the Design of Race and Ethnicity Questions


As has been discussed earlier in this chapter, the Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and
Presenting Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity issued on October 30, 1997 set forth principles that
should be followed when collecting race and ethnicity data for Federal reporting purposes. These

                                                11'
ethnicity questions contained in Federal data collection instruments. In addition, there is a rich
literature on questionnaire design and data collection methods as well as the measurement of race
and ethnicity. Readers are strongly encouraged to consult the literature and are referred to a
suggested reference list contained at the end of this chapter. By no means comprehensive, this list
should provide at least a starting point for those seeking further guidance. Following the
guidelines below are examples of questions to illustrate specific fonnats and wording depending on
the mode of data collection.


Guideline I: Communicate clearly an instruction that allows multiple responses to the race
question. The revised standards are clear that the fonnat and wording used in a race question must
communicate to the respondent an instruction that multiple responses are acceptable. Based on
research findings, the recommended fonns for this instruction are Mark one or more or Select one
or more. The committee supports these recommendations but recognizes that other possible
instructions may be preferred, especially when integrating a race question within an existing data
collection instrument. For example, some mail instruments do not word questions in a personal
way; that is, rather than What is your age? an instrument may simply have Age with a line for an
entry. Taking this case further, if one has an item simply worded as Race with a line for an entry,
then an instruction must be included to communicate that multiple race responses are acceptable.
Variations could include Race - enter one or more. Regardless of exact wording, the instruction
must be evident to the respondent.


Guideline 2: Consider using an instruction to answer both the Hispanic or Latino question and the
race question.   This has particular relevance for mail surveys or questionnaires that are self-
administered since there is no interviewer interaction. An instruction such as the following may
improve potential item non-response, especially among Hispanic respondents.


       NOTE: Please answer BOTH Questions 1 and 2 (Hispanic or Latino and Racel

       4Modified version as shown in the Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal fonns



                                                 12
information, consider options to collect further information through write-in entries or follow-up
questions asked by the interviewer. Write-in entries or follow-up questions would be most
commonly used for 'other' responses such as Other Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino, Other Pacific
Islander, or Other Asian. Also, write-in or follow-up information may be desired to obtain the
name of the enrolled or principles tribe for American Indian or Alaska Native responses.
Questions shown in section 1.3.2 includes examples for write-in responses.


Guideline 4: Take mode carefully into account when designing questions and instructions.         This
guideline may seem obvious but it is often the case that surveys are conducted using a mixed mode
(i.e., the initial interview attempt may be personal visit but a telephone interview is permissible).
Since the questions should be designed with the mode in mind, there may need to be different
versions of questions, depending on the mode of administration. Below is a brief discussion of
some additional issues to consider depending on mode.


For surveys conducted face-to-face by an interviewer, use of a flashcard is very helpful to the
respondent. The wording of the question has to incorporate the instruction to look at the flashcard.
Further, the design of the flashcard is important; it should clearly and neatly contain all available
response categories. Similarly, the design, layout, and visual appearance of a self-administered
questionnaire is very important and should be carefully considered.


For telephone surveys, questions generally are shorter with fewer response categories. This
presents a problem with questions that need to collect detailed information (see Guideline 3
discussed above). One solution may be to allow a follow-up question similar to the example
shown in Section 1.3.4 that was tested to collect detailed Hispanic or Latino information. Using
the race question as another example, if the respondent is read, Please select one or more to best
describe your race. Are you White, Black or African American, American Indian or Alaska Native,
Asian, or Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander? and responds I am Asian, a follow-up
question such as Which one of the following are you? Are you Asian Indian, Chinese, Filipino,


                                                 13


Guideline 5: Provide definitions to the minimum race categories when possible. This guideline is
particularly relevant when the short version (only the five minimum categories) of a race question
is used. Individual interpretation of the five categories could lead to response error, especially for
respondents unsure of the definitions of Asian and Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander.
For self-administered forms, providing the definition of the category should be considered if space
and formatting limitations can be overcome. For interviewer-administered questions, the
definitions should be readily available to the interviewer (usually in a manual that provides
question-by-question specifications) to assist the respondent if needed.


Guideline 6: Adhere to the specific terminology as stated in the October 30, 1997 revised
standards. The revised standards address the words and terms to use, and also indicates other
terms that can be considered. For example, the name of the Black category should be Black or
African American and additional terms such as Haitian or Negro can beused if desired. In another
example, American Indian should be used and Native American should not be substituted for
American Indian. Reviewing the terms specified in the revised standards is strongly encouraged
before designing questions on race and Hispanic or Latino origin.


1.3.2    Examples of Hispanic or Latino Origin and Race Test Questions --



   ICD

  Are you Spanish/Hispanic/Latino?

           DYes
           o   No




         Self-AdministrationS


         5Questions 2 and 5 are similar to the Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal Long Form. Question

                                                 14

  Are you Spanish/Hispanic/Latino? Mark [R] the "No" box if not Spanish/Hispanic/Latino.

         o    No, not Spanish/Hispanic/Latino
         o    Yes, Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano
         [J   Yes, Puerto Rican
         o    Yes, Cuban




   I~


         o    Yes, other Spanish/Hispanic/Latino - Print group




3 aID are similar to the Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal Short Form. Write-in entries are
presented in these questions since they will appear on Census 2000 Forms.




                                                  15
       o   Yes, Mexican, Mexican Am, Chicano            o Yes, Cuban




10

What is your race? Mark [&] one or more r~ces to indicate what you consider yourself to
be.

       o   White
       o   Black or African American
       o   American Indian or Alaska Native
       o   Asian
       o   Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander




                                               16


What is your race? Mark   [&J one or more races to indicate what you consider yourself to be.
       o   White
       o   Black or African American




IdP



                                               17

    Cf.     o ASian Indian             l    Jal           j   NatiVe HawaIIan
            o    Chinese                    o   Korean        o Guamanian or Chamorro
            o    Filipino              o    Vietnamese 0      Samoan
            o    Other Asian -                           o    Other Pacific Islander -




1.3.3     Examples of Hispanic or Latino Origin and Race Test Questions -
          Face-to Face Administration




0) Interviewer hands respondent Flashcard 7 and asks
          Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?



    FLASHCARD 7




            No       Not Spanish, Hispanic, Latino

            Yes    Spanish, Hispanic, Latino
            Includes Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano
            Puerto Rican, Cuban, or other Spanish, Hispanic,
            Latino




                                                         18
        Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?


        If "Yes", and respondent does not state detailed background, ask
        Which one of these groups are you?


        If respondent hesitates or does not answer, ask
        Are you Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban or of
        another Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino group?


        NOTE:          For Question 7, the objective is for interviewer to record Yes or No
                       only. For Question 8, the objective is for interviewer to record
                       detailed Hispanic or Latino background for all respondents who
                       answer Yes, of Hispanic or Latino origin.

CD   Interviewer hands respondent Flashcard 9 and says
        Please select one or more of the following categories to best describe your



     iFLASHCARD 9




          White
          Black or African American
          American Indian or Alaska Native
          Asian
          Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander

        race.




                                                  20

      Please select one or more of the following categories to best describe your



  IFLASHCARD 10



        White
        Black or African American
        American Indian or Alaska Native
        Asian
               Asian Indian     Japanese
               Chinese                 Korean
               Filipino         Vietnamese
               Other Asian
        Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander
               Native Hawaiian
               Guamanian or Chamorro
               Samoan
               Other Pacific Islander

     race.




1.3.4 Examples of Hispanic or Latino Origin and Race Test Questions
     Telephone Administration

                                                22

@ Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?
              If "Yes", ask
              Which one of the following are you? Are you Mexican, Mexican
              American, Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, or of another Spanish,
              Hispanic, or Latino group?


@ I'm going to read a list of racial categories. Please select one or more to best
       describe your race. Are you White, Black or African American, American
       Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, or Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander?


1.4    Continuing Research on Self-Reported Race and Ethnicity Questions


Phase I will be completed by April 1, 1999. Phase II research will begin in Spring 1999
and conclude by July 31, 1999. Phase II will follow the same research design as Phase I
but will be expanded geographically and will focus on testing with individuals who are
Hispanic or Latino, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian and other
Pacific Islander, and individuals with multiple racial heritage. In addition to research
conducted by the committee, other studies could be initiated by agencies or interested
groups. The committee expects to continue the review and modification of these
guidelines as implementation occurs, feedback from agencies is received, and new
research findings become available.




2.     Development and Testing of Aggregate Reporting Forms


A second goal of this rese,arch is to provide guidance on the design of reporting forms
that will be used by administrative personnel to aggregate race and Hispanic or Latino
origin data for a given population (e.g., reporting race and ethnicity for a school

                                             23
fundamental changes to the ways in which race and Hispanic or Latino origin data have
previously been aggregated and reported.


In the past, agencies were required to report, at a minimum, the number of individuals
who marked one of the four race categories, as well as the number of individuals who
reported either Hispanic or Latino origin or not of Hispanic or Latino origin. A standard or
prototype reporting form was not provided to Federal agencies. Rather, agencies
developed their own forms depending on the characteristics of a given program and the
data collection effort.


The October 30, 1997 revised standards specify that, at a minimum, the number of
individuals who marked one of the five race categories and the number who marked
more than one race category are to be reported and that the race of those indicating
Hispanic or Latino origin be reported if available. In many cases, greater detail about the
combinations of specific multiple race responses will be needed. The following are some
of the decisions issued in the revised standards that impact the design of aggregate
reporting forms.


      When self-identification is not feasible or appropriate, a combined question can be
       used and should include a separate Hispanic or Latino category co-equal with the
       other categories.


      When the combined format is used, an attempt should be made to record ethnicity
       and race but the option to indicate only one category (i.e., Hispanic or Latino, with
       no race designation) is acceptable.


      When data are collected in a combined format and data on multiple responses are
       collapsed, the total number of respondents reporting 'Hispanic or Latino and one
       or more races' and the total number of respondents reporting 'more than one
       race' (regardless of ethnicity) shall be provided.

                                             24
        to report the number of respondents in each racial category who are Hispanic or
        Latino.


       In addition to providing the number of people who marked one of the five racial
        categories, data producers are strongly encouraged to provide the detailed
        distributions of multiple responses. At a minimum, the total number of
        respondents reporting 'more than one race' shall be made available.


 The committee's goal is to test different forms in order to offer guidelines to Federal
 agencies. These guidelines should serve as a reference tool for agencies as they
. develop their own version of aggregate reporting forms based on agency data needs and
 program characteristics.




                                             25


The development of test forms has been a collaborative effort among the committee
members, experts in questionnaire design and survey research, and policy and statistical
analysts from the federal government who have been involved in the revision of
standards for race and ethnicity data. In developing test forms, a decision was made to
only use the minimum race categories specified in the revised standards. Thus, the
forms only aggregate the numbers of American Indians or Alaska Natives, Asians, Blacks
or African Americans, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders, and Whites and do
not aggregate subgroups such as Chinese, Japanese, Samoan, and so forth, However,
any form could easily be extended in order to capture other subgroup data, and it is
expected that agencies will develop forms that meet their specific data needs.


Phase I is still in progress. Twenty cognitive interviews, 10 in cognitive laboratories and
10 on-site at establishments and agencies; are planned for this phase of the research.
To test the forms, the subjects need to be familiar with reporting aggregate data for a
given population (e.g., total numbers of students by demographic characteristics) but not
necessarily familiar with the revised standards. For Phase I, participants are recruited
mostly through committee contacts with representatives in various Federal, state and
local agencies as well as those in the private sector.


Three different forms have been developed for testing purposes. The committee
recognized from the outset that many organizations collect and maintain data at the
individual level that includes Hispanic or Latino co-equal with other race categories.
However, the design of the forms was an attempt to see how subjects would approach
the task of aggregating separate Hispanic or Latino counts with the expectation that in
the future, agencies will gradually modify the ways in which individual race and Hispanic
or Latino origin data are collected. A brief description of each 톐orm follows.




                                             26
      the Hispanic or Latino origin responses. There are 31 reporting lines representing
      every combination of both single and multiple race responses for the five minimum
      race categories. Total numbers for each race group are then entered under one of
      three Hispanic or Latino origin status columns: Yes, of Hispanic or Latino origin;
      No, not of Hispanic or Latino origin; No Hispanic or Latino origin information
      provided. This form conceptualizes what an automated data collection format
      would include. It can easily be expanded or reduced depending on the specific
      race combinations listed.


     Form RH-2 has two parts. First, it asks for the aggregate number of individuals
      who reported each single race, the number of individuals who reported more than
      one race, and the number of individuals for whom race information is missing.
      Second, for records of individuals who reported more than one race, the form then
      asks for a count of the number of times each race was included in a multiple race
      response. These numbers are reported in one of three columns: Hispanic or
      Latinos, non-Hispanic or Latinos, or separate Hispanic or Latino origin question
      but with no answer given.


     Form RH-3 has two parts and is similar conceptually to RH-2. However, it is
      designed to report aggregated race data crosstabulated with other variables. RH-
      3A asks for the aggregate number of individuals who reported each single race
      and the aggregate number of individuals who reported more than one race
      crosstabulated by Hispanic or Latino origin and gender. RH-38 is completed only.
      for records reporting more than one race. The number of times each race was
      indicated is then crosstabulated by Hispanic or Latino origin and gender.


2.2   Results


Expert panel: A panel comprised of questionnaire design specialists and experts well-
versed in aggregate reporting by establishments was convened in July 1998 to discuss

                                          27
should be redesigned so that they would be easy to complete with little or no instructions.
 There were many reformatting suggestions, such as trying to follow the step-by-step
narrative approach used by Internal Revenue Service tax forms that guide a respondent
in calculating and entering a numeric report. Also, several of the experts thought that a
reporting form should be developed that allowed for the aggregation of Hispanic or Latino
origin individuals co-equal with individuals reporting race information; this suggestion was
based on the knowledge that current practice among many institutions is to collect
individual race and ethnicity data using a combined format.


The feedback from the expert panelled to three significant changes in the test forms.
First, one form was redesigned to allow for the aggregate reporting of every combination
of multiple race responses (among the five minimum race categories). A second form
was redesigned to capture single race responses, the total count of multiple race
responses, and the number of times a racial group was reported within multiple race
combinations. Using Asian reports as an example, the second form was designed to
aggregate the total number of students who reported only Asian and the total number of
students who reported Asian plus one or more other races. Third, a form was redesigned
to provide a template for crosstabulating race reports with other demographic data.


Cognitive interviews: Fourteen interviews have been accomplished thus far, 7 in
cognitive laboratories and 7 on-site. Of the 14 respondents interviewed, 5 were Federal
government personnel, 6 worked in private industry, 2 worked in local correctional
facilities, and 1 worked in a school. For the laboratory testing, subjects were given
'dummy' records of applications that contained multiple race responses as well as
combined Hispanic or Latino origin and race questions. Dummy records were used in
order to see how subjects would complete the forms based on different kinds of source
data. Examples of the questions used in the dummy records are below followed by the
results of testing each of the three forms. For testing conducted on-site, actual agency
records were used. Attachment B contains the general interview protocol. Attachment 0
shows the progress to date by test condition.

                                            28




Race: Mark one or more

01 0 White                        04 0 American Indian or Alaska Native
02 0 Black or African American    05 0 Asian
03 0 Hispanic or Latino           06 0 Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander




 IExample 2 Two question format used on dummy records                             I
9. Are you                  1 U. Kace: MarK one or more
   Spanish/Hispanic/Latino?      01 0 White
   01 0 Yes                      02 0 Black or African American
   02 0 No                       03 0 American Indian or Alaska Native
                                 040 Asian
                                 05 0 Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander



                                       29


This form has been tested with four subjects. There were no appreciable differences
between the laboratory and on-site interviews other than the fact that the agency data
used on-site was substantially different than the data elements for Form RH-1. While
Form RH-1 is the easiest of the three forms to complete, the subjects demonstrated
some difficulty grasping the concept of multiple race responses and said the form
appeared complex when they first looked at it. Several subjects stated that a separate
set of instructions on how to complete the form is needed. One subject reviewed the
form and did not think it provided all the needed reporting categories because Hispanic
was not listed as a race. Even though the subject noticed that there was an individual
column for Hispanic individuals to be reported, he was confused because Hispanic was
not listed among the rows with the other race groups.


Once subjects began to complete the form, they were able to adapt to its format and
report numbers accurately in the correct rows. However, entering the correct number in
the appropriate Hispanic column remained a problem. One subject stated "Everything
was pretty straightforward and I really didn't have any difficulty filling out my
employees ... but why are there three Hispanic columns? Why is the focus there? It
seems sort of arbitrary. ..
In particular, subjects seemed to have the most difficulty knowing where to report
Hispanic individuals with no race information.



                                             30
only have two Hispanic columns (Yes, of Hispanic or Latino origin; No, not of Hispanic or
Latino origin) because subjects had a lot of difficulty discriminating between the column
Individuals who marked NO, Hispanic origin and the column Individuals who did not
                                                             6
provide Hispanic origin information.                             The revised RH-1 will also attempt to make clearer
where to record individuals for whom no race information is available. Last, an improved
set of instructions will be developed and tested. Following is a sample of part of the form
that was tested followed by the test instructions.

 FORM RH-1                                                                           Individuals   Individuals   Individuals
                                                                                        who           who           who did
                                                                                       marked        marked           NOT
                                                                                        YES,           NO,          provide
                                                                                      Hispanic      Hispanic       Hispanic
                                                                                       Origin        Origin          Origin
                                                                                                                  informatio
                                                                                                                       n
              1 White ........................................................
 Individual
 s            2 Black/African American .............................
 who
 marked       3 Asian .........................................................
 ONLY
 <:>FJr       4 American Indian/Alaska Native .................
  race
              5 Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander .....
                                  6 ..............................................
              7 White +           Asian ........................ ,..............
              8 White +           Am Indian/Alaska Nat.. ...........
 Individual   9 White +            Nat Hawaiian/OPI ...................
 swho
 marked       10 BlacklAfrican Am + Asian ......................
 TWO
 races        ~,~~lacklAfrican Am            + Am Indian/Alaska
              12 BlacklAfrican Am + Nat Hawaiian/OPI ..
              13 Asian + Am Indian/Alaska Nat. .............
              14 Asian + Nat Hawaiian/OPI. ....................


 Race         32 Individuals who DID NOT provide race
 missing      information

 Total                     33 ............................................
                 Sum of rows 1 through 32



       6 RH-1 as well as RH-2 and RH-3 used Hispanic origin rather than Hispanic or
Latino origin. This was an oversight that will be corrected in future testing.




                                                                            31
three, four, and five race groups. For space reasons, only the first third of the form is
shown' above.




   RH-I INSTRUCTIONS




                                            32

         1.     We are requesting separate counts for individuals who mark only one race
 and for those who mark more than one race-- one race, two races, three races, etc.

        2.      For the purposes of this form, 'Hispanic' is an ethnic group and is not a race.

        3.       If you are entering information for individuals of Hispanic origin for whom no
 race data are available, please enter these individuals in your count on Line 32, 'Individuals
 who DID NOT provide race information' and Column (1) 'Individuals who marked YES,
 Hispanic origin'.

         4.     If you do not have any racial/ethnic information for individuals, or the
 information your organization has does not fit a racial/ethnic category, then please enter
 these individuals in your count in Row 32 'Individuals who DID NOT provide race
 information' and Column (3) 'Individuals who did not provide Hispanic Origin information'.




2.2.2 Form RH-2


                                              33
found in Form RH-1, participants interviewed on-site as well as the laboratory subjects
using a combined race/ethnicity dummy record were the most confused because the test
form separates counts of Hispanics 톐rom counts of race groups which is not currently
done at their agency or organization. With one exception, the subjects interviewed both
in the laboratory and on-site were not experienced in manually aggregating data from
individual source documents. Rather, they were familiar working with data already
aggregated and contained in automated files, most of which include Hispanic as one of
the race/ethnicity reporting categories. For example, one subject stated "The only one I
got confused and stumped on was .... under the multi-race count ... It was hard for me not
to treat Hispanic as a race category. I guess I've been trained and indoctrinated." A
second subject said "It톝 basically asking how Hispanics were separated into groups of
races. I think the part that confuses me is that our Hispanics do not view themselves as
another race. And so that is kind of what threw me off... it톝 asking for Hispanics who
had marked 'White, . but they don't. They would have checked Hispanic. "


Whether in the laboratory or on-site, all subjects were confused at first by the second half
of the form which requires the reporting of the number of times a race was marked
among the multiple race responses. Below is a modified portion of the form that asks for
these counts. As indicated in the RH-1 discussion, Form RH-2 will be revised prior to
further testing.




                                           34



  Court of ~ ""    "" "" .kJ for ~ ",.   Hispanics               NON   Separate Hispanic Origin
  m4k4 IJi mAli t (ace
                                                      Hispanics         Question with no answer
                                                                        given

  Number of times WHITE
  was marked



  Number of times BLACK/AFRICAN
  AMERICAN was marked



   Number of times ASIAN
   was marked



   Number of times AMERICAN
  INDIAN! ALASKA NATIVE was
  marked

  Number of times NATIVE
  HAWAIIAN! OTHER PACIFIC
  ISLAl'JDER was marked




                                                35


Two interviews were completed with Form RH-3. Neither subject completed the form
accurately or seemed to understand its intent. This form allows for race information to be
crosstabulated by other demographic information. The top portion of the form is shown
below. The two subjects interviewed only had experience working with automated data
and therefore, had no experience or knowledge of the tasks involved in manually
aggregating responses, One subject, a Federal government EEO officer, stated that
Hispanic is considered a race and she demonstrated difficulty in not knowing where to
report Hispanic individuals as well as what to do for Hispanic or Latino individuals who
also mark one race (Should I count this as a multiple race count?). The other subject did
not understand the form at all and was only familiar with producing aggregate reports
from automated data systems. Form RH-3 needs some additional testing before
revisions can be made.




        FORM RH-3A                 AGGREGATE REPORTING OF POPULATION BY RACE, HISPANIC
                                         ORIGIN AND GENDER


        Hispanic and                       Individuals Who Marked Only ONE Race           Individuals   Individuals   Total
        Gender                                                                               Who           Who         Pop
        Characteristics                                                                    Marked        Did NOT
                                   White     Black!    Asian     American       Native
                                                                                            MORE        Report Race
                                            African               Indian!     Hawaiian!     THAN
                                           American               Alaska        Other        ONE
                                                                  Native        Pacific       Race
                                                                               hland"

        Total PopUlation


        Hispanic          Male

                          Female

                      Total

        Not               Male
        Hispanic
                          Female

                      Total

        No Hispanic   Male
        Information
                      Female

                      Total




                                                                37


Based on the laboratory interviews, on-site visits, and discussions with many state and
local government personnel and personnel working in private industry, several
methodological problems regarding the development and testing of aggregate reporting
forms were identified.


Differences between the format of the individual (source) data and the format of the
aggregate form: One of the problems in trying to test a prototype form that would assist
agencies in developing aggregate reporting methods is that the format of the individual
data varies across programs, agencies, and organizations. To develop an aggregate
reporting form, general questionnaire design principles would call for using the same or
similar categories as those used for the individual data. For example, if the individual
data uses a combined race/ethnicity question in which Hispanic or Latino is one of the
response options, then one would expect to design an aggregate form that follows the

                                            38
reporters, members of the committee found that a combined race/ethnicity question has
been used often and that a variety of terms and words are used to represent a race
category. Thus, subjects have difficulty complying with the testing task because they are
essentially being asked to reformat and redefine their data in order to complete the test
form.


Regardless of whether an agency is using a combined question or whether an agency is
using the terms set forth in the revised standards, the point here is that data reporters
expect an aggregate form to be similar conceptually to individual records. Since the test
forms were developed independent of what the individual records contain, the test forms
were perceived as unsuitable for reporting agency race and ethnicity data.


To illustrate this problem, at one corrections center, the racial identification is made by
the arresting officer and includes the categories: (1) Black, (2) White, (3) Oriental, (4)
Indian, (5) Black Hispanic, (6) White Hispanic, (7) Oriental Hispanic, (8) Indian Hispanic,
and (9) unknown. The information is made by observation, and it is unclear to what
extent Hispanic information is assessed accurately. At a different corrections center in
the same state, race and ethnicity data are automated and keyed using two separate
fields as follows: (B) Black, (A) Asian/Pacific Islander/Oriental, (I) American Indian/Alaska
Native, (C) Caucasian, and (U) Unknown; in a separate field either (H) Hispanic is
entered or the field is left blank. The data are obtained from a police officer who records it
on an intake form which is then keyed at the time of entrance to the facility. The database
at this facility allows for missing/unknown race information which the subject said
accounts for roughly 10% of the facility population.
Neither one of these subjects worked easily with the test form because it was so different
from their agency's individual source data and aggregate reports they have completed in
the past.


Difficulties in performing a complicated manual task. A second testing problem was that
only one subject was familiar with manual aggregating and reporting of race and ethnicity

                                             39
were developed and tested, they could then easily be adapted to automated reporters.
While this may be true, the testing process itself was strained because the individuals
interviewed had considerable difficulty applying their data reporting process to manual
completion of the test forms. Improving the instructions will partially reduce this problem
but redesigning the forms is necessary too.


Visual appearance of the forms: The committee recognized that the forms look
complicated. While it was thought that draft forms would suffice for testing purposes, the
importance of the appearance and layout of the forms were underestimated. Prior to
further testing, the forms will be redesigned to look more professional and reduce the
initial perception of complexity.


Mix of laboratory and on-site tests: Conducting both laboratory and on-site visits is
methodologically much more complicated than had been foreseen. Simply put, testing in
the laboratory using dummy records is not similar enough to a like task at an agency
level. This is because the laboratory subjects actually performed the task of categorizing
and manually aggregating data in order to fill out the test form. On-site, however, the
data the subjects worked with for testing were already aggregated and therefore, the task
was substantially different and subjects could not simply disaggregate the data as
needed to fill out the form. This problem can be partially remedied by developing
different protocols for laboratory and on-site tests as well as ensuring that the interview is
conducted with a staff member who has access to the individual source data.


2.4   Guidelines for Aggregate Reporting of Race and Ethnicity Data


As referred to previously, the Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting
Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity issued on October 30, 1997 set forth principles that
should be followed when aggregating race and ethnicity data for Federal reporting
purposes. The committee tested three different reporting forms with the hopes of
providing guidelines to agencies for the development of new reporting forms. None of the

                                            40
interviews suggest that minor revisions and improved formatting of Form RH-1 may work
for agencies that collect each multiple race combination reported. The Phase II revision
of Form RH-1, along with improved instructions, may also serve to help develop computer
specifications for those who will be developing automated reporting   sy~tems.



For agencies that need a total number of multiple race responses followed by the number
of times each race was reported, the concepts underlying Forms RH-2 and RH-3 will
provide the data needed and may be worth pursuing. However, the current forms need
substantial revision and, more importantly, considerable attention still needs to be paid to
developing instructions that are easy to understand and will lead to accurate completion
of the forms. A remaining problem that can only be overcome in time is the need for
agencies to change the way individual data are collected. Redesign of the forms will not
address the disconnect between the format of the individual data and the format of
aggregate forms that meet the revised standards. A few general guidelines, though, can
be offered at this point and should be considered by agencies as they move forward with
implementing the revised standards.




                                           41
responses. A system that collects every multiple race combination along with Hispanic or
Latino origin information will allow the maximum flexibility for an   a~ency   in further
reporting and analysis. It would be expected that only automated systems could achieve
this, unless the population sizes for a given agency or organization are small enough to
allow manual record keeping and tabulations. Most of interviews thus far confirmed that
for agencies that automate individual records, new combinations of multiple races could
be incorporated into their current systems.? Practically, though, modifying a reporting
system to accept numerous combinations of race and ethnicity reports has several
difficulties, most notably (1) the burden associated with reporting at least 62 8 unique
combinations of race and Hispanic or Latino origin crossed by other variables and (2) the
issue of data suppression due to confidentiality and privacy concerns.


Guideline 2: Professionally design the form and include clear instructions.
Taking care to professionally design a reporting form may seem obvious but the need for
this is heightened when the form is complex and appears difficult to complete. Many
future respondents reporting race and ethnicity data will be working with new terms and
concepts and therefore, may be more prone to error if instructions are not clear and
completion of forms are not self-evident. In particular, instructions must address what the

       7Contacts at establishments have stated that the costs of modifying their current
automated systems may be high and that accommodating a reporting change would require a
decision at senior management levels.

       8The   figure of 62 is based upon the possible combinations of 5 race categories and 2
ethnicity categories (Yes or No regarding Hispanic or Latino origin). The figure could be
substantially higher if subgroups (e.g., Japanese, Samoan, Cuban, Puerto Rican, etc.) are used
when collecting race and ethnicity data as well as combinations that account for missing race
data and missing Hispanic or Latino origin data.




                                              42


  Guideline 3: Provide definitions that assist in understanding the concepts of single race
  reports and multiple race reports as well as the distinction between ethnicity and race.
  These definitions might be able to be integrated into the instructions accompanying the
 form or on the form itself. Another option is to develop an information sheet that explains
 these and other relevant definitions.


 Guideline 4: Explain how the respondent should treat different kinds of missing data.
 One clear problem that emerged in the cognitive testing was that respondents were
 unsure how to handle missing data. Missing data can take a variety of forms (i.e,
  Hispanic is reported but race data is missing; race is reported but Hispanic information is
 missing) and each type should be addressed to avoid reporting errors.


 2.5    Continuing Research on Aggregate Reporting of Race and Ethnicity


 Phase I will be completed by April 1, 1999. Phase II will begin in the Spring 1999 and be
 completed by July 31, 1999. Its research design is currently being revised and may
 include further testing and refinement of forms and instructions. It may also include a
 more focused effort to conduct on-site visits with various agencies to better understand
 the reporting problems posed by aggregate reporting of race and ethnicity data. It is
 relevant to note that many of the problems identified in this research are not new and
 have been known and documented in the past. Phase II will concentrate on developing
 guidelines that will inform the reporting process, improve data quality, and assist data
 reporters in aggregating data containing multiple race responses.


 3.0     Field Instructions and Training Procedures


 Work to develop interview instructions and interviewer training procedures will begin in
 the Spring of 1999 and conclude on July 31, 1999. Different training modules and
 interviewer instructions depending on the mode of administration and the type of data

                                             43
collection operations.


Work on field instruction and training will, in all likeliness, not address new issues or
problems. For example, Some household interviewers have for years been using
flashcards for race questions and are experienced in helping a respondent understand
response categories and so forth. However, since the revised standards do encompass
several distinct changes, it seems timely to address in a more systematic way issues in
the fielding of the questions, and ways that interviewers can be trained to improve data
quality. Specific procedures on how to ask the questions and, in some cases, how to
instruct the respondent to use the flashcard will be developed as well as suggested
interviewer probes, definitions, and statements that can be used to answer respondent
questions. It is known from past surveys that at a minimum, guidance should be provided
regarding the following:


     What should the interviewer say if the response is multiracial, biracial, or some
       other term or phrase without a specific race combination mentioned?


     What should the interviewer say if the response is Hispanic, Latino, or some other
      term indicating Hispanic or Latino origin?


     What are the general probes and/or definitions that interviewers should use for
      responses such as American, Swedish, Jewish, and so forth?


     What is the interviewer response to a refusal or a response of "other?"




                                             44

 Aday, L. (1989). Designing and conducting health surveys: A comprehensive guide.
 San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Bates, N., de la Puente, M., DeMaio, T. J., & Martin, E. A. (1994). Research on race and
 ethnicity: Results from questionnaire design tests. Proceedings of the Annual Research
 Conference, (pp. 107-136). Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census.

 Belson, W.A. (1981). The design and understanding of survey guestions. Aldershot,
 England: Gower.

 Biemer, P. P., Groves, R. M., Lyberg, L. E., Mathiowetz, N. A. & Sudman, S. (Eds.).
 (1991). Measurement error in surveys. New York: Wiley.

 Bureau of the Census (1996). Findings on questions on race and Hispanic origin tested
 in the 1996 National Content Survey. Population Division Working Paper No. 16 .

. Bureau of the Census (1997). Results of the 1996 Race and Ethnic Targeted Test. Staff
  in Population Division and Decennial Statistical Studies Division. Population Division
  Working Paper No. 18.

 Cantor, D., Schechter, S. & Kerwin, J. (1996). Evaluation of changes to the race
 question on birth certificates. Proceedings of the Government Statistics Section,
 American Statistical Association, 241-245.

 Converse, J. M., & Presser, S. (1986). Survey questions: Handcrafting the standard
 questionnaire. Beverly Hills: Sage.

DeMaio, T, J. (Ed.). (1983). Approaches to developing questionnaires. Statistical Policy
Working Paper No.1 O. Washington, DC: Statistical Policy Office, Office of Management
and Budget.

Dillman, D. A. (1978). Mail and telephone surveys: The total design method. New York:
Wiley.

Edmonston, B., Goldstein, J., & Tamayo Lott, J. (1994). Spotlight on heterogeneity: An
assessment of the federal standards for race and ethnicity classification. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.

텲vinger, S. (1995). How shall we measure our nation's diversity? Chance, Winter 1995,
 7-14.



Farley, R. (1993). Questions about race, Spanish origin and ancestry: Findings from the

                                           45
Subcommittee on Census, Statistics and Postal Personnel, House of Representatives,
April 14.

Fowler, F. J. (1993). Survey research methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Gerber, E., & de la Puente, M. (1996). The development and cognitive testing of race
and ethnic origin questions for the Year 2000 Decennial Census. Proceedings of the
Annual Research Conference, (pp. 190-232). Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the
Census.

Groves, R. M., Biemer, P. P., Lyberg, L. E., Massey, J. T., Nicholls II, W. L. & Waksberg
J. (Eds.). (1988). Telephone survey methodology. New York: Wiley.

Groves, R. M. (1989). Survey errors and survey costs. New York: Wiley.

Lyberg, L., Biemer, P., Collins, M., de Leeuw, E., Dippo, C., Schwarz, N. & Trewin, D.
(Eds.) (1997). Survey measurement and process quality. New York: Wiley.

Office of Management and Budget (1997). Recommendations from the Interagency
Committee for the Review of the Racial and Ethnic Standards to the Office of
Management and Budget concerning changes to the standards for the classification of
federal data on race and ethnicity. Federal Register. Vol. 62 (131), 36844-36946.

Office of Management and Budget (1997). Revisions to the standards for the
classification of federal data on race and ethnicity. Federal Register, Vol. 62 (210),
58781-58790.

Payne, S. L. (1951). The art of asking questions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.                                            .

Schechter, S. (In press). Revising the standards for data on race and ethnicity:
Comments on the process and thoughts on future implications. Statistical Policy Working
Paper: Seminar on Interagency Coordination and Cooperation. Washington; DC:
Statistical Policy Office, Office of Management and Budget.

Schwarz, N., & Sudman, S. (1996). Answering questions: Methodology for determining
cognitive and communicative processes in survey research. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.

Sirken, M., Herrmann, D., Schechter, S., Schwarz, N., Tanur, J., & Tourangeau, R.
(Eds.). (in press). Cognition and survey research. New York: Wiley.

Sudman, S., & Bradburn, N. (1982). Asking questions. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Tanur, J. M. (Ed.). (1992). Questions about questions: Inquiries into the cognitive bases


                                            46




                                        47
Robinson, E. (1996). Testing methods of collecting racial and ethnic information:
Results of the Current Population Survey Supplement on race and ethnicity. Bureau of
Labor Statistics Statistical Notes. No. 40.

Tucker, C. (in press). Revision of the classification system for race and ethnicity.
Statistical Policy Working Paper: Seminar on Interagency Coordination and Cooperation.
Washington, DC: Statistical Policy Office, Office of Management and Budget.

U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (1996). Racial
and ethnic classifications used by public schools. NCES 96-092, by N. Carey and E.
Farris, J. Carpenter, project officer, Washington, DC.




                                          48
EMAILS CREATED
ARMS - BOX 007 - FOLDER 007


[2/18/1999] [2]


 Date: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

 Start time: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

 Interviewer:_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __


 From Scott's telephone screening, subject's race is_ _ _ _ and Hispanic or Latino
 origin status is _ _ _ _ _ __


This interview is for the   condition marked below:
       CONDITION 1           Hisp Short + .Race Short      Telephone interview
       CONDITION 2           Hisp Long + Race Short        Telephone interview
       CONDITION 3           Hisp Short + Race Short       Face-to-face (Flashcards 1 and
                                                           3)
       CONDITION 4           Hisp Long + Race Short        Face-to-face (Flashcards 2 and
                                                           3)
       CONDITION 5           Hisp Long + Race Long/2 banks Face-to-face (Flashcards 2 and
                            4)
       CONDITION 6           Hisp Long + Race Long/3 banks Face-to-face (Flashcards 2 and
                            5)


Before we begin, do you have any questions to ask of me?
(If yes, answer as neutrally as possible. If specific to questionnaire, tell respondent we
will talk about this later).

Begin Interview - Modify wording as necessary if interview is conducted on telephone.

 Okay, let's begin. Pretend you are at home and I've knocked on the door/telephoned
,you and asked you to participate in an interview. You agree and I begin the interview.

01.    What are the names of all persons living here (in this house/apartment)? Start
       with the name of a person living here who owns or rents this house/apartment.

       Person 1_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                  Person 4_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
       Person 2_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                  Person 5_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
       Person 3_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                  Person 6______________


02.    What is (use name) person #2's relationship to (use name) person #1?

                                              49
         Enter relationship above next to name.

Q3.      What is (your/_ _ 's) date of birth? Ask for all household members.

         Person 1                          Person 4 - - -
         Person 2                          Person 5 - - -
         Person 3                          Person 6 _ __

Q4.      What is (your/_ _ 's) age in years? Ask for all household members.

         Person 1                              Person 4_ _ _ _ _ _ __
         Person 2                              Person 5_ _ _ _ _ _ __
         Person 3                              Person 6_ _ _ _ _ _ __


Q5.      Are you (is           ) now married, widowed, divorced, separated, or never
            married?
      Only ask for subject and remaining adults in household.

         Person 1___________________              Person 4________
         Person 2_________________                Person 5.________
         Person 3___________________              Person 6________


      PROBE: What does separated mean to you?


      PROBE: Do you consider divorced and separated the same thing or different things?


Q6.      What is (your/___ 's) sex? Ask for all household members and mark M or F
         above in Q5.


Q7.      What is the highest level of school (you/          ) (have/has) completed or the
         highest degree (you/            ) (have/has) received?

         Person 1___________~-----                   Person 4________
         Person 2___________________                 Person 5._ _ _ _ _ __
         Person 3_________________                   Person 6.________



                                             50
      PROBE: What does completed mean to you?


08.      Interviewer hands respondent Hispanic/Latino Flashcard.
         Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?

         Be sure to record the verbatim response. Ask the probes after getting
         Hispanic origin for all household members.


  Person 1___________________                   Person 4_____________

  Person 2___________________                   Person 5_________

  Person 3___________________                   Person 6________




  PROBE: Can you tell me what this question is asking?



  PROBE: What does Spanish, Hispanic, Latino mean to you?



  PROBE: Do all three words mean the same thing or do they mean something
  different?



  PROBE: When you looked at the flashcard, what did you think your answer was
  suppose to be?




  PROBE: What does Puerto Rican mean to you? What does Cuban mean? Etc.




                                           51

      Please select one or more of the following categories to best describe your
      race.

      Be sure to record the verbatim response in the order that the racers) are
      named. Ask the probes after getting race for all household members.

  Person 1____________________              Person 4_______________

  Person   2~   __________________          Person 5_______________

  Person 3____________________              . Person 6_________




  PROBE: Can you tell me what this question is asking?




  PROBE: What does the word race mean to you?




  PROBE: Does Black or African American mean the same thing or do they mean
  something different? What do they mean to you?




  PROBE: Does American Indian or Alaska Native mean the same thing or do
  they mean something different? What do they mean to you?




  PROBE: What does Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander mean to you? Do
  they mean the same thing or do they mean something different?




                                       52
the card easy or hard to read?


PROBE: Show the subject the other two flashcards. Ask the subject what is the
difference between each flashcard. Also ask whether the subject has a
preference for one flashcard over another.


PROBE: Is there anything missing from the flashcard that you would have
expected to see or were looking for?




                                   53

1. You told me that you are (or other person is)          (RACE). But are there any other races
   in your family background that might apply to you (other person)?




2. (If yes) What are those other races?


3. When you've completed forms or interviews which asked for (your lother person's) race, have
   you always answered with the same race, or has your answer been different?




4. If yes, Hispanic ...... have you ever reported your race as Hispanic or Latino? Do you find race
   questions confusing or easy to answer?




5. Were there any questions in this interview that you think some people might find difficult? If
   so, which ones? Why?




6: Were there any questions in this interview that you think some people might find sensitive? If
   so, which ones? Why?




7. Is there anything in these questions that you think we should change?
   What are those changes?




                                                54


_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Starting Time
_________ Interviewer


                                       INTRODUCTION

Hello, my name is         , and I work for            . Today, we are asking for your help
in testing a new form which asks for some general information about the people who
work in yqur agency (organization, firm). We have found that the best way to design
these forms is to try them out with a variety of people to see how easy or hard they are to
complete.

What I would like you to do is first look at the form and tell me what you think it is asking
you to do. There are no right or wrong answers but your first impression will help us
understand how other people will interpret the purpose of the form. Then, I'd like you to
try to fill it out without asking me to help you. After completing the form, I will ask you
some questions about your answers, and you can also tell me more about what you like
and don't like about the form.

Before we begin, do you have any questions to ask of me?
(If yes, answer as neutrally as possible. If specific to questionnaire, tell respondent we
will talk about this later).
Okay. Here's the form. Please take a minute to look at it and then I'll ask you some
questions.



1. Can you tell me in your own words what this form is asking you to do?



2. What.is your general reaction to the form?



3. How easy or difficult is it to understand? Are you pretty sure you know what to do or are you
   confused?




                                                55
might have a better idea of how to complete the form.


NOTE:      On-site establishment interviews are conducted using the organization's personnel
           data. Lab interviews are conducted by giving participants 100 "dummy" records.


Pretend that your school/organization gained 100 new students/employees during the year. You
are responsible for reporting the race and Hispanic or Latino origin of those 100
students/employees to your boss. For example, your boss wants to know how many white were
students/employees, how many black or African American students/employees, etc.




Now, I would like to let you know about some recent changes in OMB reporting requirements.


First of all, it is specified that respondents may select more than one race.



Second, the category Asian/Pacific Islander has been broken out into two categories: Asian and
Native Hawaiian.




You may want to use these blanks sheets as worksheets to extract the information from these
records of your 100 new students/employees.




Now use these numbers to fill out the form. If you aren't sure what to do, try to guess rather than
ask me a question. (make a note if you have a question) We can talk afterwards about what you
are unsure of.




                                                 56


1.    Now that you have worked with the fonn, can you tell me in your own words what the fonn
      asked you to do?



2.    2.     What question or questions does your agency ask to obtain race/ethnicity
      data from its students (clients)?



3.    How well would this form work for report racial and ethnic data in your current data
      system?



4.    How are your school's/company's race/ethnicity data broken out?



5.    Do your records include multi-racial data? If yes, would you be able to categorize it in a
      way that you could complete this fonn?



6.    How did you arrive at your numbers? Go over with me the parts of the fonn you
      completed and what you did to enter the number.



7.    What does (racial group) mean to you?



8.    What does the Hispanic or Latino instruction mean to you?



9.    What does single race only on this fonn mean to you?



10.   What does plus one or more other races on this fonn mean to you?


                                              57
                    which ones? Why? (What makes them difficult?)



12.   What about the amount of detail that this form asks for. ... Do you think the form asks for
      enough detail? Do you think the form asks for too much detail?



13.   What did you like about the form?



14.   What did you dislike about the form?



15.   Were there any questions that you find sensitive? If so, which ones?



16.   Is there anything on this form that you think we should change? If yes, what are those
      changes?



17.   How did you interpret the 'total population' boxes?



18.   Did you have any records that you couldn't fit into one of the boxes? Where did you put
      people whom you couldn't fit into a category? How have you handled situations like this in
      the past?



19.   How long would it take for you to gather the information to complete this form?



20.   What did you think about the instructions? What should be changed?




                                              58
      ethnicity standards and that multiple race responses are now acceptable in government
      surveys?




                                             59

SELF-REPORTED RACE AND HISPANIC ORIGIN QUESTIONS


 Conditio      Interview    Hispanic    Race               Race and Ethnic Background of Subject's Mother and Father      Tota
 n             Mode         Question    Question                                                                          I
                                                      America    Asian   Black/Af.   Native    White    Hispanic   More
                                                                                                       .9
                                                      n Indian           American    Hawl                          than
                                                                                     OPI                           one
                                                                                                                   race

 1          Telephone       Short       Short                            2                     2                          4


 2             Telephone    Long        Short                            3                                                3


 3             Face-to-     Short        Short                           2                                         1      3
               face

 4             Face-to-     Long         Short                                        1        2                          3
               face

 5             Face-to-     Long         Long                    1       3            1        2        1          1      9
               face                      with
                                         two bank
                                         flashcard

 6          . Face-to-      Long         Long                    2       3                     2        1          2      10
                            ,
               face                      with
                                         three
                                         bank
                                         flashcard




       9Both   subjects who reported their parents as Hispanic reported their race as White.



                                                 60




          61


AGGREGATE REPORTING FORMS


 Condition                           Laboratory        On-site establishment   Total
                                     Interviews        interviews

 RH-1                                2                 2                       4
 Every combination

 RH-2                                4                 4                       8
 Counts of population and times of
 multiple race responses



 RH-3                                1                 1                       2
 Crosstabulated counts of
 population and times of multiple
 race responses

 Total                               7                 7                       14




                                                  62

                  Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal Prototype Redistricting Data


Under the provisions of Public Law (PL) 94-171, the Census Bureau is required to work closely
with state legislatures and governors to design special decennial census data tabulations that will
meet the states' needs for census information for legislative redistricting. Since the enactment of
PL 94-171 in 1975, the states have requested the Census Bureau to include in the PL
Redistricting Data products a breakdown by race, Hispanic origin, and voting age to enable them
to comply with provisions of the 1965 Voting Rights Act (as amended) and the court decisions
on "one-personJone-vote."

During the past several months, the Census Bureau has designed the tabulations that will be
produced from the 1998 Dress Rehearsal to simulate the information that will be produced from
the 2000 census to satisfy these redistricting data needs of state legislatures in compliance with
Public Law 94-171.

In November 1997 and April 1998 Census Bureau officials met with the Redistricting Task Force
of the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) and reviewed the then-proposed Dress
Rehearsal PL 94-171 Redistricting Data file that would include 63 racial categories (cross-
classified by voting age and by "Not Hispanic or Latino") for each census block, state-specified
voting district, census tract, place, county, etc. The resulting product, identified as the "PL 63
Matrix," would contain over 260 data items for each geographic area (e.g., county, election
precinct, census block).

State legislative officials expressed concern about the prospect of having to create state
redistricting data bases and process many scores of alternative redistricting plans using the
resulting 260-plus data cells for each of tens of thousands of census blocks in a state (7-8 million
nationally). Also, the Census Bureau and some of its advisors had concerns about
confidentiality issues surrounding presenting such detailed information for such small geographic
areas.

Responding to this concern, Census Bureau staff met with members of the Voting Rights Section
of the Civil Rights Division, U.S. Department of Justice, in June 1998, to review the census data
state and local officials would need to comply with the Section 2 and Section 5 ("pre-clearance")
provisions of the Voting Rights Act as they redistrict after the 2000 census. As a result of those
discussions, the Census Bureau developed -- as an alternative to the "PL 63 Matrix" -- a smaller
tabulation containing only 20 racial categories, called the "PL 20 Matrix" (copy attached).

This PL 20 Matrix provides flexibility to allow redistricting officials and others to use "single-
race" totals or the "all-inclusive" totals of those persons who report one or more racial categories
(i.e., alone or in combination with one or l1fore other races) in redistricting. The Voting Rights
Section reviewed this smaller PL 20 Matrix, and in late July, the Census Bureau consulted with
the Justice officials to confirm they had no suggested changes to the census information needs
presented the PL 20 Matrix to the NCSL Redistricting Task Force and provided it to the Census
2000 Redistricting Data Program Liaisons, appointed by each state. The Task Force and the
Liaisons have indicated that this smaller matrix is appropriate for their needs and avoids the
extensive processing requirements associated with the PL 63 Matrix.

To meet the processing deadlines for the Dress Rehearsal, the Census Bureau proceeded with the
programming so that it could produce the Census Dress Rehearsal Redistricting Data no later
than April 1, 1999. Please note that if the analysis of the Dress Rehearsal results would so
indicate, the design of the PL 94-171 data could be modified for the 2000 census. The Census
Bureau expects that the Dress Rehearsal PL 94-171 Redistricting Data will be available (on CD-
ROM and the Internet) in early 1999 and no later than April 1, 1999. The.Census Bureau will
provide copies of the CD-ROM to state officials and other users, asking that users work with
these actual redistricting data and provide comments to the Census Bureau for its use in
finalizing the design of the 2000 census PL Redistricting Data products.
                      Public Law 94-171 SUMMARY FILE MATRICES
                                      (As of 11119/98)


PI.           PERSONS [I]
              Universe:        Persons
              Total

P2.           PERSONS [I]
              Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
              Total

P3.           RACE [7]
              Universe:        Persons
              White alone
              Black or African American alone
              American Indian and Alaska Native alone
              Asian alone
              Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
              Some other race alone
              Two or more races

P4.           RACE [7]
              Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
              White alone
              Black or African American alone
              American Indian and Alaska Native alone
              Asian alone
              Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
              Some other race alone
              Two or more races

P5.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [8]
            Universe: .      Persons
            Hispanic or Latino
            Not Hispanic or Latino:
                    White alone
                    Black or African American alone
                    American Indian and Alaska Native alone
                    Asian alone
                    Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
                    Some other race alone
                    Two or more races

P6.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [8]
            Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
            Hispanic or Latino
            Not Hispanic or Latino:
                    White alone
                    Black or African American alone


                                                    3
              Asian alone
              Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
              Some other race alone
              Two or more races

P7.   RACE [2]
      Universe:         Persons
      White alone or in combination with one or more other races
      Not White alone or in combination with one or more other races




                                            4
                Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
                White alone or in combination with one or more other races
                Not White alone or in combination with one or more other races

P9.             HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
                Universe:         Persons
                Hispanic or Latino
                Not Hispanic or Latino:
                        White alone or in combination with one or more other races
                        Not White alone or in combination with one or more other races

PIO.    HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      White alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not White alone or in combination with one or more other races

P II.   RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons
               Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races

P12.    RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
               Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races

P13.    HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:         Persolls
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races

P14.    HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races

PIS.    RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons
               American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other races

P16.    RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
               American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other races


                                                      5

P17.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                     American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other races
                     Not American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other
             races

PIS.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                     American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other races
                     Not American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other
                     races

P19.   RACE [2]
              Universe:         Persons
              Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races
              Not Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races

P20.   RACE [2]
              Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
              Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races
              Not Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races

P21.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                     Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races
                     Not Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races

P22.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                     Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races
                     Not Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races

P23.   RACE [2]
              Universe:        Persons
              Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more other races
              Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more other
       races

P24.   RACE [2]
              Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
              Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more other races
              Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more other


                                                     6

P25.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more
             other races
                      Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or
             more other races

P26.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more
             other races
                      Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or
             more other races

P27.   RACE [2]
              Universe:        Persons
              Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races
              Not Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races

P28.   RACE [2]
              Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
              Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races
              Not Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races

P29.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                     Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races
                     Not Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races

P30.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:'
                     Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races
                     Not Some other race alone or in combination with one or more 'other races

P31.   RACE [2]
              Universe:       Persons
              One race
              Two or more races

P32.   RACE [2]
              Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
              One race


                                                     7

P33.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                     One race
                     Two or more races

P34.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Ulliverse:        Persons 18 years and over
            . Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                       One race
                       Two or more races

P35.   HISPANIC OR LATINO [2]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino

P36.   HISPANIC OR LATINO [2]
             Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino




                                                    8

                     The Bridge Report: Tabulation Options for Trend Analysis

1. Introduction

A. Scope and Focus

To permit meaningful comparisons of data collected under the previous standards with data that
will be collected under the 1997 standards, some agencies may need procedures for bridging to
the past. Because Federal data are used to measure change over time, these kinds of data
comparisons are critical to disentangle real changes in economic, social, and health conditions
from changes resulting from the new data collection methods. The purpose of this report is to
discuss different options for tabulating racial data in order to create bridges from data collected
under the new standards, which have five racial categories and permit the reporting of more than
one race, back to the previous four racial categories. An "Other" category appears in much of
the analysis, because it is included in the decennial census.

The contents of this report represent the work of a group of statistical and policy analysts drawn
from Federal statistical agencies that use and produce data on race and ethnicity. They have spent
the past year considering these tabulation issues and conducting research to develop tabulation
guidelines for constructing "bridges" between racial data collected under the new standards and
racial data collected under the old standards. This report. sets forth criteria by which different
bridging methods should be evaluated and describes the different methods that have been
considered thus far. The results of the research ~onducted on several methods for creating
                                .
bridges are also presented. All of these methods (and the research on them reported here)
involve the use of individual-level records, because altering aggregate data would not allow for
the cross-tabulation of race with variables measuring social, economic, and health outcomes.
Analysis is limited to data collected using separate questions for race and Hispanic origin. Under
the new standards, when reporting is based on self-identification, the two-question format is to be
used; even in the case of observer identification, this is the preferred format. However, it is
expected that some users will bridge to a distribution created using a combined race and ethnicity
question. Thus, bridging both to the old racial distribution resulting from the use of two
questions and one based on a combined question are analyzed. At this time, the analysis of
bridging to the combined distribution has not been completed, but those results will be included
in the report when they become available. Based on the research, the strengths and weaknesses
of each tabulation method are discussed. Until all the analysis has been completed, however,
recommendations will not be made.

B. Organization of the Report


                                                 1
procedures considered for possible use in bridging to racial data collected under the old
standards. The third section is a description of the different bridge methods considered. The
fourth section provides an overview of the methodologies used in data analysis. The fifth section
details the results of previous research on this topic. The sixth section presents results from new
statistical analyses conducted on actual and simulated data to evaluate the different methods. The
seventh section evaluates the different tabulation procedures based on using the criteria, in
conjunction with the results from both old and new research.

II Criteria for Evaluation

The interagency expert group on tabulations generated criteria that could'be used both to evaluate
the technical merits of different bridging procedures (See Part V and Appendix D) and to display
data under the new standards. The relative importance of each criterion will depend on the
purpose for which the data are intended to be used. For example, in the case of bridging to the
past, the most important criterion is "measuring change over time," while "congruence with
respect to respondent's choice" will be more critical for presenting data under the new standards.


The criteria set forth below are designed only to assess the technical adequacy of the various
statistical procedures. The first two criteria listed below are central to consideration of bridging
methods. The next six criteria apply both to bridging and long-term tabulation decisions. The
last criterion is of primary importance for future tabulations of data collected under the new
standards.

Bridging:

       Measure change over time. This is the most important criterion for bridging, because
       the major purpose of any historical bridge will be to measure true change over time as
       distinct from methodologically induced change. The ideal bridging method, under this
       criterion, would be one that matches how the respondent would have responded under the
       old standards had that been possible. In this ideal situation, differences between the new
       distribution and the old distribution would reflect true change in the distribution itself.

       Minimize disruptions to the single race distribution. This criterion applies only to
       methods for bridging. Its purpose is to consider how different the resulting bridge
       distribution is from the single-race distribution for detailed race under the new standards.
        To the extent that a bridging method can meet the other criteria and still not differ
       substantially from the single-race proportion in the ongoing distribution, it will facilitate
       looking both forward and backward in time.

Bridging and future tabulations:


                                                  2
        across agencies in tabulating racial and ethnic data, tabulation procedures that can be used
        in a wide range of programs and varied contexts are usually preferable to those that have
        more limited applicability.

       Meet confidentiality and reliability standards. It is essential that the tabulations
                      J

       maintain the confidentiality standards of the statistical organization while producing
       reliable estimates.

       Statistically defensible. Because tabulations may be published by statistical agencies
       and/or provided in public use data, the recommended tabulation procedures should follow
       recognized statistical practices.

       Ease of use. Because the tabulation procedures are likely to be used in a wide variety of
       situations by many different people, it is important that they can be implemented with a
       minimum of operational difficulty. Thus, the tabulation procedures must be capable of
       being easily replicated by others.

       Skill required. Similarly, it is important that the tabulation procedures can be
       implemented by individuals with relatively little statistical knowledge.

       Understandability and communicability. Again, because the tabulation procedures
       will likely be used, as well as presented, in a wide variety of situations by many different
       people, it is important that they be easily explainable to the public.

Future tabulations:

       Congruence with respondent's choice. Because of changes in the categories and the
       respondent instructions accompanying the question on race (allowing more than one
       category to be selected), the underlying logic of the' tabulation procedures must reflect to
       the greatest extent possible the full detail of race reporting. The bridging methods are
       meant to simulate how respondents would have identified under the old standards using
       as much of the new information as possible.

III. Methods for Bridging

The goal of developing bridging methodology for data on raceis to identify a statistical model
that will take individuals' responses to the new questions on race and classify those responses as
closely as possible to the responses we hypothesize they would have given using the old single
race categories. Such a task will be relatively easy or be more difficult depending on how an
individual identifies himself or herself under the new standards. For bridging purposes,
individuals with only a single racial background are likely to identify as they did before, and no
statistical model is needed for bridging. However, those with a mixed racial heritage who were

                                                 3
choose to identify all of their racial heritages. When a person identifies with more than one racial
group, some model will be necessary to translate those multiple responses into the one, single
response that we hypothesize that the individual most likely would have reported ~mder the old
standards.

A. Framework

Several different methods have been identified for creating a single race distribution from data
including multiple race responses. These methods vary in both the assumptions that are made
and the procedures that are followed. Before describing the particular methods examined in this
report, it is useful to describe some of their major underlying characteristics.

One major distinction among the methods is wh~ther an individual's responses are assigned to a
single racial category (termed whole assignment in Table 1) or to multiple categories (termed
fractional assignment). Whole assignment can be based on a set of deterministic nIles or based'
on some probabilistic distribution. For example, a deterministic nIle might assign all White and
American Indian responses into the American Indian category, while a probabilistic rule might
randomly assign 60 percent White and American Indian responses into the American Indian
category, and 40 percent into the White category. In the above example, it is unlikely that all
individuals identifying as White and American Indian under the new standards would have
previously identified as American Indian, so the deterministic rule will result in misclassifications
for all those people who had previously identified as White. With a probabilistic nIle, an
individual's responses are randomly assigned to either the American Indian category or the White
category (such as with 60 percent and 40 percent probabilities, respectively, based on previously
collected data). However, even if the overall probabilities matched exactly the aggregate
distribution under the old standards, there is no guarantee that the 40 percent who were
categorized as White would have classified themselves that way. In fact, in the worst case, all 40
percent who were classified as White would actually have identified as American Indian under the
old standards, and a corresponding percentage of those categorized as American Indian would
have identified as White.

When fractional assignment is used, multiple race responses are categorized into more than one
category where each category receives a fraction of a count, and the sum of the fractions equals
one. In the above examples of whole assignment, a person's responses were placed into one and
only one category, in an attempt to mimic the past. An alternative is to use a deterministic nIle
to assign some fraction of the multiple race response to each of the racial categories identified.
For example, a multiple response of White and American Indian might count as "one-haIf" in the
tabulations for American Indians and "one-haW' in the tabulations for Whites .. These fractions,
like the probabilities in the earlier example, could be varied for different combinations of multiple
races to attempt to reflect how often people might identify with one group compared to another.

                                                 4
multiple race responses are assigned wholly to one category or fractionally to all the categories
identified. Table 1 provides an overview of this framework. Specific methods will be considered
within each of the cells except the Probabilistic/Fractional Assignment method because the
alternatives are unnecessarily complex and do not improve upon the alternatives in the other cells.

There are inherent strengths and weaknesses in each of these tabulation approaches.
Furthermore, it is important to note that all of these methods are simplistic compared with the
human behavior they are seeking to emulate, and at best, any method will only be able to reflect
roughly what is sought in an historical bridge.

B. Bridge Tabulation Methods

All of the bridge tabulation methods focus on the assignment of the responses from individuals
who identify with more than one racial group. Responses from individuals who identify with
only a single racial group under the new standards are assumed to have been the same under the
old standards. The response "Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander" is assigned to the old racial
category of "Asian or Pacific Islander." The specific methods for assigning multiple race
responses into single race categories are Deterministic Whole Assignment, Deterministic
Fractional Assignment, and Probabilistic Whole Assignment.

Two sets of results from each of the following tabulation methods are produced. The first set
ignores the use of any auxiliary information other than that needed to carry (>lit the particular
tabulation method. The other set of results for each method uses the one piece of information
that is certain to be common to all data collections done following the new standards, that is,
ethnicity. Thus, whether or not an individual is Hispanic is taken into account when a tabulation
method is used.

Deterministic whole assignment. These methods use fixed, deterministic rules for assigning
multiple responses back to one and only one of the racial categories from the old standards.
Four alternatives are examined. The first (Smallest Group) assigns responses that include White
and another group to the other group, but responses with two or more racial groups other than
White are assigned into the group with the fewest number of individuals identifying that group as
a single race. The second alternative (Largest Group Other Than White) assigns responses that
include White with some other racial group, to the other group, but responses with two or more
racial groups other than White are assigned into the group with the highest single-race count.
The third alternative (Largest Group) assigns responses with two or more racial groups into the
group with the largest number of individuals as a single race. In this latter case, any combination
with White is assigned to the White category, and combinations that do not include White are

                                                5
responses based on data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). The NHIS has
permitted respondents to select more than one race for a number of years, with only the first two
responses captured. However, respondents reporting more than one race were given follow-up
question asking them for the one race with which they most closely identify (see section VI.A.1
for a detailed description of the NHIS data). For these respondents, the proportion choosing
each of the two possibilities as their main race was calculated. All responses in a particular
multiple-race category using the Plurality method are assigned to the race group with the highest
proportion of responses on the follow-up question about main race.

Deterministic fractional assignment. These methods use fixed, deterministic rules for fractional
weighting of multiple-race responses, that is, assigning a fraction to each one of the individual
racial categories that are identified. These fractions must sum to 1. Two alternatives are
examined. The first (Deterministic Equal Fractions) assigns each of the multiple responses in
equal fractions to each racial group identified. Thus, responses with two racial groups are
assigned half to each group; those with three groups are assigned one-third to each, etc. The
second alternative (Deterministic NHIS Fractions) assigns responses by fractions to each racial
group identified, with the fractions drawn from empirical results from the NHIS (as described
above).

Probabilistic whole assignment. These methods use probabilistic rules for assigning multiple race
responses bac~ to one and only one of the previous racial categories. Two alternatives are
examined. These parallel the two alternatives discussed under Deterministic Fractional          .
Assignment, except that, for a given set of fractions, the resp~nse is assigned to only one racial
category. The fractions specify the probabilities used to select a particular category. The first
alternative uses equal selection probabilities. The second uses the NHIS fractions where possible,
and equal fractions when no information is available from NHIS. Probabilistic Whole
Assignment will yield nearly, on average, the same population counts as Deterministic Fractional
Assignment. Only the results from Deterministic Fractional Assignment are presented in this report.
In practice, there would be a difference between Deterministic Fractional Assignment and
Probabilistic Whole Assignment when computing variances for tabulated estimates, and the two
methods will yield relatively small differences in distributions for respondent characteristics. In
general, Probabilistic Whole Assignment would yield a higher estimated variance than the
Deterministic Fractional approach, with the variances for both methods underestimating the true
variance. Probabilistic methods which incorporate a "Multiple Imputation" statistical technique
would result in an unbiased estimate of variance, but at the price of being more difficult to
implement (See Rubin 1987.).

Another probabilistic whole assignment method that is not examined but could be considered is a
hot deck imputation method. This procedure is often used in surveys to provide data on
responses to survey items where responses are missing. For purposes of bridging, a hot deck

                                                 6
person who identified more than one racial group. The person would then be assigned into one
of the racial categories that he or she had reported based on the single racial group reported by
the nearest neighbor.

C. Detailed Race Distributions

In addition to the results from applying the historical bridge tabulation methods, the "detailed"
race distributions are presented. This information gives the percentage of individuals identifying
with a single race or with specific multiple-race combinations. Excluding the "other" category,
there are 31 categories in the detailed distribution, including 5 single race groups, 10 two-race
combinations, 10 three-race combinations, 5 four-race combinations, and 1 five-race combination.
 The percentage of respondents identifying with a single race represents the lower bound for the
counts in the separate race categories.

The percentages of the total number of respondents who identified with each racial group also
are presented regardless of whether they also identified with any other group. Thus, those who
selected more than one race group are included in each group they selected, and each percentage
represents the percent of the population who marked that given racial group. The sum of these
percentages, in the presence of multiple race reporting, totals more than 100 percent. This
distribution serves both as a point of comparison to the bridge methods and as an alternative to
the complete distribution described above, and it gives an upper bound on the percentage of
individuals who might have identified with anyone of the racial groups under the old standards.
 This distribution is referred to as the "All Inclusive" distribution.

IV. Methods of Evaluation

A. Review of Previous Research

A significant amount of research was completed during 1995 and 1996 to inform decisions
concerning proposed changes to the standards for data on race and ethnicity. The May 1995
Current Population Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity provided detailed
information concerning alternative ways of collecting data about racial and ethnic background.
The results from the National Content Survey (NCS) conducted by the Bureau of the Census in
1996 yielded similar information. The CPS, however, also included racial information from the
same respondents gathered in a previous data collection using the racial categories from the old
standards. In addition, data available from the Racial and Ethnic Targeted Test (RAETT)
reported by the Census Bureau in 1997 provides distributions from the reporting of race and
ethnicity under the new standards for selected population groups. The National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS) also contains information about multiple race reporting. As described above, the
NHIS asks respondents to select all racial groups with which they identify, and those individuals

                                                7
data sets will provide a good background for the additional research needed on bridging. See
OMB (1997) for a description of these surveys and their results.

B. Data Sources for Additional Research

Only a limited number of data sources are available for evaluating the methods of creating
bridges. None of the currently available, nationally-representative data sets mimic exactly the way
the question on race will be asked under the new standards. Yet, some of the current data can
offer insights into the relationship between how individuals will actually respond to the new
question on race and how they responded to the question under the old standards.

Both the NHIS and the CPS Supplement data sets are useful for this purpose. Actually, the CPS
Supplement can be used to evaluate the effects of the different tabulation methods for both the
two-question format and a combined race and ethnicity question (to be presented in a later
version). Data recently collected by the state of Washington will serve as an example for
evaluating the tabulation methods at the sub-national level, and its race question most closely
resembles that which will be used under the new standards. Simulations using 1990 census data
also were conducted, but the results differed little from those for the other data sets. At this
point, it is believed that an analysis of data from the 1998 census dress rehearsal would be of
greater utility. Furthermore, the dress rehearsal data will provide other examples of the effects of
the new standards at the local level. Thus, this analysis will be included in a later version of this
paper.

C. Description ofNew Analysis

The analyses concentrated on the bridge tabulation methods. These analyses can be divided into
three broad areas: (1) descriptions of racial distributions under the tabulation methods; (2) rates
of racial misclassificatio.n for the tabulation methods; and, (3) sensitivity of outcome measures to
tabulation alternatives.

Distribution of Race. For the first part of the analysis (using the NHIS, the CPS Supplement,
and the data from Washington State), the distributions of race under the allocation alternatives
described previously were calculated: All Inclusive, Deterministic Whole Allocation (Smallest
Group, Largest Group Other Than White, Largest Group, and Plurality) and Fractional
Allocatiol1 (Equal Fractions and NHIS Fractions). At this time, it is unknown what percentage
of people in the United States will identify with more than one racial group when given the
opportunity to do so in Census 2000 census and in subsequent surveys. For purposes of
illustrating the effects of a greater proportion of individuals identifying multiple racial
backgrounds, analyses were conducted increasing the proportion of multiple race responses two-,
four-, six- and eight-fold using the NHIS, the CPS Supplement, and the Washington State micro

                                                  8
effects with increasing levels of multiple race reporting. Of necessity, these tabulations assume
that the increases are the same across the different combinations of more than one race. The
accuracy of this assumption cannot be tested. The purpose of these analyses is not to attempt to
make accurate predictions about the extent of multiple race reporting or its composition, but
rather to see more clearly possible differences among tabulation methods that may only become
apparent with a greater percentage of multiple race reporting.


In all three data sets, overall goodness-of-fit statistics were calculated to compare the match
between the distribution from each bridge tabulation method and the appropriate reference
distribution in each data set (representing the distribution under the old standards). The
goodness-of-fit measure was a multiple of the standard Likelihood Ratio G 2 statistic used in
categorical analysis (Agresti 1990), with the "true" or reference distribution playing the role of the
"Expected" and the distribution of each of the tabulation methods playing the role of the
"Observed." Small values of the goodness-of-fit measure indicate that the distributions are close,
and large values indicate that the distributions are not close. Significance tests at the .10 level also
were calculated for all pair-wise comparisons of the percentage in a particular racial category from
the reference distribution to the percentage falling in the same category under each of the
tabulation methods. These tests take into account both the fact that multiple comparisons are
being made and the effects of complex sampling designs.


Misdassification of Race. Besides evaluating the overall racial distributions produced by the
tabulation methods, the misclassification of individuals also needs to be examined. For the
NHIS, the CPS Supplement, and the Washington State survey, these misclassification rates were
formed by comparing an individual's answer to the race question under the old standards to the
assigned category of the individual's response(s) to the race question under the new standards
using each of the tabulation methods. For the purpose of estimating these rates for the whole
population, those selecting a single race with the new question were included. The
misclassification rate and its standard error for each race by tabulation method were produced.


Preliminary Outcomes Assessment. In the last part of the analysis, the impact of multiple-race
reporting on outcome measures is assessed. This is important because users in many of the
Federal agencies are not typically examining race distributions, but rather trends and indicators for
the Nation (e.g.,health outcomes, economic well-being, educational attainment) across racial
groups. This is where the majority of work will need to be done within individual agencies as
the new standards are implemented. An initial examination of how common statistics could be
affected by multiple race reporting is presented here. Five outcome measures were examined,
three from the NHIS and two from the CPS Supplement. From the NHIS, three routine health
outcomes were calculated: percent of respondents in poor or fair health, percent of children

                                                   9
Supplement, the proportion of respondents who were unemployed and the labor force
participation rates for different racial groups were calculated. These measures are not meant to be
precise estimates of these factors, but are used to demonstrate the possible impact multiple-race
reporting, and the tabulation methods, may have on these and similar estimates.


V. Findings from Previous Research


In order to evaluate tabulation methodologies for bridging to the past, the magnitude of the
problem first must be considered. Currently the proportion of the population reporting more
than one race is quite small. Between 1 and 2 percent of the total population identified with
multiple races in both the CPS Supplement and the NCS. These numbers coincide with recent
data from the longitudinal series collected in the NHIS. These estimates, however, may not
match the results from the new standards for two reasons. In light of the greater publicity this
issue has received in recent months, a heightened awareness of multiple heritages could lead a
higher proportion of the population to select more than one race. Moreover, some of the
estimates were based on question formats that differ from what the new standards require. Both
in the CPS Supplement and in the NCS, respondents were asked to select only one category
from a list including a "multiracial" category and did not have the option of choosing one or
more races from a list of single races. The results from the METI, in which the multiple
response option was compared to the use of a multiracial category in targeted populations,
indicated that the "multiracial" category (when "select one or more" was the instruction) had a
greater effect among Asians and Pacific Islanders than did the multiple response option.
Unfortunately, the multiple response option was not tested with the Alaska Native targeted
sample, where the proportion selecting the "multiracial" category was the largest compared to the
other samples.
Even if the portion of the total population marking more than one race is small, the proportions
of some population groups doing so can be quite large and variable. Table 2 shows the racial
distribution and the percentage of respondents who selected more than one race for each of the
targeted samples in the RAETI. The percentages for the groups other than Whites and Blacks
are fairly large, especially in the Asian and Pacific Islander targeted sampl.e. Those classified as
American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN) under the old standards were the respondents most
likely to choose the multiracial category when it was offered in the CPS Supplement. However,
even those in the AlAN category selecting a single race varied from one time to the next (in
both the CPS Supplement and the NCS reinterview) in their choice of the particular single race.
 This inconsistency in the reporting of racial group by American Indians and Alaska Natives has
been noted elsewhere (Passel and Berman 1986; Snipp 1986; McKenney and Cresce 1992;
McKenney et al. 1993). Thus, the difficulty of forming a bridge to the past will differ depending
on the particular racial group as reported under the old standards. Other racial groups also may

                                                 10
population reporting more than one race no doubt will differ by state, size of place, and also by
some individual demographic characteristics such as the levels of income, education, and,
especially, age. The various methods for creating the bridge could have different effects on the
statistics for groups defined by these and other variables.


VI Results of Statistical Analysis Comparing Different Methods


A. Comparison of distributions from different methods using the reported proportions of
multiple race responses


1. National Health Interview Survey
The NHIS is a continuing nationwide sample survey designed to measure the health status of
residents of the United States (Benson and Marano, 1995; Massey et aI., 1989). Information on
demographic and health characteristics for an entire household is collected through a personal
interview with a single respondent. All information for children under 18 years of age is obtained
by proxy. The sample design follows a multistage probability design that allows a continuous
sampling of the civilian noninstitutionalized population of the United States. The survey is
designed so that the samples for each week are nationally representative and can be combined
over time. The response rate of the ongoing portion (the core) of the questionnaire is between
94 and 98 percent. To obtain population estimates from the NHIS, survey weights are assigned
to each observation. These weights are derived from census estimates of the U.S. population,
household non-response, and the sampling frame.


The analysis for this report uses data from an analytic file that contains three years of NHIS data
(1993, 1994, and 1995). For each of these years there were about 45,000 households
interviewed, resulting in a little over 100,000 individuals per year. The total sample for the
bridge analysis is 323,080 (5237 respondents are missing racial data).


Racial Variables from the NHIS. Since 1976, the NHIS has allowed respondents to choose more
than one racial category. As the respondent is handed a card with numbered racial categories,
the interviewer asks, "What is the number of the group or groups that represent your race". If a
respondent selects more than one category, the interviewer then asks, "Which of those groups
would you say best describes your race?"


Although the listed racial groups have changed over time, for 1993 to 1995, the card shown to


                                                 11
Chinese, Filipino, Hawaiian, Korean, Vietnamese, Japanese, Asian Indian, Samoan, Guamanian,
and other Asian and Pacific Islander). Although not on the flashcard, respondents were allowed
to give an "other race" response. To be consistent, the 16 groups were collapsed to the four
previous racial categories: White, Black, American Indian or Alaskan Native (AlAN), and Asian
or Pacific Islander (API), plus Other.


For this analysis, a variable called Detailed Race was created from responses to the first question,
which allowed identification with more than one racial group. This information is not included
on public use data files of the NHIS. However, on internal files, the first two race groups
mentioned are recorded for each observation. Even if a respondent selected more than two
groups, only two were recorded on the intermediate file. From the two recorded racial
responses, Detailed Race was coded into five single race groups (White, Black, AlAN, API,
Other) and 11 multiple race groups (White/Black, White/AlAN, White/API, White/Other,
Black/AlAN, Black/API, Black/Other, AlAN/API, AlAN/Other, and API/Other). For most
analyses, multiple racial groups that had insufficient numbers were combined into the category
"Other Combinations." Individuals who had two racial groups recorded for Detailed Race but a
third group recorded for the "group that best describes race" were coded into "Other
Combinations."


The Main Race variable, used asa reference point representing the racial distribution under the
old standards, is primarily derived from Detailed Race and the responses to the second question,
which asks the respondent for the group that best describes his/her race (Benson and Marano,
1995). For respondents who selected one Detailed Race group, Main Race is the same as
Detailed Race. For respondents who selected more than one racial group, Main Race is the one
group reported as best describing their race. Some respondents who had chosen more than one
race for the Detailed Race question responded as "Multiple race" or "Other" for the Main Race
question. For this analysis, these responses were combined into the "Other" category.
Categories for Main Race were White, Black, AlAN, API, and Other.


Several tabulations of the NHIS were done for this report. Unless otherwise stated, the survey
weights are used to provide national estimates.


NHIS AnaJysis. Information about how respondents who selected two racial groups might
identify if there was only the option to select a single racial group can be obtained from the
NHIS by looking at a comparison of Detailed Race and Main Race classifications. For
individuals in multiple-race combinations that had sufficient sample size, the Main Race
designation was compared to the Detailed Race response. As can be seen in Table 3, there is

                                                  12
describes their race. For example, 12 percent or less of those who reported as Black and AlAN
or White and AlAN choose AlAN as their Main Race group, whereas about 35 percent of
individuals identifying as White and API identify as API and about 50 percent of respondents
identifying as Black and White identify as Black. However, 27 percent of White and Black and
nearly 20 percent of White and API respondents do not select a Main Race, compared with
about 7 percent of those who are White and AlAN or Black and AlAN. Because the NHIS is
the only nationally representative data set available with large enough numbers of individuals with
specific combinations of racial groups, it is the best source for estimating how respondents who
selected multiple racial groups would identify a single race group.


The distribution of race was calculated using the Detailed Race variable, the Main Race variable,
and the different tabulation alternatives where responses from individuals of more than one race
are allocated to a single racial group (described above in detail). For the most part, the
distribution from the Main Race variable was used as a reference in comparisons with the
distributions produced by the different tabulation methods.


As Table 4A shows, less than 2 percent of the respondents reported more than one race during
1993, 1994, and 1995 in the NHIS. With less than 2 percent reporting more than one race, the
race distributions appeared very similar under different tabulation methods (Table 4B). The
estimated distribution from the NHIS Fractional Assignment method was closest to the reference
distribution for all race groups. Largest Group Whole Assignment and the Plurality method also
led to distributions close to the reference distribution. Smallest Group Whole Allocation and
Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation produced distributions similar to one
another. These two Whole Allocation methods greatly overestimated the number of AlAN
respondents, relative to the reference distribution .. Equal Fractional Assignment overestimated the
numbers in the AlAN group, but not nearly as much as the Smallest Group and Largest Group
Other Than White Whole Allocation methods. The All Inclusive Allocation method, by
definition, leads to a higher proportion of respondents in each racial group, relative to the
reference distribution. However, the increase for the AlAN group is considerably larger than for
the other racial groups. The sum total for the All Inclusive method is greater than 100 percent,
reflecting the duplicate assignment of the multiple race respondents. The same conclusions hold
when looking at the distributions from the tabulation methods controlling for ethnicity (Table
4C).


The goodness of fit measures lead to similar conclusions; the NHIS Fractional Allocation method
had the smallest (i.e., the best) goodness-of-fit value, followed by the Largest Group Whole
Allocation method. Smallest Group Whole Allocation and Largest Group Other Than White
Whole Allocation had the largest goodness-of-fit values, indicating a poorer overall fit than the

                                                 13


Because of their larger population size, the White and Black categories were less affected by the
choice of allocation method than were the API and the AlAN categories. Compared to the
reference distribution, the various allocation methods led to estimates approximately 10 percent
lower to 200 percent higher for the AlAN group, 3 percent lower to 6 percent higher for the
API group, and estimates within 1.5 percent for both the Black and White groups.


2. May 1995 Supplement on Race and Ethnicity to the Current Population Survey (CPS)


The May 1995 CPS Supplement was one in a series of studies conducted for the Federal
agencies' review of the standards for data on race and ethnicity. The Supplement was designed
to address the following issues: (1) the effect of having a "multiracial" race category among the
list of races; (2) the effect of adding "Hispanic" to the list of racial categories; and (3) the
preferences for alternative names for racial and ethnic categories (e.g., African-American for
Black, and Latino for Hispanic). The Supplement was organized into four panels representing a
two-by-two experimental design for studying the first and second issues outlined above. Each
panel was given to one-fourth of the sample, or about 15,000 households (30,000 individuals).
All respondents in a household received the same set of questions; household members 15 years
and older were asked to respond for themselves, and parents answered for children under 15.
The panels were defined as:
       Panel 1:   Separate race and Hispanic origin questions, no multiracial category;
       Panel 2:   Separate race and Hispanic origin questions, with a multiracial category;
       Panel 3:   A combined race and Hispanic origin question, no multiracial category;
       Panel 4:   A combined race and Hispanic origin question, with a multiracial category.
In panels 1 and 2, the Hispanic origin question preceded the race question. Detailed information
concerning the results of the CPS Supplement can be found in Tucker et al., (1996).


Data from the May 1995 CPS Supplement. Only two of the panels in the CPS Supplement
allowed respondents to report in a multiracial category (panels 2 and 4), and only panel 2 had
separate race and Hispanic origin questions as ultimately recommended in the new standards.
Therefore, panel 2 data were used to analyze the effects of the different tabulation methods.
The smaller sample (about 30,000 observations) hampers analysis and generalizations when the
focus is on the small portion of the sample (about 1 percent) who identified as "multiracial."


There are additional limitations to these data for evaluating the bridging methods. The option

                                                14
category with a follow-up question asking respondents to identify all of the racial groups the
person would identify with. The new standards allow people to identify directly with all the
racial groups they choose and do not include a "multiracial" category. Furthermore, a large
percentage of individuals who chose the multiracial category in panel 2 of the Supplement did
not specify more than one racial group (see Tucker et al., 1996). For purposes of this evaluation,
individuals were classified as belonging to the specific racial categories they identified. Those
who identified as being multiracial but then did not give two or more specific racial groups were
reclassified as single race respondents in the one racial category they gave. Thus, the distribution
of the CPS Supplement data reported here differs from that which was published in earlier
reports, which classified as multiracial any person who identified with the multiracial category
even if they only specified one racial group. This new distribution is referred to here as the
"Edited Distribution."


The edited distribution was used with the various tabulation methods. As in the NHIS, the
resulting distributions were compared to a reference distribution, in this case based on the
respondents' original answers (in the first CPS interview) to the race question that followed the
old standards.


Several tabulations of the CPS Supplement were done for this report. Because weighting to the
race controls developed under the old standards would confound analysis, the survey weights that
are used for tabulations are not designed to provide national estimates. The weights reflect the
probability of selection and an adjustment for nonresponse, but do not reflect post-stratification to
known population totals by age, race, and sex groups. Thus, these results cannot be directly
compared to other sources.


CPS Supplement Analysis. Table SA provides the detailed distribution for the racial categories
reported in the CPS Supplement. A smaller proportion reported more than one race in this
survey compared to the NHIS. This is largely the result of recoding, in the Supplement, two
race responses involving "Other" to the single race category of the other race mentioned. As can
be seen in Table SB, the All Inclusive Allocation method, the Smallest Group Whole Allocation
method, and the Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation method have the poorest
fits to the reference distribution, based on the race question in the initial CPS questionnaire. The
NHIS fractional method provides a relatively close fit. The Largest Group Whole Allocation
method and the Plurality method give the closest fits. These observations are largely confirmed
by the goodness-of-fit measures. Table SC shows essentially the same results when controlling
for ethnicity.



                                                 15
assigned to these same categories using the different bridging methods along with answers to the
race question in the CPS Supplement in Panel 2, including respondents who simply switched
single-race categories from one time to the other. Over 96 percent of Whites and 95 percent of
Blacks in the original survey were assigned back to this same category for all methods. Well over
90 percent of those in the API category originally ended up in that category using each bridge
method. On the other hand, far fewer respondents in the original AlAN category (only a little
more than 60 percent) were assigned to that category with every bridging method. The same
was true for those in the "Other" category. Using ethnicity does not alter these results (Table
6B).


3. 1998 Washington State Population Survey


The 1998 Washington State Population Survey (WSPS) was designed to provide information on
Washington residents between decennial censuses. The survey collected data on employment,
income, education, health, along with basic demographic information. The WSPS was done by
telephone and included 7,279 households with telephones. Blacks, Asians, Hispanics and
American Indians were overs amp led. The designated respondent was the individual with the
greatest knowledge about the household. The respondent weights reflect this oversampling and,
thus, results are representative of the Washington population as a whole. The response rate for
the entire sample was between 50 and 60 percent.


Data from the WSPS. Information about the race of the respondent was collected twice during
the course of the interview. At the beginning of the survey, the respondent was asked, "Are you
of Hispanic origin?" Following that question, the respondent was asked, "What is your race?"
The categories were the ones appearing under the old standards, but the order was as follows:
Black; American Indian, Aleut, or Eskimo; Asian or Pacific Islander; and White. An "Other"
category also was allowed, and the interviewer recorded the verbatim response on a "specify"
line. Near the end of the survey, the respondent was asked race questions conforming to the
new standards. Besides the same Hispanic origin question, the respondent was asked to specify
country of origin. For race, the respondent was asked to select one or more categories. This
time the ordering of the categories was White; Black or African American (Or Haitian or
Negro); American Indian or Alaska Native; Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander; Asian.
Again, an "Other" category was provided. There also was a follow-up question for Asian
respondents to specify country of origin.


The results from the race question at the end of the survey were used with the tabulation
methods. The reference distribution came from the answers to the original race question.

                                               16
children are not likely to be represented. Because the racial characteristics of the population in
Washington differ substantially from those of the nation as a whole, the results of the analysis of
the Washington data offer a contrast to those for both the NHIS and the CPS Supplement
(Table 7 A). Only 2 to 3 percent of the state's population is Black. Although Whites reporting a
single race make up more than 86 percent of the population, API is still about 3 percent of the
population (as in the nation as a whole) and AlAN (alone or in combination with White) is
about 3 percent of the population. In the reference distribution Cfable 7B), AlAN is 1.3 percent
of the population. Those reporting more than one race comprise more than 4 percent of the
state's population.


When the WSPS responses were assigned to the old categories using the various tabulation
methods, the national racial distributions used in CPS were applied. Table 7B shows that the All
Inclusive method, the Smallest Group method, and the Largest Group Other Than White
method provide the poorest fits to the reference distribution, especially for the AlAN category.
The Largest Group method and the Plurality method understate the proportion in the AlAN
category, and the Equal Fraction method overstates it. Their goodness-of-fit measures, however,
are approximately equivalent. The NHIS Fractions method clearly provides the closest fit.
Again, the conclusions are similar when ethnicity is taken into account (Table 7C).


Table 8A presents a somewhat different picture. As in the CPS Supplement, a very large
percentage of those classified as White, Black, or API using the old standards would remain in
the same category under the new standards using any of the methods. However, those originally
classified as AlAN or "Other" are more likely to remain in the same category using the All
Inclusive, Smallest Group, and Largest Group Other Than White methods than when using the
other methods. The same conclusions hold when controlling for ethnicity (Table 8B).


B. Misclassification Rates


1. NHIS AnaJysis


Tables 9A and 9B present the misclassification rates for race by tabulation method in the NHIS.
The two tables are essentially the same. The misclassification rates for the "Other" category are
relatively large (and significantly different from zero) no matter the tabulation method. The
Smallest Group method and the Largest Group Other Than White method perform the best for
both the AlAN and API categories. Note, however, that these two methods have the highest

                                                17
relative to the other categories. The Largest Group method, the Plurality method, and the NHIS
Fractions method produce substantial misclassification rates for the AlAN category.


2. CPS Supplement Analysis


Tables lOA and lOB show the misclassification rates for the CPS Supplement. Again, the
conclusions are the same whether or not ethnicity is taken into account. Misclassification is much
greater in the CPS Supplement compared to the NHIS. The rates for the AlAN and "Other"
categories are extremely large, and the results differ little from one tabulation method to another.


3. Analysis of the WSPS


The results from the WSPS fall in between those for NHIS and the CPS Supplement (Tables
llA and llB), and controlling for ethnicity has little effect. Although the Smallest Group method
and the Largest Group Other Than White method have substantial misclassification rates ~or both
the AlAN and "Other" categories, these rates are not nearly as large as the ones for the other
tabulation methods. Misclassification in the API category is much the same for all methods.
Given the size of the White category and the somewhat greater misclassification rates for this
category using the Smallest Group and Largest Group Other Than White methods, these two
methods again have the highest overall misclassification rates.


C. Comparisons of the Race Distributions if Multiple Race Responses Increase


This section does not include analyses controlling for ethnicity, because this control had little
effect in the previous analyses. No significance testing is done given the hypothetical nature of
these simulations. For example, increases in the numbers reporting more than one race would
not likely be uniform across all racial categories.


1. NHIS Analysis


Table 12 shows that if the percentage of multiple race responses increases for all groups at the
same rate and the distribution on the Main Race variable remains the same, the tabtilated counts
for AlAN increase dramatically under several tabulation methods. The Fractional Allocation
method that uses 'the proportions derived from the NHIS remains close to the reference


                                                18
goodness-of-fit value, underestimates the Main Race proportions within all groups, including
AlAN, except White. Smallest Group Whole Allocation shows the greatest proportionate change
to all of the groups, increasing all the groups except White. The change is greatest for the
smaller groups, AlAN and API, and is less so for Black. As with the results from previous
comparisons, the Equal Fractions Allocation method more closely resembles the reference
distribution than does Smallest Group or Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation
methods, but does not come as close as the Largest Group Whole Allocation and NHIS
Fractions methods. Again, the Plurality method produces the results closest to the reference
distribution. The All Inclusive method increasingly deviates from the reference distribution. For
example, when the multiple responses are increased by a factor of 'eight, the percent AlAN under
the All Inclusive method is over five times the percent AlAN in the reference distribution. In
contrast, the percent White is only 16 percent higher than the reference distribution.


Goodness-of-fit statistics grow increasingly as the number of multiple-race respondents increases,
suggesting that the allocation methods to approximate the old standards may be of decreasing
utility over time, especially in certain areas of the country. Nonetheless, the relative ranks of the
goodness-of-fit statistics are consistent: the Plurality method has the lowest value, followed by the
NHIS Fractions and Largest Group Whole Allocation methods, while Smallest Group and
Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation have the largest values, indicating poorer
fits.


Overall, the results for the AlAN group are the most sensitive to the choice of bridge allocation
method. Results for the API group are also sensitive to the choice of allocation method; as for
the AlAN group, Smallest Group and Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation
overstate the percent API, Largest Group Allocation slightly understates the percent API, Equal
Fractions slightly overstates the percent API, and, the Plurality method and NHIS Fractions are
the most similar. Because of their relatively larger size, Black and White groups are less affected
than the smaller groups; however, even those estimates increasingly differ as the numbers of
multiple-race respondents increase. The methods controlling for Hispanic ethnicity were not
evaluated for the increases in the proportion of respondents reporting multiple races, because the
earlier analysis showed this control had little effect.


2. CPS Supplement Analysis


As can be seen in Table 13, the pattern of findings for the different methods in the CPS
Supplement looks very similar to that using the NHIS. Again, the greatest effects are seen on the
smaller racial groups, with the largest increases occurring when the All Inclusive method and the

                                                 19
Plurality method, followed by the Largest Group method and the NHIS Fractional method, most
closely resemble the racial distribution under the old standards. Again, the analyses controlling
for ethnicity were not done.


3. Analysis of the WSPS


Table 14 provides the results when increasing the percentage of individuals reporting more than
one race. Given that the number reporting more than one race in Washington was already
relatively large (over 4 percent), increasing that number up to a factor of 8 gives rather dramatic
results. It is unlikely that such a large portion of the state's population would report more than
one race in the foreseeable future. In any case, the proportion of responses assigned to the
AlAN category grows very large with the All Inclusive method, the 'Smallest Group method, and
the Largest Group Other Than White method. The proportions assigned to the White category
also become erratic. The Largest Group and Plurality methods underestimate the proportion.
The NHIS Fractional method performs the best throughout.


VII Effects ofMethods on Outcome Measures


A. Sensitivity of Three Health Indices to Multiple-Race Reporting


As can be seen in both Table 15A and Table 15B, the health indices for single race groups did
not appear to change much under any of the tabulation methods. In particular, the largest single
race groups (White and Black) are mostly unaffected by additions or subtractions of multiple race
respondents, primarily due to their size relative to the proportion multiple race, even when
estimates for the multiple race groups are distinctly different than their single race counterparts.
For example, Table 15A shows that the percent uninsured among the Black respondents' is the
same under all the allocation methods even though the percent uninsured is much lower among
BlackjWhite respondents. This difference is due to the fact that the BlackjWhite respondents are
a very small group relative to the entire Black group. In some cases (All Inclusive, Smallest
Group, Largest Group Other Than White, and Equal Fractions), the AlAN group has a smaller
percent uninsured. These differences are due to the large difference in percent uninsured between
the single race AlAN and the multiple-race AIANfWhite group, accompanied by the fact that a
relatively large proportion of AIANjWhite respondents is included as AlAN under the allocation
methods.


Despite the lower percent of AIANjWhite respondents compared to single-race AlAN

                                                20
the AlAN group. Once again, this indicates that both the difference in estimates between the
multiple race groups and the single race groups needs to be large and the proportion of multiple
race respondents also needs to be large to have measurable impact.


As another example, the percent of children living with a single mother is different for the single
race and the multiple race groups. Yet, the differences are not evident in the allocation methods.
 Only in the case of the AlAN group is there a possible effect.


B. Sensitivity of Economic Indicators to Multiple-Race Reporting


Tables 16A and 16B show the impact of the different bridging methods on the unemployment
rate and the labor force participation rate. On the surface, all of the methods produce a large
increase in the unemployment rate for the AlAN category, and the Largest Group, Plurality, and
NHlS Fractional methods produce the largest changes. However, these increases are not
statistically significant. Only in the case of labor force participation rates for some tabulation
methods are there statistically significant differences compared to the reference distribution.


VIII Examining the Tabulation Methods According to the Criteria


Bridging to the past will be needed for measuring change in a variety of circumstances. Besides
measuring population growth, any number of economic, social, and health outcomes must be
monitored. This work will involve different population groups at different levels of geography.
As -a first step toward providing the information users will need to make informed decisions
about the methods, the strengths and weaknesses of these methods with respect to the evaluation
criteria will be discussed based on the findings in this report and other relevant information.


Measure Change Over Time. As indicated earlier, measuring change over time is the criterion that
is of greatest importance in evaluating the bridging methods. Much of this report has been
devoted to analyses that shed light on the performance of the various methods in this area. In
essence, an ideal bridging method in this case is one that not only accurately recreates the
population distribution under the old standards such that the only difference remaining is a
function of true change over time, but also assigns an individual's response to the old category
that would have been chosen. The methodology used in these studies allows users, within limits,
to see how well the bridging methods using racial data collected under the new standards can
match data from the same respondents collected (at the same time) under the old standards. To
the extent that there is a match, any change that would occur from this point forward would

                                                 21


When comparing the different methods to their reference distributions, the racial categories that
are most sensitive to which method is chosen are the numerically small ones, particularly the
AlAN category. While different data sets were used in each study and the racial questions were
not the same, the studies indicate that the Largest Group Deterministic Whole Assignment
method, the Plurality method, and the two Deterministic Fractional Assignment methods produce
distributions closer to the reference distributions than are the other Deterministic Whole
Assignment methods and the All Inclusive method. Controlling for ethnicity had no effect on
these results. One reason the Largest Group Assignment method results are so close is that it has
little effect on the smaller races, because most assignments are made to Black or White, and the
percentages for these two races are so large that the relatively small increase they receive is not
noticeable. The Plurality method produces a close fit, because it makes assignments at the level
of specific racial combinations. The performance of the NHIS Fractional Assignment method
can be discounted to a degree in the and NHIS study because the analysis is somewhat circular;
however, the results from the CPS Supplement and the Washington State Population Survey
(WSPS) show this method yields a relatively close match. The Equal Fractional Assignment
method produces a reasonable match in these studies. The primary reason that the other two
Whole Assignment methods and the All Inclusive method do not perform as well is that they
alter the White percentage to some extent and substantially increase the percentage in the AlAN
category.


In the case of misclassification rates, some contradictory results emerge. While the AlAN and
"Other" categories have high misclassification rates across all tabulation methods in the CPS
Supplement, the same is not true for the other two surveys. The Smallest Group Whole
Assignment and the Largest Group Other Than White Whole Assignment methods produce the
most comparable results for the AlAN category in both surveys and for the "Other" category in
the WSPS; however, these methods have higher overall misclassification rates. Both the CPS
Supplement and the WSPS have large misclassification rates for these two categories when using
many of the tabulation methods.


When the distributions of the outcome variables are examined, all methods produce comparable,
and relatively close, matches for all health outcomes. For the AlAN unemployment rate, the
Largest Group Whole Assignment method and the NHIS Fractional Assignment method appear
to produce the least comparable numbers, but none of the differences are significant. There are
significant differences in the AlAN labor force participation rates for several of the tabulation
methods. It is likely that which method is best at matching a reference distribution for outcome
measures will depend on the outcome being examined. Unfortunately, the data to assess the best
tabulation method for each outcome may never be readily available.

                                                 22
these studies. It is unclear how people will respond to the new racial question in the future, and
these responses could differ by mode of data collection and with the subject of the survey.
Furthermore, most of this work on developing bridging methods relied on sample data, and
small samples at that.


Congruence with Respondent's Choice. This criterion concerns how well the full range of the
respondent's choices is represented in the racial distribution. It is more important for evaluating
ongoing tabulations under the new standards, but the bridging methods can be differentiated with
respect to this criterion, too. None of the Deterministic Whole Assignment methods take into
account the full range of the respondent's selections, but the Plurality method at least controls for
the particular racial combination chosen by the respondent under the new standards. The All
Inclusive method accurately reflects all selections by tabulating actual responses and not people.
The Equal Fraction Assignment method tabulates people, but, like the All Inclusive method,
treats all responses equally. The NHIS Fractional Assignment method takes all responses into
account, but assignment is based on attempting to estimate in which single-race category the
respondent would prefer to be counted.


Range of Applicability. This criterion refers to how well the bridging method can be applied in
different contexts. The All Inclusive method provides the same results in every context, because
assignment does not depend on the particular detailed racial distribution. This method is not -
suitable for users who need a distribution that adds to 100 percent. Of the Deterministic Whole
Assignment methods, the Largest Group Assignment method is the least sensitive to context and
can be used in a wide variety of applications. The other Deterministic Whole Assignment
methods are as easy to use as the Largest Group Whole Assignment method, but the results for
the small racial categories will vary to a greater extent with the context, particularly according to
level of geography. The Equal Fraction Assignment method is as generalizable as the All
Inclusive method, but it is not quite as easy to use. The NHIS Fractional Assignment method
and the Plurality method may be the most problematic, because they currently only represent a
national preference distribution based on data from 1993 to 1995. The use of this distribution at
the local level would be likely to produce inaccurate- results in a number of cases. That is not to
say that the other methods do not face the same problem.


Meet Confidentiality and Reliability Standards. Because these methods all attempt to reproduce the
racial categories under the old standards, the same confidentiality problems that existed over the
last 20 years will continue to exist. No increase in problems is anticipated. In the case of
reliability, however, the situation is different. The All Inclusive method will not produce less


                                                 23
reliability problems as a result of only adding fractional counts to some of the smaller categories if
these categories have a high probability of being chosen as the preferred single race. The same
would be true if equal fractions were used to make whole assignments. In sample surveys, the
Deterministic Whole Assignment methods will have reliability problems to the extent that there is
a large variance on the individual race proportions. This is likely to occur when small samples
are involved. The Largest Group Whole assignment method should have the fewest problems
with respect to reliability, and the Smallest Group Whole Assignment method will likely have the
most. These methods have another problem, however, in that an individual's response may be
assigned to different categories at different levels of geography. The NHIS Fractional
Assignment method, as well as methods where fractions are used for whole assignment (i.e., the
Plurality method), is based upon a sample distribution with its own variance properties.
Reliability for the very small combinations will be quite bad unless many years of data are
combined, and this presents its own problems.


Minimize Disruptions to the Single Race Distributions. This criterion is only for evaluating the
bridging methods. Its purpose is to see how different the resulting bridge distribution is from the
single-race distribution for detailed race under the new standards. To the extent that a bridging
method can meet the other bridging criteria and still not differ substantially from the single-race
proportions in the ongoing distribution, it will have value for looking both forward and
backward in time. An evaluation of the different methods according to this criterion involves the
comparison of the bridge distributions to the detailed race distribution urider the new standards in
each case.


For the CPS Supplement, the Plurality method is marginally closer than the Largest Group
Whole Assignment method and the Fractional methods. While the All Inclusive method and the
other Deterministic Whole Assignment methods match for the White category, they differ
substantially from the single-race AlAN category in the detailed distribution and are marginally
worse for the API category. The NHIS Fractional method is the closest in both the NHIS and
WSPS.


Statistically Defensible. To be statistically defensible, the bridging method must conform to
acceptable statistical conventions. The All Inclusive method makes no assumption about how
respondents would assign themselves in the single race situation. The NHIS Fractional
Assignment method and the Plurality method are based on an observed distribution, and, to that
extent, involve less judgment than the rest of the methods that assign people and not responses.
While the Equal Fractional Assignment method is based on judgment, it does not make
assumptions about the relative importance of any given race. The Largest Group Whole
Assignment method does assign greater importance to one of the races, but it also follows

                                                 24
minimize the error in assignment. The Smallest Group Whole Assignment method and the
Largest Group Other Than White Whole Assignment method do not follow statistical practice,
but, instead, rely on the historical record of discrimination; even in these cases, however, the
assigned category is based on an observed distribution.


Ease of Use. "Ease of use" refers to how complicated it is to produce the bridge results. The
Equal Fractional Assignment method makes assignments that do not depend on the particular
detailed racial distribution at hand. It and the NHIS Fractional Assignment method do require
the duplication of individual records or the creation, on every record, of a variable for each racial
category under the old standards in order to be able to assign fractions for any combination of
categories. If the fractional methods are used to assign a respondent to a single category (whole
probabilistic methods), this cumbersome process can be avoided. The All Inclusive method, like
the Equal Fractional method, does not depend on the particular distribution, but it does produce
proportions that add to more than 100 percent unless they are raked or repercentaged to a base
of 100 percent each time. The Deterministic Whole Assignment methods and the NHIS
Fracti'onal method w.ould require an extra step unless only nati.onal figures are used, because the
relative size of the groups must be determined for each detailed distribution. Otherwise, they are
as easy to use as the wh.ole probabilistic methods.


Skill Required This criterion refers t.o the skills required to carry out the bridge operati.ons. The
am.ount .of c.omputer expertise to perf.orm the operations associated with each of these methods is
fairly trivial. The Deterministic Whole Assignment methods require almost no statistical
knowledge. Some familiarity with the statistical adjustment literature would be useful for
understanding the Deterministic Fracti.onal Assignment procedures. If the All Inclusive method
were used, users might need to understand statistical raking.


Understandability and Communicability. This criterion concerns how easily the methods can be
explained and understo.od by the average user. The Deterministic Whole Assignment methods
are both easy to explain and easy t.o understand. The fracti.onal assignment of individuals to a
single category als.o is not difficult t.o f.ollow. Assigning fractions of a person to different
categ.ories may be easy to explain, but the average user may find it difficult to accept the idea.
The All Inclusive method also is easily explained, but, unless the percentages are raked to 100
percent, users may have a problem understanding how to use the results.




                                                 25
Agresti, A. (1990), Categorical Data Analysis, New York: Wiley.
Benson, V. and Marano, M. (1995), "Current Estimates from the National Health Interview                 Survey, 199"1
Massey, J. T, Moore, T F., Parsons, V. L., and Tadros W. (1989), "Design and Estimation for the National
McKenney, N. R. and Cresce, A. R. (1993), "Measurement of Ethnicity in the United States:
             Experience of the U.S. Census Bureau, in Challenges of Measuring an Ethnic
     World:        Science, Politics and Reality," Proceedings of the Joint Canada-United
     States Conference on the Measurement of Ethnicity, April 1-3, U.S. Government printing
     Office, Washington, DC, pp. 163-182.
McKenney, N. R., Bennett, c., Harrison, R., and del Pinal, J. (1993), "Evaluating Racial and
            Ethnic Reporting in the 1990 Census," Proceedings of the Section on Survey
     Methods        Research, pp. 66-74.
Office of Management and Budget (1997), "Recommendations from the Interagency Committee
               for the Review of the Racial and Ethnic Standards to the Office of Management
       and           Budget Concerning Changes to the Standards for the Classification of Federal
        Data on Race and Ethnicity, Notice," Federal Registel; Vol. 62, No. 131, 36844-36946.
Passel, J. F. and Berman, P. A. (1986), "Quality of 1980 Census Data for American Indians,"
                 Social Biology, 33, 163-182.
Rubin, D. R. (1987), Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys, New York: Wiley, 1987.
Snipp, M. C. (1986), "Who Are American Indians? Some Observations About the Perils and
              Pitfalls of Data for Race and Ethnicity," Population Research and Policy Review,
       5,237- 252.
Tucker,   c., McKay,    R., Kojetin, B., Harrison, R., de la Puente, M., Stinson, L., and Robison, E.
                 (1996), "Testing Methods of Collecting Racial and Ethnic Information: Results of
          the      Current Population Survey Supplement on Race and Ethnicity," Bureau of
          Labor Statistics Statistical Notes, No. 40.




                                                  26
                                        Are responses assigned to a category by a fixed rule or by a probability method?


Are responses assigned to one or more   Deterministic: Responses are             Probabilistic: Responses are assigned

than one category?                      assigned to a category following a set   to a category based on a probability

                                        of predetermined rules.                  distribution.



Whole assignment: Responses are                    Smallest GlVUp                            Equal Fractions
assigned completely to one category.     Largest GlVup Other Than White                      NHIS fractions
                                                   Largest GlVUp
                                                       Plurality


Fractional assignment: Responses are               Equal Fractions                           Not Applicable
assigned partially to each selected               NHIS fractions
category.


NHIS = National Health Interview Survey




                                                         27
(RAEIT).


                                                                        Targeted Sample



                                                                           American
                Race Response                     White        Black        Indian          API       Hispanic
                                                (N=2,222     (N=2,395     (N=l,634)       (N=2,982   (N=2,127)
                                                   )             )                           )

 White                                            96.04        22.63        50.67          16.90       64.55


  Black                                            1.08        72.73         4.41           4.06       13.59


 American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN)           .14          .29          37.21          .13         .80


 Asian or Pacific Islander (API)                   1.08         .58          1.47          64.76       1.60



 Other                                             .32         1.96          2.02           4.12       15.89



 Multiracial/Multiple Race                         1.35        1.80          4.22          10.03       3.57



SOURCE: Racial and Ethnic Targeted Test (RAETT), Panel C. Excerpted from Population Division Working
Paper No. 18 : "Results of the 1996 Race and Ethnic Targeted Test", U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the
Census, Population Division and Decennial Statistical Studies Division, May 1997.




                                                      28
National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.

                                                                        Detailed Race

                                               White/Black     White/AlAN        White/API       Black/AlAN
                 Main Race                      N=849           N=2618            N=842            N=375

 White                                          25.2 (2.4)       80.9 (1.3)      46.9 (2.9)

 Black                                          48.2 (2.6)                                        85.4 (2.4)

 American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN)                         12.4 (1.1)                       7.0 (1.8)

 Asian or Pacific Islander (API)                                                 34.6 (3.5)

 Other'                                         26.6 (2.3)        6.7 (.8)       18.4 (2.2)       7.6 (1.7)

 Total                                            100.0            100.0           100.0            100.0


--- Not applicable.
tAll percents weighted to be nationally representative.
2 Main Race = Race when asked best single race group; Detailed Race = Race when asked which group or groups

describes race.
, Includes response "Multiracial".

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National
Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                      29
Detailed Race 2 National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.


                                                              Standard
         Detailed Race Groups           Sample                 Error         RSE
                                          Size
 White                                   250,054     79.39           .71         .89

 Black                                     45,259    12.50           .61        4.89

 American Indian or Alaska Native           2,616       .81         .07         8.64
 (AlAN)

 Asian or Pacific Islander (API)           10,042      3.42          .35       10.25

 Other                                      9,734      2.25         .27        12.10



 White/Black                                  849       .23         .02         6.83

 White/AlAN                                 2,618       .83         .07         8.22

 White/API                                    842       .28         .03        10.12

 White/Other                                  277       .08          .01       13.16

 Black/AlAN                                   375       .11         .01        10.61

 Black/API                                     88       .03         .00       16.54

 Black/Other                                  127       .03          .01      16.29

AlAN/API                                       25       .01         .00       36.90

AlAN/Other                                     70       .02         .00        20.81

API/Other                                      52       .01         .00       22.05

Other Combinations                             52       .02         .00       22.54


                                              30
    (Multiple Race Groups Total)             5,375      1.64           .09         5.22




JAlI percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and
are not tabulated.
2 Detailed Race = Race when asked which group or groups describes race.
RSE = Relative Standard Error. Estimates and standard errors calculated using SUDAAN.

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data
from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                31


                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                            Assignment
                                          Reference                                          Largest
             Race Groups                 Distribution2        All          Smallest          Group         Largest        Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                          (Standard        Inclusive        Group          Other Than      Group                       Fractions      Fractions
                                            Error)                                           White
 White                                   80.29 (.71)             80.82          79.39            79.39          80.82          80.57        80.10          80.29

 Black                                   12.74 (.62)             12.91          12.74            12.91          12.67          12.90        12.70          12.74

 American Indian or Alaska Native          .93 (.07)              1.78            1.77            1.63           0.81           0.82         1.29             .93

 Asian or Pacific Islander                3.54 (.36)              3.76            3.73            3.72           3.44           3.44         3.58           3.54

 Other                                    2.50 (.27)              2.39            2.38            2.35           2.27           2.27         2.32           2.50

                 Total                      100.0               101.65          100.0            100.0          100.0          100.0        100.0          100.0

           Goodness of Fit'                                                 .00255           .00194         .00025        .00022        .00062         .00001

--- Not applicable.

'All percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
2Reference distribution is Main Race.
'Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                          32
Hispanic Origin #.

                                                                                                                                        Deterministic
                                                                                       Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Fractional
                                                                                                                                        Assignment
                   Race Groups                       Reference                             Largest
                                                   Distribution 2        Smallest          Group          Largest         Plurality        NHIS
                                                 (Standard Error)         Group          Other Than       Group                           Fractions
                                                                                           White
    White                                           80.29 (.71)                79.39           79.39           80.82           80.53            80.23

    Black                                           12.74 (.62)                12.75           12.90           12.65           12.90            12.72

    American Indian or Alaska Native                 .93 (.07)                  1.77             1.63               .81           .82               .92

    Asian or Pacific Islander                       3.54 (.36)                  3.74             3.72           3.43             3.48            3.53

    Other                                           2.50 (.27)                  2.36             2.37           2.29             2.27             2.61

                       Total                           100.0                   100.0            100.0          100.0           100.0            100.0

                  Goodness of fit                                         .00245            .00181         .00026         .00024           .00002


--- Not applicable.

IAll percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
2Reference distribution is Main Race.
'Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.




                                                          33
Current Population Survey, Race and Ethnicity Supplement.


                         Race Category                                                 l   Standard Errors
                                                          Unweighted         Weighted
                                                           Counts           Percentages

          White (W)                                               24,870      80.384            0.556
          Black (B)                                                3,204      10.836            0.377
          American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN)                    337       0.797            0.101
          Asian or Pacific Islander (API)                            966       3.285            0.232
          Other                                                    1,088       4.021            0.261


          W&B                                                         47       0.148            0.025
          W & AlAN                                                    74       0.228            0,038
          W&API                                                       24       0.075            0.022
          W & Other                                                   12       0.040            0.010
          B & AlAN                                                     9       0.032            0.016
          B & API                                                      6       0.017            0.015
          B & Other                                                     7      0.027            0.012
          AlAN & API                                                   4       0.007            0.004
          API & Other                                                  2       0.013            0.009
          W& B & AlAN                                                 18       0.060            0.017
          W & B & API                                                  1       0.004            0.004
          W & B & Other                                                1       0.005            0.005
          W & AlAN & API                                               2       0.009            0.007
          W & AlAN & Other                                             2       0.004            0.003
          B & AlAN & API                                               2       0.003            0.003
          B & AlAN & Other                                             1      0.002             0.002
          W & B & AlAN & API                                           1      0.002             0.002
                             Total                                30,678      100.00
                  (Multiple Race Group Total)                        213       0.677            0.065


IAII percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally
representative.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2
only.




                                                         34
May 1995.
                                                                                            Deterministic Whole Assignment                     Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                     Assignment
                 Race Groups                Reference       All Inclusive     Smallest          Largest        Largest         Plurality       Equal           NHIS
                                           Distribution                        Group         Group Other       Group                          Fractions       Fractions
                                              (SE) 2                                          than White
    White                                  82.35 (0.51)            80.96           80.42            80.42          80.96            80.74          80.68           80.72


    Black                                   11.11 (0.37)            11.14           11.02            11.14          10.92            11.13         10.99            11.00

. American Indian or Alaska Native           .68 (0.10)              1.15            1.15             1.03           0.80             0.80          0.96            0.86

    Asian or Pacific Islander               3.29 (0.23)              3.41           3.39              3.39           3.33             3.30          3.35             3.34

    Other                                   2.58 (0.22)              4.11           4.02             4.02            4.02             4.03          4.02            4.09


                   Total                       100.0       100.77           100.0            100.0           100.0           100.00          100.0         100.0
               Goodness of Fit'                              0.00451          0.00431          0.00387         0.00320         0.00323         0.00359       0.00355


--- Not applicable.
1All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are nOl nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3Goodness of Fit =Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.




                                                           35
May 1995. Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #
                                                                                                                            Deterministic
                                                                             Deterministic Whole Assignment                  Fractional
                                                                                                                            Assignment
              Race Groups                   Reference           Smallest         Largest       Largest        Plurality       NHIS
                                           DistributiOll         Group        Group Other      Group                         Fractions
                                                                               than White
 White                                     82.35 (0.51)              80.38           80.34          80.96           80.72          80.71

 Black                                     lUI (0.37)                11.01            lUI           10.90            lU3           n.oo
 American Indian or Alaska Native          0.68 (0.10)                 U4              1.03          0.80            0.80           0.86

 Asian or Pacific Islander                 3.29 (0.23)                3.39             3.38          3.30            3.32           3.34

 Other                                     2.58 (0.22)                4.08             4.10          4.05            4.04           4.09

                Total                      100.0                     100.0            100.0         100.0         100.00           100.0
            Goodness of Fit3                                    0.00452          0.00414       0.00327        0.00326         0.00358


--- Not applicable.
1All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.

2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement OIl Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.




                                                           36
(CPS). CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.

                                Race
                            Classification                              Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
    Race Reported in the
                             Under the                                                                                     Assignment
         Basic CPS
                              Bridging
      (Sample Counts)
                              Method
                                                All        Smallest         Largest        Largest       Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                             Inclusive      Group        Group Other       Group                      Fractions      Fractions
                                                                          than White
          White            White                  96.74         96.38           96.38          96.74          96.68        96.56           96.62
        (N= 25,401)        Black                   0.25          0.24             0.25          0.19           0.25         0.22            0.22
                           AlAN                    0.62          0.62             0.61          0.37           0.37         0.49            0.40
                           API                     0.21          0.20             0.21          0.15           0.15         0.18            0.17
                           Other                   2.59          2.55             2.55          2.55           2.56         2.55            2.59
                                Total            100.41        100.00          100.00         100.00         100.00       100.00          100.00

           Black           White                    2.17         1.32             1.32          2.15           1.36         1.69            1.59
        (N = 3,285)        Black                   96.14        95.62            96.14         95.33          96.14        95.57           95.66
                           AlAN                     0.73         0.73             0.25          0.21           0.21         0.42            0.31
                           API                      0.12         0.10             0.06          0.06           0.06         0.08            0.08
                           Other                    2.45         2.23             2.23          2.23           2.23         2.23            2.36
                                Total             101.61       100.00         . 100.00        100.00         100.00       100.00          100.00

    American Indian or     White                  24.53         22.15           22.15          24.53          24.53        23.34           24.08
   Alaska Native (AlAN)    Black                  10.29         10.19           10.29          10.29          10.29        10.24           10.28
         (N = 292)         AlAN                   62.89         62.89           62.80          60.42          60.42        61.66           60.72
                           API                     1.95          1.95            1.95           1.95           1.95         1.95            1.95
                           Other                   2.81          2.81            2.81           2.81           2.81         2.81            2.98
                                Total            102.47        100.00          100.00         100.00         100.00       100.00          100.00




                                                    37

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                          38

                                       Race
                                   Classification                                   Deterministic Whole Assignment                     Deterministic Fractional
       Race Reported in the
                                    Under the                                                                                               Assignment
            Basic CPS
                                     Bridging
         (Sample Counts)
                                     Method
                                                         All          Smallest          Largest         Largest         Plurality       Equal          NHIS
                                                      Inclusive        Group         Group Other        Group                          Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                      than White
      Asian or Pacific Islander   White                      1.98            1.22             1.22           1.98               1.98         1.60            1.63
               (API)              Black                      0.40            0.08            0.40            0.40               0.40         0.22            0.29
            (N =984)              AlAN                       0.97            0.97             0.52           0.40               0.55         0.67            0.54
                                  API                       94.35           94.10           94.22           93.59              93.44        93.88           93.79
                                  Other                      3.87            3.63             3.63           3.63               3.63         3.63            3.76
                                       Total               101.57          100.00          100.00          100.00             100.00       100.00          100.00

               Other              White                    31.88            27.96           27.96           31.88              28.81        29.74           29.38
             (N = 716)            Black                     6.56             4.88            6.56            3.50               6.56         4.51            4.52
                                  AlAN                      3.52             3.52            2.30            1.85               1.93         2.51            2.37
                                  API                       4.45             4.29            3.82            3.42               3.34         3.88            3.83
                                  Other                    60.47            59.36           59.36           59.36              59.36        59.36           59.91
                                       Total              106.88           100.00          100.00          100.00             100.00       100.00          100.00


I   All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                             39
(CPS). CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity. Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #

                                 Race
                             Classification                      Deterministic Whole Assignment                   Deterministic
  Race Reported in the
                              Under the                                                                            Fractional
       Basic CPS
                               Bridging                                                                           Assignment
    (Sample Counts)
                               Method
                                                 Smallest            Largest        Largest        Plurality        NHIS
                                                  Group           Group Other       Group                          Fractions
                                                                   than White
         White              White                     96.35              96.35          96.74           96.66            96.62
       (N= 25,401)          Black                      0.24                0.25          0.19            0.25             0.22
                            AlAN                       0.62                0.61          0.37            0.37             0.40
                            API                        0.20                0.21          0.15            0.17             0.17
                            Other                      2.59                2.59          2.55            2.56             2.59
                                 Total               100.00             100.00         100.00          100.00           100.00

          Black             White                       1.32              1.32           2.17            1.36             1.58
       (N = 3,285)          Black                      95.54             96.01          95.20           96.14            95.64
                            AlAN                        0.73              0.25           0.21            0.21             0.31
                            API                         0.10              0.06           0.06            0.06             0.08
                            Other                       2.31              2.36           2.36            2.23             2.39
                                 Total                100.00            100.00         100.00          100.00           100.00

   American Indian or         White                     22.15          22.15           24.53            24.53             24.07
  Alaska Native (AlAN)        Black                     10.19          10.29           10.29            10.29             10.28
        (N = 292)             AlAN                      62.89          62.80           60.42            60.42             60.72
                              API                        1.95           1.95             1.95             1.95             1.95
                              Other                      2.81           2.81             2.81             2.81             2.98
                                    Total              100.00         100.00          100.00           100.00           100.00
I All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.




                                                            40

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                         41
                                     Race
                                 Classification                     Deterministic Whole Assignment                 Deterministic
      Race Reported in the
                                  Under the                                                                         Fractional
           Basic CPS
                                   Bridging                                                                        Assignment
        (Sample Counts)
                                   Method
                                                    Smallest            Largest        Largest       Plurality         NHIS
                                                     Group           Group Other       Group                          Fractions
                                                                      lhall While
    Asian or Pacific Islander   White                     1.17                 1.17         1.98            1.88            1.62
             (API)              Black                     0.08                0.40          0.40            0.30            0.29
          (N = 984)             AlAN                      0.97                0.52          0.40            0.40            0.54
                                API                      94.10               94.03         93.40           93.80           93.78
                                Other                     3.68                3.87          3.83            3.63            3.77
                                     Total              100.00              100.00        100.00          100.00          100.00

             Other              White                    27.37               27.37         31.88           28.75           29.32
           (N = 716)            Black                     4.88                6.34          3.28            6.47            4.47
                                AlAN                      3.52                2.24          1.85            1.93            2.37
                                API                       4.05                3.82          3.42            3.10            3.83
                                Other                    60.19             . 60.23         59.57           59.75           60.01
                                     Total              100.00              100.00        100.00          100.00          100.00


I   All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                               42
Washington State Population Survey (WSPS).


                         Race Category                    Un weighted        Weighted'       Standard Errors
                                                            Counts          Percentages

         White. (W)                                                 5339            86.187             0.384
         Black (B)                                                   308             2.180             0.192
         American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN)                     343             0.875             0.074
         Asian or Pacific Islander (API)                             258             2.937             0.196
         Other                                                       351             3.666             0.277

         W&B                                                         20             0.256              0.080
         W & AlAN                                                   174             1.965              0.212
         W&API                                                       19             0.198              0.071
         W & Other                                                   70             1.225              0.200
         B & AlAN                                                    14             0.196              0.066
         B & API                                                      1             0.003              0.003
         B & Other                                                    7             0.062              0.019
         AlAN & API                                                   3             0.004              0.003
         AlAN & Other                                                 7             0.012              0.006
         API & Other                                                  3             0.005              0.003
         W&B &AJAN                                                    6             0.070              0.028
         W & B & API                                                  3             0.042              0.037
         W & B & Other                                                2             0.026              0.016
         W & AlAN & API                                               2             0.007              0.007
         W & AlAN & Other                                             6             0.076              0.043
         W & API & Other                                              1             0.001              0.001
         B & AlAN & API                                               1             0.001              0.001
         W & B & AlAN & API                                           2             0.005              0.004
                            Total                                  6940            100.00
                 (Multiple Race Group Total)                        341             4.155              0.334



'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally
representative.

SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey




                                                        43

                                                                                             Deterministic Whole Assignment                  Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                   Assignment
              Race Groups                   Reference       All Inclusive     Smallest           Largest        Largest       Plurality      Equal            NHIS
                                           Distriblltion2                      Group          Group Other       Group                       Fractions       Fractions
                                                                                               than White
 White                                     88.97 (0.31)            90.06             86.19           86.19          90.06          89.66         88.08           88.63


 Black                                      2.27 (0.17)              2.84            2.44             2.84           2.44            2.82         2.49             2.56

 American Indian or Alaska Native           1.29 (0.08)              3.21             3.21            2.84           0.88            0.88         2.02             1.19


 Asian or Pacific Islander                  3.04 (0.16)              3.20             3.19             3.15          2.94            2.94         3.06             3.03


 Other                                      4.44 (0.31)              5.07             4.98            4.99            3.68           3.71         4.35            4.59


                Total                          100.0              104.38           100.0             100.0          100.0          100.0         100.0           100.0
            Goodness of Fit3                                  0.00770         0.00833           0.00676        0.00170        0.00211       0.00167         0.00024


--- N Of applicable.
IAil percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distriblltion is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey




                                                                                44

Table 7-C Percent Distributiori of Race for Bridge Tabulation Methods. Washington State Population Survey (WSPS). Adjusted for
Hispanic Origin #.

                                                                                                                             Deterministic
                                                                            Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Fradional
                                                                                                                             Assignment
                                            Reference         Smallest          La'rgest       Largest        Plurality        NHIS
              Race Groups                  Distribution 2      Group         Group Other       Group                          Fractions
                                                                              than White
 White                                     88.97 (0.31)            86.19             86.19         90.06           89.64            88.63

 Black                                      2.27 (0.17)             2.45                2.82         2.42            2.81           2.56

 American Indian or Alaska Native           1.29 (0.08)              3.21               2.84         0.88            0.88             1.19

 Asian or Pacific Islander                  3.04 (0.16)              3.19               3.15         2.94            2.95            3.03


 Other                                      4.44 (0.31)             4.96                5.00         3.70            3.73            4.59


                Total                          100.0               100.0            100.0           100.0          100.0           100.0
            Goodness of Fir'                                  0.00833          0.00674         0.00166        0.00206         0.00024


--- Not applicable.
IAlI percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
'Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics .


                                                                                 . 45




                                             46
(WSPS).

    Race Reported in the        Race
        Basic WSPS          Classification                               Deterministic Whole Assignment                 Deterministic Fractional
      (Sample Counts)        Under the                                                                                       Assignment
                              Bridging
                              Method
                                                All        Smallest          Largest        Largest       Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                             Inclusive      Group         Group Other       Group                       Fractions      Fractions
                                                                           than White
            White          White                  99.41         96.81            96.81          99.41          99.21         98.10           98.56
          (N= 5490)        Black                   0.29          0.25             0.29           0.10           0.29          0.19            0.19
                           AlAN                    1.67          1.67              1.63          0.01           0.01          0.83            0.22
                           API                     0.26          0.26              0.21          0.10           0.10          0.17            0.16
                           Other                   1.06           1.01             1.06          0.39           0.39          0.71            0.87
                                Total            102.69        100.00           100.00         100.00         100.00        100.00          100.00

            Black          White                   2.16          0.20             0.20           2.16           0.54          0.97            0.99
          (N = 326)        Black                  99.29         90.61            99.29          97.68          98.15         94.56           97.26
                           AlAN                    7.79          7.79             0.35           0.00           0.00          3.90            0.57
                           API                      O.ll          O.ll            0.00           0.00           0.00          0.04            0.04
                           Other                    1.41         1.30             0.17           0.17            1.31         0.55             U5
                                Total             110.76       100.00          100.00         100.00         100.00        100.00          100.00

    American Indian or     White                  24.13          0.79             0.79          24.13          20.44         12.28            17.13
   Alaska Native (AlAN)    Black                   8.00          7.37             8.00           4.32           8.00          5.85            6.09
         (N = 422)         AlAN                   88.51         88.51            85.80          67.48          67.77         77.81           70.62
                           API                     2.12          1.80             2.12           2.01           1.72          1.92             1.90
                           Other                   3.29          1.52             3.29           2.07           2.07          2.15            4.26
                                Total            126.05        100.00           100.00         100.00         100.00        100.00          100.00



                                                                         47

SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey




                                                                                    48

                                       Race
                                   Classification                                    Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Deterministic Fractional
        Race Reported in the
                                    Under the                                                                                               Assignment
            Basic WSPS
                                     Bridging
          (Sample Counts)
                                     Method
                                                         All          Smallest           Largest        Largest         Plurality       Equal          NHIS
                                                      Inclusive        Group          Group Other       Group                          Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                       than White
      Asian or Pacific Islander   White                     5.07              1.11              1.11         5.07               3.15         3.09            3.03
               (API)              Black                     1.92             1.92              1.92          0.00               1.92         0.96            0.97
            (N = 273)             AlAN                      1.28             1.28              1.28          0.00               0.00         0.64            0.16
                                  API                      93.83            93.83            93.75          92.99              93.07        93.41           93.30
                                  Other                     1.94             1.86              1.94          1.94               1.86         1.90            2.55
                                       Total              104.04           100.00           100.00         100.00             100.00       100.00          100.00

               Other              White                     24.76            0.00             0.00          24.76              22.86        11.97           13.61
             (N =429)             Black                      3.81            0.14             3.81           1.93               3.81         1.60            1.78
                                  AlAN                       8.30            8.30             5.48           0.00               0.01         3.75            1.47
                                  API                        2.23            1.94             1.86           0.01               0.07         1.04            0.79
                                  Other                     90.21           89.63            88.85          73.30              73.26        81.63           82.34
                                       Total               129.31          100.00           100.00         100.00             100.00       100.00          100.00


I   All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.

SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey




                                                                                     49
(WSPS). Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #.

  Race Reported in the           Race
      Basic WSPS             Classification                     Deterministic Whole Assignment                   Deterministic
    (Sample Counts)           Under the                                                                           Fractional
                               Bridging                                                                          Assignment
                               Method
                                                 Smallest           Largest        Largest         Plurality        NHIS
                                                  Group          Group Other       Group                           Fractions
                                                                  than White
         White              White                     96.81             96.81          99.41            99.21           98.56
       (N= 5490)            Black                      0.25              0.29           0.10             0.29            0.19
                            AlAN                       1.67               1.63          0.01             0.01            0.22
                            API                        0.26               0.21          0.10             0.10            0.16
                            Other                       1.01              1.06          0.39             0.39            0.87
                                 Total               100.00            100.00         100.00           100.00          100.00

          Black             White                       0.20             0.20           2.16             0.54            0.99
        (N = 326)           Black                      90.61            99.29          97.68            98.15           97.26
                            AlAN                        7.79             0.35           0.00             0.00            0.57
                            API                          0.11            0.00           0.00             0.00            0.04
                            Other                       1.30             0.17           0.17              1.31            U5
                                 Total                100.00           100.00         100.00           100.00          100.00

   American Indian or         White                      0.79           0.79           24.13            20.32             17.06
  Alaska Native (AlAN)        Black                      7.37           8.00            4.32             8.00              6.09
        (N = 422)             AlAN                      88.51          85.80           67.48            67.77             70.68
                              API                        1.80           2.12             2.01             1.72             1.90
                              Other                      1.52           3.29            2.07              2.19             4.27
                                    Total              100.00         100.00          100.00           100.00           100.00
I All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.




                                                                                 50
SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey




                                                                                51

                                                   Race
                                               Classification                    Deterministic Whole Assignment                     Deterministic
                    Race Reported in the
                                                Under the                                                                            Fractional
                        Basic WSPS
                                                 Bridging                                                                           Assignment
                      (Sample Counts)
                                                 Method
                                                                   Smallest           Largest        Largest         Plurality         NHIS
                                                                    Group          Group Other       Group                            Fractions
                                                                                    than White
                   Asian or Pacific Islander   White                      l.ll               1.11         5.07               3.15           3.03
                            (API)              Black                     1.92               1.92          0.00               1.92           0.97
                          (N = 273)            AlAN                      1.28               1.28          0.00               0.00           0.16
                                               API                      93.83             93.75          92.99              93.07          93.30
                                               Other                     1.86               1.94          1.94               1.86           2.55
                                                    Total              100.00            100.00         100.00             100.06         100.00

                            Other              White                      0.00              0.00         24.76              22.44          13.61
                          (N =429)             Black                      0.54              3.41          1.53               3.72           1.78
                                               AlAN                       8.30              5.48          0.00               0.01           1.47
                                               API                        1.94              1.86          0.01               0.16           0.79
                                               Other                     89.23             89.26         73.70              73.68          82.34
                                                    Total               100.00            100.00        100.00             100.00         100.00


IAlI percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.

SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey




                                                                                  52
Survey 1993-1995.

                                                             Deterministic Whole Assignment                           Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                            Assignment
                                               Smallest      Largest Group        Largest Group    Plurality         Equal              NHIS
           Main Race Reported                   Group         Other Than                                            Fractions         Fractions
                                                                 White
 White                                         1.12 (.OS)       1.12 (.OS)         0.00 (.00)      .07 (.01)        .56 (.04)         .32 (.02)

 Black                                        1.00 (.10)       0.00 (.00)           .S9 (.OS)     0.00 (.00)        .94 (.OS)        1.24 (.10)

 American Indian or Alaska Native             0.00 (.00)        2.26 (.46)         13.25 (1.26)   12.27 (1.19)     6.62 (.63)       11.39 (1.09)

 Asian or Pacific Islander                     .44 (.10)        .24 (.07)           3.12 (.47)    2.95 (.44)        1.71 (.24)       2.31 (.32)

 Other                                        7.S9 (1.01)      S.25 (1.07)         9.67 (1.45)    9.67 (US)        5.0S (.60)        S.17 (.9S)

                    Total                     1.24 (.07)        1.14 (.07)          .59 (.03)      .52 (.03)        .82 (.04)         .81 (.04)


SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                             53
Origin #. National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.

                                                                                                                  Deterministic
                                                               Deterministic Whole Assignment                      Fractional
                                                                                                                  Assignment
                                                 Smallest      Largest Group         Largest Group    Plurality      NHIS
           Main Race Reported                     Group         Other Than                                         Fractions
                                                                   White
 White                                          1.12 (.08)        1.12 (.08)          0.00 (.00)      .09 (.01)     .33 (.02)

 Black                                          .94 (.09)         0.06 (.01)           .95 (.08)     0.00 (.00)     1.24 (.10)

 American Indian or Alaska Native               0.00 (.00)        2.26 (.46)          13.25 (1.26)   12.27 (U9)    ll.l9 (1.07)

 Asian or Pacific Islander                      .22 (.06)         .42 (.08)            3.30 (.48)    2.42 (.35)     2.31 (.32)

 Other                                         8.29 (1.06)        7.85 (1.01)         9.27 (1.09)    9.67 (U5)     8.07 (.96)

                    Total                       1.24 (.07)        U4 (.07)             .59 (.03)      .52 (.03)     .81 (.04)


# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                54

                                                     Deterministic Whole Assignment                     Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                               Assignment
         Main Race Reported            Smallest      Largest Group   Largest Group      Plurality       Equal             NHIS
                                        Group         Other than                                       Fractions        Fractions
                                                         White
 White                                3.62 (0.23)     3.62 (0.23)      3.26 (0.22)    3.32 (0.22)    3.44 (0.23)       3.38 (0.23)

 Black                                4.38 (0.70)     3.86 (0.63)      4.67 (0.65)    3.86 (0.63)    4.43 (0.66)       4.34 (0.65)

 American Indian or Alaska Native     37.11 (6.32)    37.20 (6.34)    39.58 (6.31)    39.58 (6.31)   38.34 (6.28)     39.28 (6.30)

 Asian or Pacific Islander            5.90 (1.32)     5.78 (1.28)      6.41 (1.37)    6.56 (1.41)     6.12 (1.33)      6.21 (1.34)

 Other                               40.64 (4.06)    40.64 (4.06)     40.64 (4.06)    40.64 (4.06)   40.64 (4.06)     40.09 (4.06)

 TOTAL                                4.97 (0.26)     4.90 (0.25)      4.73 (0.25)     4.70 (0.25)    4.84 (0.25)      4.77 (0.25)


SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity




                                                                        55
Table lO-B. Percent of ALL Respondents Misc1assified by Bridge Tabulation Methods. Current Population Survey. Adjusted for Hispanic
Origin #.

                                                                                                                 Deterministic
                                                          Deterministic Whole Assignment                          Fractional
                                                                                                                 Assignment
         Main Race Reported                Smallest       Largest Group                                             NHIS
                                            Group          Other than       Largest Group           Plurality     Fractions
                                                              White
 White                                    3.65 (0.23)      3.65 (0.23)        3.26 (0.22)         3.34 (0.23)     3.38 (0.23)

 Black                                    4.46 (0.70)       3.99 (0.64)      4.80 (0.66)          3.86 (0.63)    4.36 (0.65)

 American Indian or Alaska Native         37.11 (6.32)     37.20 (6.34)      39.58 (6.31)         39.58 (6.31)   39.28 (6.30)

 Asian or Pacific Islander                5.90 (1.32)       5.97 (1.33)       6.60 (1.41)         6.20 (1.32)     6.22 (1.34)

 Other                                   39.82 (4.10)      39.77 (4.05)      40.43 (4.05)         40.25 (4.10)   39.99 (4.06)

 TOTAL                                    4.98 (0.25)       4.93 (0.25)       4.75 (0.25)         4.69 (0.25)     4.77 (0.25)

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.
SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity




                                                                               56

                                                    Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                             Assignment
                                       Smallest     Largest Group   Largest Group      Plurality      Equal             NHIS
                                        Group        Other than                                      Fractions        Fractions
         Main Race Reported
                                                        White
 White                               3.19 (0.29)     3.19 (0.29)      0.59 (0.13)    0.79 (0.15)    1.90 (O.1S)      1.44 (0.16)

 Black                               9.39 (2.84)     0.71 (0.24)      2.32 (0.74)    1.S5 (0.70)    5.44 (l.4S)      2.74 (0.62)

 American Indian or Alaska Native    11.49 (2.46)    14.20 (2.47)    32.52 (3.S0)    32.23 (3.S3)   22.19 (2.77)    29.39 (3.55)

 Asian or Pacific Islander           6.17 (2.96)     6.26 (2.96)      7.01 (2.94)    6.93 (2.94)    6.59 (2.95)      6.70 (2.94)

 Other                               10.37 (1.77)    ILlS (1.75)     26.70 (3.26)    26.74 (3.26)   18.37 (2.09)    17.66 (1.99)

 TOTAL                               3.84 (0.2S)     3.72 (0.26)      2.40 (0.26)    2.55 (0.24)    3.12 (0.23)      2.71 (0.20)


SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey




                                                                       57
Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #

                                                          Deterministic .Whole Assignment                        Deterministic
                                                                                                                  Fractional
                                                                                                                 Assignment
         Main Race Reported                Smallest       Largest Group     Largest Group           Plurality       NHIS
                                            Group          Other than                                             Fractions
                                                              White
 White                                    3.19 (0.29)       3.19 (0.29)       0.59 (0.13)         0.79 (0.15)     1.44 (0.16)

 Black                                    9.39 (2.84)       0.71 (0.24)       2.32 (0.74)         1.85 (0.70)    2.74 (0.62)

 American Indian or Alaska Native        1l.49 (2.46)      14.20 (2.47)      32.52 (3.80)         32.23 (3.83)   29.32 (3.55)

 Asian or Pacific Islander                6.17 (2.96)       6.26 (2.96)       7.01 (2.94)         6.93 (2.94)    6.70 (2.94)

 Other                                    10.77 (1.78)     10.74 (1.77)      26.30 (3.22)         26.32 (3.30)   17.66 (1.99)

                                          3.86 (0.28)       3.70 (0.26)       2.38 (0.26)         2.54 (0.24)     2.71 (0.20)
 TOTAL


# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.
SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey




                                                                               58
National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.

                                                                                              Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fradional
                                                                                                                                                 Assignment
              Race Groups                    Reference      All Inclusive     Smallest        Largest         Largest       Plurality       Equal           NHIS
                                            Distribution"                      Group           Group          Group                        Fradions        Fractions
                                                                                            Other Than
                                                                                                White
                                                                                 (Increase Multiple Race Response by a Fador of 2)
 White                                             79.90           82.25              78.11            78.11          80.93       80.44         79.51           79.88

 Black                                             12.76            13.32           12.76              13.11          U.63        13.09         12.70           12.77

 American Indian or Alaska Native                    1.03            2.75             2.70             2.42            0.79        0.82          1.74             1.03

 Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.60             4.15             3.98             3.97            3.40         3.41         3.69            3.60

 Other                                               2.71            2.54             2.46             2.40            2.25        2.25          2.36             2.71

                  Total                            100.0          104.96            100.0             100.0           100.0       100.0         100.0           100.0

            Goodness of Fit l                                                  .00727             .00570         .00090        .00080       .00198          .00003

-_. Not applicable.
'All percents weighted 10 be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
2Reference distribution is Main Race.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                 59

                                                                                           Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                Assignment
                 Race Groups                 Reference      All Inclusive     Smallest        Largest       Largest       Plurality       Equal          NHIS
                                            Distribution'                      Group          Group         Group                        Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                           Other Than
                                                                                              White
                                                                               (Increase Multiple Race Response by a Factor of 4)

    White                                           79.15          85.12          75.66            75.66              81.13      80.19       78.39           79.10

    Black                                          12.82           14.14           12.80           13.48          12.55          13.44        12.69          12.83

    American Indian or Alaska Native                 1.22           4.69            4.46            3.92                .77       0.82         2.61           1.24

    Asian or Pacific Islander                        3.71           4.78            4.45            4.43               3.21       3.34         3.90           3.72

    Other                                            3.10           2.83            2.63             2.51             2.20        2.20         2.42            3.11

                     Total                         100.0          1ll.56           100.0           100.0          100.0          100.0        100.0          100.0

               Goodness of Fit3                                                .01843           .01499        .00320          .00287      .00557        .000045


--- Not applicable.
IAll percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
'Reference distribution is Main Race.
'Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                 60

                                                                                              Deterministic Whole Assignment               Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                  Assignment
                 Race Groups                 Reference      All Inclusive     Smallest        Largest       Largesi       Plurality         Equal          NHIS
                                            Distribution'                      Group          Group         Group                          Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                           Other Than
                                                                                               White
                                                                               (Increase Multiple Race Response by a Factor of 6)

    White                                          78.45           87.99           73.37              73.37          81.32        79.95         77.33          78.37

    Black                                           12.86          14.97           12.84              13.78         12.48         12.86         12.68          12.88

    American Indian or Alaska Native                 1.40           6.64               6.11            5.33            .74         1.40          3.42           1.42

    Asian or Pacific Islander                        3.81           5.46               4.89            4.87           3.28          3.81         4.09           3.83

    Other                                            3.47            3.11              2.78            2.60           2.17         3.47          2.48           3.49

                     Total                          100.0         118.16           100.0              100.0         100.0         100.0         100.0          100.0

               Goodness of Fit3                                               .030339              .02520        .00654        .00585       .00967         .00007


--- Not applicable.
IAll percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
'Reference distribution is Main Race.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                  61

                                                                                          Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fraoional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
              Race Groups                    Reference       All Inclusive     Smallest        Largest       Largest       Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                            Distribution 2                      Group          Group         Group                      Fraoions       Fractions
                                                                                            Other Than
                                                                                               White
                                                                                (Increase Multiple Race Response by a Factor of 8)

 White                                       77.79           90.85           71.21           71.21           81.50         79.72       76.34         77.68

 Black                                       12.91           15.79           12.88           14.16           12.42         14.09       12.67         12.93

 American Indian or Alaska Native            1.57            8.58            7.67            6.65            .72           .82         4.18          1.60

 Asian or Pacific Islander                   3.91            6.14            5.30            5.27            3.22          3.23        4.27          3.93

 Other                                       3.42            3.40            2.93             2.70           2.14          2.14        2.53          3.84

                  Total                    100.0              124.76         100.0          100.0          100.0           100.0       100.0         100.0

            Goodness of Fit3                                                   .042400         .03570         .01068         .00950      .013932        .00009


--- Not applicable.
IAlI percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
2Reference distribution is Main Race.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                     62
    1995 CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.


                                                                                           Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                Assignment
                 Race Groups                 Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                            Distribution                      Group           Group          Group                       Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                           Other than
                                                                                              White
                                                                               (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 2)

    White                                           82.1I          80.99          79.92            79.92          80.98         80.55         80.43          80.51

    Black                                           lLl7           11.36           n.12             11.36         10.93          11.35        1I.07          11.09

    American Indian or Alaska Native                0.69             1.48           1.48             1.25          0.79           0.81          1.11          0.91

    Asian or Pacific Islander                        3.31           3.52            3.48            3.47           3.30           3.29         3.40           3.38

    Other                                            2.71            4.18           3.99            3.99           3.99          4.00          3.99           4.12

                     Total                        100.00          101.53         100.00           100.00        100.00         100.00        100.00         100.00

               Goodness of Fir'                               0.00562        0.00530           0.00418       0.00254        0.00261      0.00344        0.00321


--- Not applicable
IAll percents weighted to adjust for sample design and 110nresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.


                                                                                  63
1995 CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                            Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive     Smallest       Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                       Group          Group          Group                       Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 4)

White                                             81.66          81.04          78.94            78.94          81.03          80.18        79.94          80.08

Black                                             11.31          1l.80           1l.33            11.80         10.94          11.78        ll.22           11.27

American Indian or Alaska Native                   0.72            2.15           2.15            1.69           0.78           0.81         1.42            1.02

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.36            3.73           3.64            3.62           3.30           3.27         3.49            3.44

Other                                              2.96           4.30            3.94            3.94           3.94           3.96         3.94            4.19

                 Total                          100.00          103.02         100.00           100.00        100.00          100.00       100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit3                                 0.00866         0.00835          0.00561       0.00153         0.00168     0.00365        0.00268



--- Not applicable
'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
'Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.



                                                                                 64
1995 CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest       Plurality       Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group         . Group         Group                        Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Fador of 6)
White                                             SUI            S1.09          77.99            77.99          S1.0S          79.S2        79.47          79.67

Black                                             11.43          12.23           11.53           12.23          10.96          12.20        11.37          11.44

American Indian or Alaska Native                   0.74           2.79            2.79             2.12          0.77           O.Sl          1.71           1.13

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.41           3.93            3.S1             3.7S          3.29           3.25         3.57           3.51

Other                                              3.21           4.42            3.S9             3.S9          3.S9           3.92         3.S9           4.26

                 Total                          100.00          104.46         100.00           100.00        100.00          100.00       100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit3                                 0.01221         0.01221          O.OO77S       0.000S9         0.00ll3     0.00437        0.00234



--- Nat applicable
lA1l percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question c~nforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 4S)


SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.



                                                                                 65
1995 CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest.      Plurality       Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group         Group                        Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Fador of 8)

White                                            80.78           81.14          77.06            77.06          81.12          79.47        79.00          79.28

Black                                             11.56          12.64           11.72           12.64          10.97          12.60         U.51          11.60

American Indian or Alaska Native                   0.76           3.42            3.42            2.54           0.76           0.82         2.00            1.23

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.46            4.13           3.96            3.92           3.29           3.23         3.66           3.57

Other                                              3.44           4.54            3.84            3.84           3.84           3.88         3.84           4.32

                 Total                          100.00          105.87         100.00           100.00        100.00          100.00       100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit'                                 0.01599         0.01659          0.01047       0.00057         0.00090     0.00547        0.00215



--- Not applicable
IAiI percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
1Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.




                                                                                66
Washington State Population Survey (WSPS).

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                  Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest         Largest        Largest         Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group          Group                         Fractions      Fradions
                                                                                           Other than
                                                                                             White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 2)

White                                            87.64           90.18          82.75            82.75          90.18           89.41         86.39          87.45

Black                                              2.39           3.36            2.59            3.36           2.60             3.31         2.68           2.82

American Indian or Alaska Native                   1.54            5.33           5.33             4.61          0.84             0.85         3.03           1.44

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.03            3.33           3.30             3.22          2.83             2.83         3.06           3.00

Other                                              5.40           6.22            6.04            6.05           3.55             3.60         4.84           5.29

                 Total                          100.00         108.842         100.00           100.00        100.00           100.00        100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit'



--- Not applicable
IAll percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey



                                                                                 67
Washington State Population Survey (WSPS).


                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inelusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group          Group                       Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 4)

White                                            85.27           90.40          76.63            76.63         90.40          88.98         83.38          85.33

Black                                              2.59           4.29            2.85            4.29           2.87          4.20          3.03           3.29

American Indian or Alaska Native                   2.00           9.09            9.09             7.77          0.78          0.79          4.84           1.89

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.03           3.56            3.50             3.35          2.63           2.63         3.05           2.95

Other                                              7.ll           8.27            7.93            7.95           3.32           3.40         5.70           6.54

                 Total                          100.00           ll5.61        100.00           100.00        100.00         100.00        100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit3


--- Not applicable
'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey


                                                                                 68
Washington State Population Survey (WS~S).

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group          Group                       Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 6)

White                                            83.22           90.59           71.36           71.36         90.59          88.60         80.79          83.51

Black                                              2.77           5.09            3.08            5.09           3.11          4.96          3.33           3.69

American Indian or Alaska Native                   2.39          12.33           12.33           10.49           0.73           0.74         6.39           2.28

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.02           3.76            3.67            3.47           2.45           2.46         3.05           2.90

Other                                              8.59          10.03            9.56            9.59           3.12           3.23         6.45           7.62

                 Total                          100.00          121.80         100.00           100.00        100.00         100.00        100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit3



--- Not applicable
'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey



                                                                                 69
Washington State Population Survey (WSPS).

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group         Group                        Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 8)

White                                             81.44          90.76          66.77            66.77         90.76          88.28         78.53          81.93

Black                                              2.93           5.79            3.28            5.79           3.32           5.63         3.59           4.04

American Indian or Alaska Native                   2:74           15.15          15.15           12.86           0.68           0.70         7.75           2.62

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.02           3.93            3.82             3.57          2.30           2.31         3.04           2.86

Other                                              9.88           11.57          10.98            11.02          2.95           3.08         7.10           8.56

                 Total                          100.00          127.20         100.00           100.00        100.00         100.00        100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit'


--- Not applicable
lAlI percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not natiOIlaUy representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey



                                                                                70

                                                                                              Deterministic Whole Allocation                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                  Allocation
                                                                                                  Largest
Race Group                        Detailed         Main            All         Smallest           Group         Largest        Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                 Race' (SE)        Race'        Inclusive       Group             Other         Group
                                                                                                   Than
                                                                                                  White
  No Health Insurance (N =251,196)'
       White                   13.4 (.3)               13.5           13.5            13.4             13.4          13:5            13.5         13.5          13.5
       Black                    18.1 (.5)              18.0           18.0            18.0             18.0          18.0            18.0         18.0          18.0
       AlAN                    32.2 (2.1)              32.3           26.7            26.7             27.5          32.2            32.1         27.9          31.0
       API                     18.9 (1.3)              18.5           18.2            18.2             18.3          18.9            18.9         18.6          18.7
       Other                   32.5 (l.l)              31.1'          32.0            32.1             32.1          32.5            32.5         32.3          30.9
       White/Black             15.6 (2.3)
       White/AlAN              22.9 (1.4)
       White/API               11.2 (1.9)
       Other Combinations      19.0 (2.1)

   Poor or Fair Health'
           White                      9.5 (.1)            9.6             9.6           9.6             9.6           9.6             9.6          9.6           9.6
           Black                    14.5 (.4)            14.6            14.6          14.5            14.5          14.7            14.6         14.6          14.6
           AlAN                      14.1 (.9)           14.3            13.8          13.8            13.4          14.1            14.2         14.0          14.2
           API                       8.0 (.4)             8.0             7.8           7.8             7.8           8.0             8.0          7.9           7.9
           Other                     11.7 (.5)           U.8'            II.7          U.8             U.7           11.7             U.8          U.8          11.7
           White/Black               6.4 (l.0)
           White/AlAN                12.5 (.7)
           White/API                 5.5 (l.0)
           Other Combinations       14.1 (1.7)
--- Not applicable.
, All percents weighted to be nationally representative. 5,237 observations missing   data on race and are not tabulated. Health insurance only obtained for half of 1993.
           Percent living with single mother only relevant for children.

                                                                                 71
'Includes Multiracial.NHIS = National Health Interview Survey; AlAN = American Indian or Alaskan Native; API= Asian or Pacific Islander.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control/National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                            72

                                                                                            Deterministic Whole Allocation                Deterministic Fraaional
                                                                                                                                                Allocation
                                                                                                Largest
Race Group                        Detailed        Main             All        Smallest          Group         Largest        Plurality     Equal         NHIS
                                   Race 2         Race 2        Inclusive      Group            Other         Group
                                                                                                 Than
                                                                                                White
    Children Living with Single Mothers (N=86,941) I
           White                   14.6 (.3)            14.7          14.9           14.6            14.6          14.9            14.7         14.7          14.7
           Black                  54.7 (l.l)            54.4          54.1           54.2            54.1          54.5            54.1         54.3          54.3
           AlAN                   32.1 (3.6)            31.6          28.0           28.0            26.6          31.2            32.2         30.1          32.2
           API                    11.7 (1.0)            12.2          12.4           12.4            12.5          11.7            ll.7         12.3          11.9
           Other                  26.3 (1.9) .         26.0 3         26.4           26.3            26.1          26.3            26.3         26.5          27.0
           White/Black            40.9 (3.1)
           White/AlAN             2l.l (2.3)
           White/API              16.7 (2.9)
           Other Combinations 34.3 (3.6)


--- Not applicable.
I All percents weighted to be nationally representative. 1.6 missing data on race and are not tabulated. Health insurance only obtained for half of 1993. Percent
          living with single mother only relevant for children.
2 Main Race = Race when asked best single race group; Detailed Race = Race when asked which group or groups describes race.

3 Includes MultiraciaL

NHIS = National Health Interview Survey; AlAN = American Indian or Alaskan Native; API= Asian or Pacific Islander.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease ControljNational Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                73
        Origin #.

                                                                                                      Deterministic Whole Allocation                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                          Allocation
                                                                                                          Largest
         Race Group                        Detailed        Main            All         Smallest           Group         Largest        Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                            Race 2         Racel        Inclusive       Group             Other         Group
                                                                                                           Than
                                                                                                          White
           No Health Insurance (N =251,196)'
                White                    13.4 (.3)             13.5           13.5             13.4            13.4          13.5            13.5         13.5          13.5
                Black                    18.] (.5)             IS.0           IS.0             18.0            IS.0          18.0            IS.0         IS.0          18.0
                AlAN                    32.2 (2.1)             32.3           26.7             26.7            27.5          32.2            32.1         27.9          31.0
                API                     18.9 (1.3)             IS.5           18.2             18.2            IS.3          IS.9            18.9         18.6          IS.7
                Other                   32.5 (1.1)             31.13          32.0             32.1            32.0          32.4            32.5         32.3          30.7
                White/Black             15.6 (2.3)
                White/AlAN              22.9 (1.4)
                White/API               U.2 (1.9)
                Other Combinations      19.0 (2.1)

             Poor or Fair Health'
                    White                     9.6 (.1)            9.6            9.6            9.6           9.6          9.6             9.6           9.6            9.6
                    Black                    14.7 (.4)           14.6           14.6          14.5           14.5         14.7           14.6           14.6           14.6
                    AlAN                     14.1 (.9)           14.3           13.S           13.S          13.4         14.2           14.2           14.0            14.
                    API                       S.O (.4)            S.O            7.S            7.S           7.S           S.O            8.0           7.9            7.9
                    Other                     U.S (.5)           n.s'           U.7            11.7          11.7          U.S            I1.S           U.S           11.6
                    White/Black              6.5 (1.0)
                    White/AlAN               12.7 (.7)
                    White/API                5.S (1.0)
                    Other Combinations       14.2 (1.7)
--- Not applicable. NHIS = National Health Interview Survey; AlAN = American Indian or Alaskan Native; API= Asian or Pacific Islander.
, All percents weighted to be nationally representative. 5,237 observations missing data on race and are not tabulated. Health insurance only obtained for half of 1993. Percent
          living with single mother only relevant for children.
2 Main Race = Race when asked best single race group; Detailed Race = Race when asked which group or groups describes race." 3 Includes Multiracial.


# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease ControljNational Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.


                                                                                          74

                                                                                     Deterministic Whole Allocation                Deterministic Fraoional
                                                                                                                                         Allocation
                                                                                           Largest
e Group                       Detailed       Main            All         Smallest          Group        Largest       Plurality     Equal         NHIS
                               Race'         Race'        Inclusive       Group            Other        Group
                                                                                            Than
                                                                                           White

hildren Living with Single Mothers (N =86941) I
      White                   14.6 (.3)            14.7         14.9          14.6             14.6         14.9            14.7        14.7           14.7
      Black                  54.7 (1.1)            54.4         54.1          54.3             54.0         54.5            54.1        54.3           54.4
      AlAN                   32.1 (3.6)            31.6         28.0          28.0             26.6         32.1            32.2        30.1           32.2
      API                    11.7 (1.0)            12.2         12.4          12.4             12.5         ll.7            12.1        12.3           11.9
      Other                  26.3 (1.9)           26.0'         26.4          26.2             26.3         26.5            26.3        26.5           26.6
      White/Black           40.9 (3.1)
      White/AlAN             21.1 (2.3)
      White/API             16.7 (2.9)
      Other Combinations 34.3 (3.6)

    .-- Not applicable.
    I All percents weighted to be nationally representative. 5,237 observations missing data on race and are not tabulated. Health insurance only obtained for half of 1993. Percent

              living with single mother only relevant for children.
    , Main Race = Race when asked best single race group; Detailed Race = Race when asked which group or groups describes race.
    , Includes Multiracial.
    NHIS = National Health Interview Survey; AlAN = American Indian or Alaskan Native; API= Asian or Pacific Islander.
     # Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non- Hispanics.
    SOURCE: Centers for Disease ControljNational Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                      75
Computed from the Race and Ethnicity Supplement to CPS.

                                                                                 Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                     Assignment
         Labor Measure and Race          Basic CPS         All        Smallest         Largest       Largest      Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                Category                                Inclusive      Group           Group         Group                     Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                      Other than
                                                                                        White
       Unemployment Rate
              White                     4.82 (0.24)           4.73           4.71           4.71          4.73          4.71        4.72            4.72
              Black                     9.29 (0.90)           9.39          9.22            9.39          9.28          9.31         9.31           9.31
              AlAN                      9.76 (3.66)          11.84          n.84           10.67         12.51         12.71        n.87           12.71
              API                       4.85 (1.12)           4.39          4.41            4.39         4.40          4.40         4.40           4.40
              Other                     6.74 (1.62)           7.73           7.88           7.88          7.88          7.83        7.88            7.83


       Labor Force Participation
       Rate
               White                   66.30 (0.42)         66.25          66.23           66.23         66.25         66.25        66.24         66.24
               Black                  62.53 (1.01)         62.78          62.70           62.78         62.68         62.78        62.72         62.72
               AlAN                    57.66 (3.75)         65.75          65.75           64.49         63.47         63.60        64.57         64.19
               API                     66.53 (2.22)         65.60          65.45           65.66         65.41         65.38        65.46         65.46
               Other                   68.73 (2.46)         68.45          68.38           68.38         68.38         68.38        68.39         68.39



1Estimates weighted to adjust for nonresponse and survey design but are not nationally representative.
AlAN = American Indian or Alaska Native; API = Asian or Pacific Islander.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                                                 76
from the Race and Ethnicity Supplement to CPS. Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #
                                                                                                                                    Deterministic
                                                                                    Deterministic Whole Assignment                   Fractional
                                                                                                                                    Assignment

               Labor Measure and Race           Basic CPS             Smallest           Largest         Largest      Plurality        NHIS
                      Category                  Distribution           Group          Group Other        Group                        Fradions
                                                                                       than White
           Unemployment Rate
                  White                        4.82 (0.24)                  4.71              4.71             4.73          4.71            4.72
                  Black                        9.29 (0.90)                  9.22              9.39             9.28          9.39            9.31
                  AlAN                         9.76 (3.66)                 11.90             10.67            12.51         12.44           12.79
                  API                          4.85 (1.12)                  4.43              4.41             4.41          4.40            4.40
                  Other                        6.74 (1.62)                  7.77              7.77             7.84          7.86            7.82


           Labor Force Participation Rate
                   White                       66.30 (0.42)                66.23            66.23         66.25            66.26            66.24
                   Black                       62.53 (1.01)                62.75            62.79         62.70            62.78            62.72
                   AlAN                        57.6(:i (3.75)              65.64            64.64   .... _63.47            63.60            64.17
                                                                                            65.58--
                                                                .


                   API                         66.53 (2.22)                65.37-                         65~32 -          65.15            65.45
                   Other                       68.73 (2.46)                68.47            68.49         68.40            68.40            68.39



IEstimates weighted to adjust for nonresponse and survey design but are not nationally representative.
AlAN = American Indian or Alaska Native; API = Asian or Pacific Islander.

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                                                 77
EMAILS CREATED
ARMS - BOX 008 - FOLDER 002


[2/28/1999 - 3/8/1999]
