RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( KAGAN_E      (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-0CT-1995 14:47:00.60

SUBJECT: lrm 2891

TO: Bruce N. Reed                               REED B      (WHO)
READ:23-0CT-1995 15:11:24.88

CC: Melinda D. Haskins                          HASKINS M      (OMB)
READ:23-0CT-1995 14:50:49.32

TEXT:
Bruce:
I'll leave the political calculation as to whether to send the DOJ letter (and
if so, in what form) to you.    (Of course, we should consider whether we want to
make strong constitutional objections to provisions in the welfare bills that
the President is likely to go along with.)    Here's a quick and dirty legal
analysis of the "constitutional concerns" noted in the DOJ letter to inform your
decision.   (For various reasons, I'd appreciate it if this analysis were not
passed on to OLC; let me know if this is a problem.). The numbers I use are the
same as the numbers used in the DOJ letter, with "H" referring to the House
version and "S" referring to the Senate version:
HI. The constitutional argument here is very weak.     A rational basis standard
of review almost certainly would apply, and this provision almost certainly
would meet it.
H2. The argument here is moderately strong.     It's not an automatic winner by
any means, but it is a sound position, well supported by existing precedent.
H3.   I can't imagine a court reading this provision in the way OLC (rightly)
thinks would raise constitutional concerns.    This objection seems a bit "made
up" to me.
H4. The argument here is less strong than the letter indicates, but still
credible. There's a real distinction between this provision and others
previously held unconstitutiona~: this provision limits newcomers' benefits to
the level received in the former state, whereas the provisions in earlier cases
denied them entirely.   But there's still a decent case to be made that this
provision is unlawful because a state can't discriminate among its residents
based on length of time spent in the state.    It probably wouldn't win, but it's
a respectable argument.
H5. This (like HI) is a weak argument, because rational basis claims almost
never succeed.   It takes legislation far more irrational than this to move the
court to take action under this standard.
H6. This fear seems overstated (as above, I don't think a court would interpret
the provisions in this manner), but the amendment proposed seems sensible
enough.
H7. Similarly, the change proposed here is of mere "academic" importance, but
is very sensible.
SI. See HI above.
S2. This seems as if it should be a very strong legal argument, but it's really
not. I'd grade it as a plausible legal claim, but not much more than that. The
problem, in a nutshell, is that this provision doesn't distinguish on its face
-- but only in operation -- between naturalized and natural-born citizens, and
in current constitutional law, that ~akes all the difference in the world.
Perhaps this is one on which reasonable people can disagree, but I would rank
the claim as much less strong than does OLC.
S3. See H2 above.
S4. See H3 above.
S5. See H4 above.
S6. See H6 above.
S7. See H7 above.
Please call i f you have any questions, want more detailed legal analysis, etc.


And let me know·what you decide to do with the letter.




