RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( KAGAN_E      (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-NOV-1995 13:19:52.39

SUBJECT: shutdown

TO: Jack M. Quinn                                          (WHO)
READ: 9-NOV-1995 19:36:24.51

TEXT:
         Chris passed on to me your note on the shutdown issue, because he knew
I'd done a fair bit of work on this 6 weeks ago.     (When you asked Chris to get
up to speed on debt limit questions, he and I agreed that that was easily
severable and that he should just do it.)    I hope it's OK with you for me to
continue on this matter.    If not, that's fine too.
         I've been in pretty close touch with Bob Damus and Chris Schraeder (of
OLC) and talked to them again this morning.    Not much new is happening.
Agencies (and the EOP) completed shutdown plans the last time this loomed, and
they presumably will implement those plans on Tuesday if there's no new CR.     OMB
is preparing a memo to be sent out today to all agency heads, telling them to
prepare to implement their plans. And Alice Rivlin will. reiterate that message
in the context of a larger presentation she is giving at today's Cabinet meeting
on budgetary issues.
         Bob told me that a question came up at one of the morning meetings
concerning how a shutdown would affect the President's scheduled trip to Japan.
I imagine this is much more a political issue than a legal issue, but I did
spend some time talking with Chris Schraeder about it this morning. As you
know, certain activities are excepted from a shutdown: though the government
can't actually pay any money to conduct these activities, the government can
obligate itself to make payment. Among the excepted activities are those
necessary to protect life or property (the emergency exception) and -- more to
the point here -- those integral to the carrying out of the President's core
constitutional powers, such as foreign policy.    The critical questions in
determining whether a trip of this sort falls within the "core executive
powers" exception are whether the trip serves a significant foreign policy
intel'est and whether postponement of the trip (until after the shutdown is
expected to end) would compromise that interest. Assuming the trip is
authorized under this standard, there is a more-than-ordinary burden to examine
the level of staffing to ensure it is as lean as possible, consistent with the
foreign policy interest.   Th.is is a preliminary analysis - - Chris S. said he'd
like to do some more thinking about the issue      but it'~ probably pretty close
to the final product.
         If you would like additional briefing on any shutdown issues, either in
person or on paper, just let me know.




EMAILS CREATED
ARMS - BOX 010 - FOLDER 003


[11/9/1995 - 2/2/1996]
