RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( KAGAN_E       (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-DEC-1995 17:34:25.74

SUBJECT: line item veto

TO: Jack M. Quinn
READ:21-DEC-1995 13:49:19.84

TO: Kathleen M. Wallman                         WALLMAN KM    (WHO)
READ:19-DEC-199512:18:25.34

TEXT:
        You'll recall from my last memo on this subject that we made informal
suggestions to Senate staff on how to respond to the House offer on a line item
veto. The Senate staff accepted many of our recommendations, but with two
important exceptions:
        1. Senate staff said it wished to retain a "lockbox" mechanism,
requiring a reduction in discretionary spending caps (or PAYGO balances)
whenever the   President strikes a spending item. We fear that such a mechanism
will make it difficult to get supplemental appropriations later in the year.     To
mitigate this concern, we are now proposing the creation of "emergency reserve
accounts." When the President strikes a spending item, the amount will be
credited to these accounts; the money in the accounts then can be used for
emergency supplementals and other emergency legislation.     (Emergency legislation
does not actually require an offset; thus, Congress can enact such legislation
with or without these accounts.    The hope is that the existence of these funds
will make it politically and psychologically easier for Congress to make
appropriations of this kind.)   Jack: Bob Damus said this was your idea.    It
seemed to the line item veto group (including me) a good one.
        2. Senate staff agreed to strike the word "veto" (to describe what the
President may do to items of spending), but is replacing it with the word
"cancel" rather than with the word "suspend." OLC thinks that use of the word
"cancel" makes the statute more constitutionally vulnerable than it would be if
the word "suspend" were used.    (My own view is that the constitutionality of
this law is not going to rest on the difference between "cancel" and "suspend.")
In deference to OLC's view, we are asking for a definition of the word "cancel"
which includes the word "suspend."    This all seems a bit absurd and unnecessary
to me, but I do not think there's any harm in it.
        Meanwhile, OLC sent a memo to OMB asking once again that we urge
Congress to write a provision authorizing the President to lift any suspension
(or cancellation).  As we discussed when we last spoke about this issue, OLC
thinks this will make the statute less vulnerable to constitutional attack.
Neither I nor Bob Damus agrees with this argument.    (Indeed, I think it's much
easier to spin the argument: the other way: i.e., that such a provision would
makes the statute more constitutionally problematic.)    Everyone else hates this
idea for policy reasons: it makes the statute too complicated; it seems like
overreaching, etc.  So everyone is ignoring OLC on this point.
        If you don't agree with the preliminary decisions on any of these
points or have any other ideas, let me know as soon as possible.




http://] 72.28.127.30:80821 ARMS/servletigetEmailArchive?URL] ATH=/nlcp-llArms405/wholW...     4/912009
