RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (ALL-IN-l MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan      ( KAGAN_E    (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:18-JAN-1996 12:28:06.14

SUBJECT: timber

TO: Jennifer M. O'Connor                           OCONNOR J   (WHO)
REI'.D: 18 -JAN-1996 12: 59: 36.94

TEXT:
         You probably know by now that Justice will appeal Hogan's rulings on
enjoined sales and high-bidder sales and will seek a stay pending the appeal.
         As to the "withdrawn" sales (the First and Last sales), Justice is going
to file a "Notice of Filing and Request for Status Conference" with Judge Dwyer.
As you know, Hogan has enjoined us to release those sales. We haven't contested
their release in any prior court proceeding.   Environmental plaintiffs, however,
did contest their release (as well as the release of the enjoined sales) in a
motion filed in Judge Dwyer's court.   Dwyer stayed that motion pending Hogan's
rl'ling.  The pleading that Justice intends to file with Dwyer states that in
chese circumstances, some direction from Dwyer is necessary p'rior to any release
of the sales.   The pleading does not take a position on what Dwyer should do: it
does not say whether he has a legal basis for ordering the withholding of the
sales.   The pleading eseentially punts the question to Dwyer. Given the Forest
Service's and DOJ's prior statements on these sales, stretching back to early
1995, I think this is the best we can do in this pleading.
         DOJ is still thinking about whether it also can file an affidavit in
response to the enviros' motion in Dwyer's court describing the environmental
damage that release of these sales would cause.   This affidavit, while saying
nothing about the legal basis for withholding the sales, would provide Dwyer
~ith factual information about the consequences of such release.   I take it
ci~ere is some dissension within DOJ on whether filing such an affidavit makes
sense.   (If I had to guess, I'd say that Lois is in favor, while Peter Coppelman
is opposed.)   I told Lois that CEQ, you, and I all thought we should file the
affidavit (assuming that the facts support a claim of environmental damage).    I
believe folks from CEQ were going to call Lois and make the same point.




