RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( KAGAN_E       (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-MAY-1996 11:12:38.39

SUBJECT: alternative timber memo

TO: Kathleen A. McGinty                         MCGINTY K      (CEQ)
READ: 6-MAY-1996 11:23:34.54

TO: Martha Foley                                FOLEY M      (WHO)
READ: 6-MAY-1996 12:06:47.38

TO: Jennifer M. O'Connor                        OCONNOR J      (WHO)
READ: 6-MAY-1996 14:07:58.20

TO: Dinah Bear                                  BEAR D      (CEQ)
READ: 6-MAY-1996 13:18:31.04

TO: T J Glauthier                               GLAUTHIER T         (OMB)
READ: 6-MAY-1996 16:44:26.96

TEXT:
A few more thoughts:
1. On the need to prioritize:    I agree with TJ that there should be more
guidance for the field.   It's true that if we win on k3, we're legally obligated
to provide replacement timber for the whole 225 mbf.   But we might lose on k3 --
and if we do, we will need to know which of these sales are the worst, which the
next worst, and so on.  TJ's right that the memo doesn't prioritiz.e in this way,
nor does it suggest how the field folks should prioritize for themselves.
2. The memo suggests that we have no problem with any of the sales we already
have been forced to release.   Is that true? Or are there some previously
released sales that we currently are -- or ought to be -- negotiating about?
And if so, how do these sales fit within the (nonexistent) list of priorities.
3. The statement about needing twice as much alternative timber has to be
deleted.  Someday we may be in litigation with purchasers over whether timber
we've given them is of like kind and value, and in that context, this statement
will come back to haunt us.
4. To expand on the concerns raised by Dinah in her second and third bullitts,
can't we cut back on a lot of this memo's statement of the problem? I'd be more
comfortable if this memo didn't spend so much time characterizing our legal
obligations.
5. I'm of mixed mind as to whether we should say so directly that we will
exercise our right to cancel contracts if negotiations are unsuccessful.   It
might be helpful, from an internal point of view, to put this position on
record. More, I doubt it will come as a surprise to the timber industry that
we've been thinking about this option.   Finally, we will need to state this
position, at some point and in some context, if we want to use it as leverage.
But I worry that the industry will attempt to use this memo's flat statement
against us -- perhaps as a basis for immediately seeking a declaratory judgment
regarding our contractual rights, or perhaps as evidence that the cancellations
result from broadscale policy concerns, rather than from good faith case-by-case
evaluation of the results of contractual performance.   I think I would at least
like to play with the language to alleviate my concerns on these matters.

6. I don't have the letter to Craig that TJ wrote an e-mail about.          Can someone
send me a copy?




