RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1997 19:00:46.00

SUBJECT:   Commencement update

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 04/08/97 07:04
PM ---------------------------




Michael Cohen
04/08/97 12:18:49 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
cc:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
Subject:         Commencement update

I want to bring you up to speed on the commencement developments before
today's 4:30 meeting.

Don has been pushing for each speech to be focused on education.  Michael
Waldman, among others, has been arguing for a different theme for each
speech.  Today's meeting will focus largely on sorting out the message
issues.

There is general agreement to recommend three places to POTUS:

1. an Historically Black College or University -- probably Morgan State
in Baltimore. Don has been pushing for this to be one venue for an
education speech, playing off of Morgan state's role in educating
teachers. An alternative under consideration is to focus the speech on
health issues, such as kidney disease, where there is a particular
interest among African Americans, assuming whe've got a package of things
to announce then.

2. Sidwell Friends, where the message would be on service,and on the
obligation of the most fortunate among us to give something back to the
community and the nation.  There is an ongoing discussion about whether to
consider and to portray the Sidwell graduation as part of the President's
commencement package, or to simply acknowledge it as something special the
President is doing for his daughter.

3.   West Point, where the message will be on foreign policy.

4. A public high school, or a large public college or university.    I have
been arguing for a public high school, especially a school that has been
or is being turned around from failure to success.   The message would be
on the importance of public education, on the standards-related agenda,
and the fact that we can make public education work.   This seems to be
carrying the day; Don now favors this over a charter school. We are
looking at DeWitt Clinton high school in the Bronx as the leading
contender, though I've also been asked to find a couple of possibilities
in Chicago. Craig Smith reminded us that we owe Chicago a visit, since we
went to the suburbs last winter.   (If Chicago doesn't work out for now,


they should have some charter schools opening the the Fall; maybe we could
go back for that) .

There doesn't seem to be anyone yet arguing forcefully for a public
college or university yet, and, while I have gotten a new list of
possibilities from ED, have not done anything to push this myself.


A final note -- I may be a bit late for the 4:30 commencement meeting this
afternoon. since I will be in the middle of an ED briefing on 'the Voc. Ed.
bill, in preparation for the Erskine memo.




