RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-MAY-1997 09:18:49.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP       [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Dear' [whomever]

        As America moves into the 21st Century,we must give our poeple the
strongest education in the world. No other priority is more important for
our nation.  I will veto any legislation that would hinder our mission of
raising standards and giving every American child a world-class
education.

         As I said in my State-of-the-Union Address, America needs
educational standards -- not federal government standards, but national
standards reperesenting what all our students must know to succeed in the
new knowledge economy.   I have proposed that every state should test 4th
graders in reading, and 8th graders in math, to make sure these standards
are met.   In recent months, we have worked with educators, parents,
business and state officials to encourage states to adopt these standards
throughout the nation. Our Department of Education has begun to work with
these states, and will help them develop math and reading tests that will
truly measure these skills. The proposed amendment would stop in its
tracks this national, cooperative effort to develop meaningful tests.

        Education .is the key to our future, and national standards are the
key to improving education. The proposed amendment would effectively block
these national standards.   It would set back the cause of education and
damage the future of our children.   I would veto it, without hesitation.

        We must make sure that all our young people can meet these new
rigorous standards. That is why, for example, I believe it is so
important that the recent budget agreement funds our America Reads
challenge, which would mobilize an army of 1 million volunteer tutors
toward our goal of every 8 year old being able to read independently.  We
must press forward with other ongoing efforts to help our children learn
the basics of reading and math, and I look forward to working with you in
partnership toward these critical national goals. But above all, I will
not allow our nation to come to a halt as we move toward effective
national standards.

        As you are also aware, I have made clear that I will veto this
legislation if it incldues the automatic continuing resolution provision
contained in the senate passed bill.  While I share the goal of ensuring
that Congress does not shut the governemnt down again, such a proyision is
inconsistent with our recent bipartisan budget agreement, and is clearly
extraneous to this emergency disaster relief legislation.

        In addition, members of my administration have informed you of
other seriously objectionable provisions that must be addressed before
this legislation reaches my desk.

        This vital legislation containst $5.6 billion in ugently needed
disaster assistance funds for hundreds of thousands of victims of recent
natural disasters in 33 states. These citizens should not be forced to
wait.  I urge you to pass strong disaster relief and international


peacekeeping supplemental funding, without attaching unrelated and
damaging provisions that can only set this legislation back.




