 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-MAY-1998 10:52:07.00

 SUBJECT:   Lookback memo

 TO: Laura Emmett    CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 05/14/98 10:52
 AM ---------------------------




 Bruce N. Reed
 05/14/98 02:17:50 AM
 Record Type:    Record

 To:      Jason S. Goldberg/WHO/EOP
 cc:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP, Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP
 Subject:         Lookback memo

 The attached memo provides some facts Erskine asked for on
 company-by-company lookbacks.



 He should also know that:

 1. Chris has reached tentative agreement with NGA on a menu, and will firm
 it up Thursday a.m.

 2. Elena and I are meeting with McCain/Hollings staff at 8 a.m. to wrap up
 spending, miscellaneous liability items, and any other remaining issues.
 We will try to get back here to ride up with him to the McCain/Hollings
 meeting at 10 -- or call him with an update.

 3. OMB and Treasury are under the strictest orders to get their best
 possible estimate of how much money we'll have left under CBO scoring.   If
 you get this message before the 7:45 a.m. mtg, it wouldn't hurt to make
 clear to Rubin and Lew that this is the highest priority, so we can be in
 a position to respond if Joint Tax comes out with an estimate of $2/pack
 at the Finance markup.

4. We may need the VP and Shalala's help tomorrow in selling this whole
package to the public health community.   I talked to Kessler and Matt
Myers tonight.  Kessler is fine except for the liability cap.   Myers is
worried that even though we've done well, Koop and the big groups will
still complain without a major sales job.   I can discuss this with Erskine
at the McCain mtg.


Gene's out of town, so somebody had to work the hamster shift.      The
cleaning people kept asking after him.



;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT   1 ;;==;;;;=;;;;;;;;;;;
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00
,.
,~
     r.   1IIt.




                                                                May 14,1998


                  MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

                  FROM:                  Bruce Reed

                  SUBJECT:               Youth Lookbacks

                          I talked with John Raidt and Ivan Schlager tonight, and explained our Comad problem.
                  They were willing to agree to $1,000 per youth smoker on the company-by-company penalty if
                  we agree to an industrywide cap of $4 billion. Elena and I believe this is a good deal for us.
                  Conrad will still squawk -- and the public health community will be insufficiently grateful as
                  well-- but it enables Conrad to save face and come around ifhe wants. (Meanwhile, Philip
                  Morris executives will fire all their lobbyists, and Bruce Lindsey will think we have lost our
                  minds.)

                          Here are the facts on how to respond to Conrad's criticism. He fundamentally
                  misunderstands the purpose of a company-by-company penalty. Industrywide penalties are
                  passed directly to price, and are designed to .drive up the price to discourage teens from smoking.
                   Company-specific penalties are designed not to drive up the price of cigarettes (as the
                  industrywide penalties do), but to come straight out of the companies' bottom line ifthey sell to
                  kids. Companies cannot pass company-specific penalties onto price, because any price
                  differential between companies (even a few pennies) will wreak havoc on their share of the adult
                  market. That is why these companies always increase their prices in lock-step, as they did earlier
                  this week.

                          So when Conrad says our company-specific penalty is a fraction of a penny a point, that's
                  the wrong measure. We've already got an industrywide penalty that gets up to at least 35 cents a
                  pack [$4 billion non-deductible = nearly $6 billion pre-tax, divided by our estimated volume of
                  17 billion packs in 2003 = about 35 cents a pack. If CBO estimates volume at 12 billion packs,
                  our industrywide penalty could reach 50 cents a pack.] The purpose of a company-specific
                  penalty is to change company behavior by imposing a serious disincentive.

                         Here are a few ways to make our proposal sound significant:

                          I. Without a company-specific penalty, any company can still make a profit by selling to
                  kids. At $1,000 per youth smoker, our proposal will force a company to surrender twice the
                  lifetime profits it makes from addicting a teen in the first place. (It's really more than twice,
                  when you count the $150-250 in lost profits from the industrywide penalty.)




                                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
the companies $SOO million that they can't pass on to price -- that's $1 a pack for every pack they
sell to teenagers. A 2S-point miss would cost $1 billion -- or $2 a pack for every pack they sell to
teenagers. To put it another way, that's 8 cents a pack for every percentage point miss.

         3. This penalty is uncapped, and comes straight out of after-tax profits. The total after-
tax profits of the domestic tobacco industry are $S billion ($7 billion pre-tax). Treasury
estimates that after-tax profits will drop to $3.6 billion in 2003 under the McCain bill. (CBO
volume assumptions could reduce that another 2S-33%.) The company-specific penalties reduce
the companies profits by $400 million for every 10 points. A 30-point miss would reduce profits
by $1.2 pillion, or 113 of total profits. A 60-point miss would reduce profits by $2.4 billion, or
2/3 of total projected profits. Either scenario could put RJR out of business ifit continues
aggressively marketing to kids. Even Philip Morris (which accounts for nearly 2/3 of industry
profits, or a projected $2.4 billion in 2003) would be in real danger, especially since it has over
60% of the youth market.

        4. Don't forget to mention that we strengthened provisions to ensure that any company
that misses its targets by more than 20% will lose liability protections altogether. That may not
mean much to Conrad, but it has the companies and industry analysts scared to death.

         Ifpressed, here's an example you can use if anyone tries to argue that our penalties are so
small the companies will just pass them onto price. Let's split the difference between OMB and
CBO and assume volume is IS million packs. Philip Morris's market share is SO%, or 7.S
million packs. A 30-point miss would cost PM about $740 million. If PM passed that along to
price, it would have to raise the price ofMarlboros by 10 cents a pack. But PM can't afford to
sell Marlboros for 10 cents a pack more than RJR sells Winstons. That's $1.00 a carton. A few
years ago, PM nearly put RJR out of business on "Marlboro Friday," when it made Marlboros a
few cents a pack cheaper than Winstons. RJR has never recovered.

       Treasury will fax over a new chart in the morning with $4 billion in industry penalties
and $1,000 per youth smoker.




                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
