RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 18-FEB-1999 12:42:02.00

SUBJECT:   Draft provisional guidance on racial/ethnic data tabulations

TO: Laura Emmett    ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
please print
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 02/18/99 12:43
PM ---------------------------


   Katherine K. Wallman                      02/17/99 07:30:53 PM

Record Type:       Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:      Donald R. Arbuckle/OMB/EOP, Suzann K. Evinger/OMB/EOP, Nancy
Kirkendall/OMB/EOP
Subject:         Draft provisional guidance on racial/ethnic data tabulations

As promised in my note of last Friday, I am providing below the full text
and appendices of the Draft Provisional Guidance on the Implementation of
the 1997 Standards for the Collection of Data on Race and Ethnicity. The
first of the documents, R&ETAB, begins with an overview and then addresses
the three major areas of data collection, data tabulation, and building
bridges.  Please let me know if I can provide additional information.
Thanks.




Message Sent
TO:~--~------~~~~~------------------------------------------
Maria Echaveste/WHO/EOP
Sylvia M. Mathews/OMB/EOP
Joshua Gotbaum/OMB/EOP
Robert B. Johnson/WHO/EOP
Minyon Moore/WHO/EOP
Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
Karen Tramontano/WHO/EOP
Ann F. Lewis/WHO/EOP
Thurgood Marshall Jr/WHO/EOP
Mickey Ibarra/WHO/EOP
Lynn G. Cutler/WHO/EOP
Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
Sally Katzen/OPD/EOP
Linda Ricci/OMB/EOP


;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00
                             OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20503


                                        February 17, 1999



                        DRAFT PROVISIONAL GUIDANCE
               ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1997 STANDARDS
        FOR THE COLLECTION OF FEDERAL DATA ON RACE AND ETHNICITY



NOTE FOR READERS

        As a follow-on to OMB's October 1997 announcement of revised government-wide
standards for the collection of data on race and ethnicity, the Tabulation Working Group of the
Interagency Committee for the Review of Standards for Data on Race and Ethnicity has recently
issued a report, "Draft Provisional Guidance on the Implementation of the 1997 Standards for the
Collection of Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity." This guidance, which has been developed
with the involvement of many Federal agencies, essentially was requested by those agencies and
the many users of data on race and ethnicity.

        The guidance focuses on three areas: collecting data using the new standards, tabulating
data collected under the new standards, and building bridges to compare data collected under the
new and the old standards. At this juncture, the guidance is often in the form of alternatives for
discussion rather than recommendations for implementation. In many areas work is ongoing, and
the guidance will be amended as additional research and analyses are completed.

        At this juncture, we are seeking broader comment on the guidance. In keeping with the
process that guided review and revision of the standards for data on race and ethnicity, we are
looking forward to an open dialogue on this draft provisional guidance. Following a two month
period for discussion by stakeholders within and outside government, we expect to issue
provisional guidance at the end of April. We expect the guidance issued at that time will evolve
further as data from Census 2000 and other data collections employing the new collection
standards become available.

       We look forward to your review and comments, and welcome your questions.


                                             Katherine K. Wallman
                                             Chief Statistician

                                           DRAFT

                      ON THE

               IMPLEMENTATION

         OF THE 1997 STANDARDS FOR

 FEDERAL DATA ON RACE AND ETHNICITY




                    Prepared By


             Tabulation Working Group
Interagency Committee for the Review of Standards for
             Data on Race and Ethnicity




                                        February 17, 1999

1.     Background
             A. The Need for Tabulation Guidelines and Alternative Approaches
             B. General Guidelines for Tabulating Data on Race
             C. Points of Clarification Regarding the 1997 Standards
             D .. Criteria Used in Developing the Tabulation Guidelines

II.    Collecting Data on Race and Ethnicity Using the New Standards
              A. Developing Procedures for Data Collection (Full Report at Appendix B)
              B. Best Practices in Survey Design and Data Processing (Under development)

III.   Tabulating Data on Race and Ethnicity Collected Under the New Standards
              A. Decennial Census
              B. Other Surveys and Administrative Records

IV.    Using Data on Race and Ethnicity Collected Under the New Standards
             A. Redistricting
             B. Equal Employment Opportunity
             C. Vital Records and Intercensal Estimates
             D. Issues for Further Research (Under Development)

V.     Comparing Data Under the Old and the New Standards (Full Report at Appendix D)
            A. Introduction
            B. Methods for Bridging
            C. Methods of Evaluation
            D. Examination of the Results with Respect to the Evaluation Criteria

Appendix A. Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting Federal Data on Race and
             Ethnicity                                                     .

Appendix B. Procedural Implementation of the New Standards for Data on Race and Ethnicity--
            Phase I Report

Appendix C. Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal Prototype Redistricting Data

Appendix D. Bridge Report: Tabulation Options for Trend Analysis




                                             3
      THE 1997 STANDARDS FOR FEDERAL DATA ON RACE AND ETHNICITY

                                            Prepared by

                                 Tabulation Working Group
                    Interagency Committee for the Review of Standards for
                                 Data on Race and Ethnicity



The guidance presented in this report has been developed to complement the Federal
Government's decision in October 1997 to provide an opportunity for individuals to select one or
more races when responding to agency requests for data on race and ethnicity. To foster
comparability across data collections carried out by various agencies, it is useful for those
agencies to report responses of more than one race using some standardized tabulations or
formats.

The report briefly explains why the tabulation guidelines are needed, reviews the general
guidance issued when the new standards were adopted in October 1997, and provides
information on the criteria used in developing the guidelines. This report also addresses a larger
set of implementation questions that have emerged during the working group's deliberations.
Thus, the report considers:

       Collecting data on race and ethnicity using the new standards, including aggregate data
        reporting,

      Tabulating Census 2000 data and data on race and ethnicity collected in surveys and from
       administrative records,

      Using data on race and ethnicity in applications such as legislative redistricting and equal
       employment opportunity monitoring, and

      Comparing data under the old and the new standards when conducting analyses.

In addition, the appendices to the draft report contain the full text of the reports on the research
that has been conducted in two areas: best procedural practices for implementing the new
standards, and approaches for bridging between data collected under the old standards and data
collected under the new standards.

The guidelines are necessarily provisional pending the availability of data from Census 2000 and
other data systems as the new standards are implemented. They are likely to be reviewed and
refined as Federal agencies and others gain experience with data collected under the new


                                                  4
Instead, options are presented and guidelines in these areas will be issued at a later date.

OMB expects to issue this provisional guidance by the end of April 1999, following a period of
public discussion of this draft by interested users. As noted in the Table of Contents and the
report, a few sections are still "under development"and will be available for review at a later
time.




                                                5

This part of the report discusses why guidance is needed for tabulating data collected using the
1997 standards, reiterates the general guidance issued in October 1997, provides clarification of
several aspects of the new standards, and presents the criteria that were developed for evaluating
bridging methods and presenting data.

A. The Need for Tabulation Guidelines and Alternative Approaches

On October 30, 1997, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) published "Standards for
Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity" (Federal Register,
62 FR 58781 - 58790), which are reprinted in Appendix A. The new standards reflect a change
in data collection policy, making it possible for Federal agencies to collect information that
reflects the increasing diversity of our Nation's population stemming from growth in interracial
marriages and immigration. Under the new policy, agencies are now required to offer
respondents the option of selecting one or more of the following five racial categories included in
the updated standards:

       American Indian or Alaska Native. A person having origins in any of the original
       peoples of North and South America (including Central America), and who maintains
       tribal affiliation or community attachment.

       Asian. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast
       Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan,
       Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.

       Black or African American. A person having origins in any of the black racial groups
       of Africa. Terms such as "Haitian" or "Negro" can be used in addition to "Black or
       African American."

       Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. A person having origins in any of the
       original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.

       White. A person having origins in any ofthe original peoples of Europe, the Middle
       East, or North Africa.

These five categories are the minimum set for data on race for Federal statistics, program
administrative reporting, and civil rights compliance reporting.

With respect to ethnicity, the standards provide for the collection of data on whether or not a
person is of "Hispanic or Latino" culture or origin. (The standards do not permit a multiple
response that would indicate an ethnic heritage that is both Hispanic or Latino and non-Hispanic
or Latino.) This category is defined as follows:


                                                6
       American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race. The term, "Spanish
       origin," can be used in addition to "Hispanic or Latino."

As a result of the change in policy for collecting data on race, the reporting categories used to
present these data must similarly reflect this change. In keeping with the spirit of the new
standards, agencies cannot collect multiple responses and then report and publish data using only
the five single race categories. Agencies are expected to provide as much detail as possible on
the multiple race responses, consistent with agency confidentiality and data quality procedures.
As provided by the standards, OMB will consider any agency variances to this policy on a case
by case basis.

Based on research to date, it is estimated that less than two percent of the Nation's total
population is likely to identify with more than one race. This percentage may increase as those
who identify with more than one racial heritage become aware of the opportunity to report more
than one race. In the early years of the standards' implementation, there will be issues of data
quality and confidentiality related to sample size that may restrict the amount of data that can be
published for some combinations of multiple race responses. Over time, however, the size of
these data cells may increase. It should be noted that such data quality and confidentiality
problems for small popUlation groups also existed under the old standards, where sample sizes
prevented presentation of data on certain population groups such as American Indians. The
possible multiple race combinations under the new standards, some with small data cells, serve
to make such data quality concerns more apparent. Some balance will need to be struck between
having a tabulation showing the full distribution of all possible combinations of multiple race
responses and presenting only the minimum -- that is, a single aggregate of people who reported
more than one race.

B. General Guidelines for Tabulating Data on Race

In response to concerns that had been raised about how Federal agencies would tabulate multiple
race responses, OMB in the October 30, 1997, Federal Register notice issued the following
ge'neral guidance:

      Consistent with criteria for confidentiality and data quality, the tabulation procedures
       used by the agencies should result in the production of as much detailed information on
       race and ethnicity as possible.

      Guidelines for tabulation ultimately must meet the needs of at least two groups within the
       Federal Government, with the overriding objective of providing the most accurate and
       informative body of data.

       (1)    The first group is composed of those Federal Government officials charged with
              carrying out constitutional and legislative mandates, such as redistricting


                                                7
               discrimination programs. (The legislative redistricting file produced by the
               Bureau of the Census, also known as the Public Law 94-171 file, is an example of
               a file meeting such legislative needs.)

       (2)     The second group consists of the staff of Federal statistical agencies producing
               and analyzing data that are used to monitor economic and social conditions and
               trends.

      Many of the needs of the first group can be met with an initial tabulation that provides,
       consistent with standards for data quality and confidentiality, the full detail of racial
       reporting; that is, the number of people reporting in each single race category and the
       number reporting in each of the possible combinations of races, which would add to the
       total population.

      Depending on the judgment of users, the combinations of multiple responses could be
       collapsed.

       (1)    One method would be to provide separate totals for thos'e reporting in the most
              common multiple race combinations and to collapse the data for other less
              frequently reported combinations. The specifics of the collapsed distributions
              would be dependent on the results of particular data collections.

       (2)    A second method would be to report the total selecting each particular race,
              whether alone or in combination with other races. These totals would represent
              upper bounds on the size of the populations who identified with each ofthe racial
              categories. In some cases, this latter method could be used for comparing data
              collected under the old standards with data collected under the new stan'dards.

      It is important that Federal agencies with the same or closely related responsibilities adopt
       the same tabulation method.

      Regardless of the method chosen for collapsing multiple race responses, Federal agencies
       must make available the total number reporting more than one race, if confidentiality and
       data quality requirements can be met, in order to ensure that any changes in response
       patterns resulting from the new standards can be monitored over time.

      Different tabulation procedures might be required to meet various needs of Federal
       agencies for data on race. Nevertheless, Federal agencies often need to compare racial
       and ethnic data. Hence, some standardization of tabulation categories for reporting data
       on race is desirable to facilitate such comparisons.

The October 30, 1997, Federal Register Notice identified four areas where further research was


                                                8

       (1)     How should the data be used to evaluate conformance톣ith program objectives in
               the area of equal employment opportunity and other anti-discrimination
               programs?

       (2)     How should the decennial census data for many small population groups with
               multiple racial heritages be used to develop sample designs and survey controls
               for major demographic surveys?

       (3)     How do we introduce the use ofthe new standards in the vital statistics program
               which obtains the number of births or deaths from administrative records, but uses
               intercensal population estimates in determining the rates of births and deaths?

       (4)     And more generally, how can we conduct meaningful comparisons of data
               collected under the previous standards with those that will be collected under the
               new standards?

In order to address these and other issues and to ensure that tabulation methodologies would be
carefully developed and coordinated among the Federal agencies, OMB assembled a group of
statistical and policy analysts drawn from the Federal agencies that generate or use these data.
Over the past year, this group has considered tabulation issues and developed the draft
provisional guidance that is presented in this report for use by Federal agencies. The work of this
group has included: (1) a review of Federal data needs and uses to ensure that the tabulation
guidelines produce data that meet statutory and program requirements; (2) cognitive testing of
the wording of questions; (3) development of a form for reporting aggregate data; (4) evaluation
of different methods of bridging from the new to the old standards; and (5) development of
guidelines for presenting data on multiple race responses that meet accepted data quality and
confidentiality standards.

The tabulation guidance in this report is necessarily provisional pending the availability of
Census 2000 data and other data systems as the new collection standards are implemented.
These guidelines will be reviewed and modified as the ~gencies and other data users gain
experience with data collected using the new standards.

C. Points of Clarification Regarding the 1997 Standards

A few questions about the new standards have emerged over the past year. This section
elaborates on several points in the standards that have been a source of confusion for some users.


Under the new standards, "Hispanic or Latino" is clearly designated as an ethnicity and not as a
race. Whether or not an individual is Hispanic, every effort should be made to ascertain the race


                                                 9
The two-question fonnat, with the ethnicity question preceding the race question, should be used
when infonnation is collected through self-identification. Although the standards pennit the use
of a combined question when collecting data by observer identification, the use of the two-
question format is strongly encouraged even where observer identification is used.
Regardless of the question fonnat, observers are expected to attempt to identify the individual's
race(s).

The standards require that at a minimum the total number of persons identifying with more than
one race be reported. It is stressed that this is a minimum; agencies are strongly encouraged to
report detailed infonnation on specific racial combinations subject to constraints of data
reliability and confidentiality standards.

The following wording concerning the reporting of data when the combined question is used is
clarified in the paragraph below:

       "In cases where data on multiple responses are collapsed, the total number of respondents
       reporting 'Hispanic or Latino and one or more races' and the total number of respondents
       reporting 'more than one race' (regardless of ethnicity) shall be provided." (Section 2b of
       the standards)

Race by ethnicity always should be reported when confidentiality pennits. Ifnot, the first level
of collapsing should be ethnicity by the single races and ethnicity for those reporting more than
one race. Thus, an Hispanic or Latino respondent reporting one race should be reported both as
Hispanic or Latino and as a member of that single race. If the respondent selects more than one
race, he or she should be reported in the particular racial combination as well as in the Hispanic
or Latino category. Reporting a composite -- that is, the number of people who responded
"Hispanic or Latino" and more than one race -- is a minimum that only should be used ifmore
detailed reporting would violate data reliability and confidentiality standards.

The rules discussed in Section 4 of the new standards concerning the presentation of data on race
and ethnicity under special circumstances are not to be invoked unilaterally by an agency. If
the agency believes the standard categories are inappropriate, the agency must request a specific
variance from OMB.

The new standards do not include an "other race" category. For the sole purpose of the Census
2000 data collection, OMB has granted an exception to the Census Bureau to use a category
called "Some Other Race."

D. Criteria Used in Developing the Tabulation Guidelines

The interagency expert group on tabulations generated criteria that could be used both to evaluate
the technical merits of different bridging procedures (See Part V and Appendix D) and to display


                                                10
purpose for which the data are intended to be used. For example, in the case of bridging to the
past, the most important criterion is "measuring change over time," while "congruence with
respect to respondent's choice" will be more critical for presenting data under the new standards.


The criteria set forth below are designed only to assess the technical adequacy of the various
statistical procedures. The first two criteria listed below are central to consideration of bridging
methods. The next six criteria apply both to bridging and long-term tabulation decisions. The
last criterion is of primary importance for future tabulations of data collected under the new
standards.

Bridging:

       Measure change over time. This is the most important criterion for bridging, because
       the major purpose of any historical bridge will be to measure true change over time as
       distinct from methodologically induced change. The ideal bridging method, under this
       criterion, would be one that matches how the respondent would have responded under the
       old standards had that been possible. In this ideal situation, differences between the new
       distribution and the old distribution would reflect true change in the distribution itself.

       Minimize disruptions to the single race distribution. This criterion applies only to
       methods for bridging. Its purpose is to consider how different the resulting bridge
       distribution is from the single-race distribution for detailed race under the new standards.
        To the extent that a bridging method can meet the other criteria and still not differ
       substantially from the single-race proportion in the ongoing distribution, it will facilitate
       looking both forward and backward in time.

Bridging and future tabulations:

       Range of applicability. Because the purpose ofthe guidelines is to foster consistency
       across agencies in tabulating racial and ethnic data, tabulation procedures that can be used
       in a wide range of programs and varied contexts are usually preferable to those that have
       more limited applicability.

       Meet confidentiality and reliability standards. It is essential that the tabulations
       maintain the confidentiality standards of the statistical organization while producing
       reliable estimates.

       Statistically defensible. Because tabulations may be published by statistical agencies
       and/or provided in public use data, the recommended tabulation procedures should follow
       recognized statistical practices.



                                                 11
       situations by many different people, it is important that they can be implemented with a
       minimum of oper~tional difficulty. Thus, the tabulation procedures must be capable of
       being easily replicated by others.

       Skill required. Similarly, it is important that the tabulation procedures can be
       implemented by individuals with relatively little statistical knowledge.

       Understandability and communicability. Again, because the tabulation procedures
       will likely be used, as well as presented, in a wide variety of situations by many different
       people, it is important that they be easily explainable to the public.
                                                                                  
Future tabulations:

       Congruence with respondent's choice. Because of changes in the categories and the
       respondent instructions accompanying the question on race (allowing more than one
       category to be selected), the underlying logic of the ~abulation procedures must reflect to
       the greatest extent possible the full detail of race reporting.




                                                12
       STANDARDS

This part of the report currently provides a summary of the Phase I Report on Procedural
Implementation of the New Standards for Data on Race and Ethnicity, which is contained in
Appendix B.

A. Developing Procedures for Data Collection

An interagency committee has been continuing past research efforts to develop procedures to
collect and aggregate data on race and ethnicity. This research is designed to produce guidelines
that address three areas: (1) wording and format of questions that ask for self-reported data on
race and Hispanic or Latino origin; (2) wording and format of instructions and forms that collect
aggregate data on race and Hispanic or Latino origin; and (3) instructions and training procedures
for field interviewers and administrative personnel who will be using these questions and forms.
Guidelines will be continually reviewed and modified as implementation of the new standards
occurs, feedback from agencies is received, and new research findings become available.

Members of the procedures committee represent the Departments of Health and Human Services,
Commerce, Education, Labor, and Veterans Affairs, and the General Accounting Office. This
summary briefly describes the Phase I research, offers initial guidelines for agencies developing
new data collection procedures, and includes a schedule for the completion of work by this
committee. The full report ofthe committee includes the research design and methods, results of
Phase I, examples of test questions and forms, and a broader discussion of guidelines and
problems identified.

Developing and Testing Self-Reported Race and Ethnicity Questions

A goal of this research is to provide guidance on the wording and format of questions for self-
reporting race and Hispanic or Latino origin depending on the mode of administration.
Questions administered by telephone or in a face-to-face personal interview have been tested in
cognitive laboratory interviews; self-administered questions are not included in this testing
because the Census Bureau previously conducted such research in preparation for Census 2000.
To date, 32 cognitive interviews have been completed; another 18 are planned for Phase I and at
least 25 more for Phase II.

Among the 32 subjects interviewed, 13 reported their race as Black, 3 reported Asian, 2 reported
Native Hawaiian, 4 reported more than one race, and 10 reported White, of which 2 also reported
Hispanic or Latino origin. No American Indians or Alaska Natives have been interviewed yet in
Phase I. Subjects were first asked routine demographic questions as well as the test Hispanic or
Latino origin and race questions for themselves and members of their household. Then,
debriefings were conducted to learn more about the subjects' understanding of the questions and
terms used.


                                               13
questions. In the cognitive interviews, understanding of the intent of a race or Hispanic origin
question was shared but individual differences in the interpretation and meaning of terms used
was found, as was confusion regarding the separation of Hispanic or Latino origin from race.

As expected, subjects who were interviewed face-to-face seemed to use and rely on the
flashcards to select a response. Subjects interviewed by telephone had a bit more difficulty
answering the race questions since they had to listen to a relatively long list of response options.
Also, there was some evidence that the instruction to "... select one or more... " was
misunderstood on the telephone to mean that the subject had to select more than one race.
Section I in Appendix B describes in detail the results of testing the questions on race and
ethnicity.

Based on these interviews, the following initial guidelines for the design of questions on race and
ethnicityare offered:

      Communicate clearly an instruction that allows, but does not require, multiple responses
       to the race question.

      Consider using an instruction to answer both the Hispanic or Latino origin question and
       the race question.

      For data collection efforts requiring detailed Hispanic or Latino origin or detailed race
       information, consider options to collect further information through write-in entries or
       follow-up questions asked by the interviewer.

      Take mode of administration carefully into account when designing questions and
       instructions.

      Provide definitions to the minimum race categories when possible.

      Adhere to the specific terminology as stated in the October 30, 1997, standards.

Developing and Testing Aggregate Reporting Forms

Implementing the revised standards will cause fundamental changes to the ways in which data on
race and Hispanic or Latino origin have previously been aggregated and reported. Therefore, a
second goal of this research is to provide guidance on the design of reporting forms that will be
used by administrative personnel to aggregate data on race and Hispanic or Latino origin for a
given population (e.g., reporting race and ethnicity for a school population).

Twenty cognitive interviews are planned for this phase of the research. Three different forms are


                                                 14
but not necessarily familiar with the revised standards. Fourteen interviews have been completed
thus far, 7 in cognitive laboratories and 7 on-site. Of the 14 respondents interviewed, 5 worked
for the Federal Government, 6 worked in private industry, 2 worked in local correctional
facilities, and I worked in a school.

For the laboratory testing, subjects were given 'dummy' records of applications that contained
multiple race responses as well as combined Hispanic or Latino origin and race questions. For
the on-site interviews, subjects referred to agency data.

None of the forms tested were completed accurately without interviewer intervention.
Regardless of the form tested or whether the testing was conducted in a laboratory or on-site, the
most common problem was the requirement to count and report race for individuals who are of
Hispanic or Latino origin. As an illustration, one subject stated "It's (the form) basically asking
how Hispanics were separated into groups of races. I think the part that confuses me is that our
Hispanics do not view themselves as another race. And so that is kind of what threw me off ..
it's asking for Hispanics who had marked 'White, ' but they don't. They would have checked
Hispanic." Discussions with subjects revealed that all but one worked for agencies that have
used the single question -- combined race and ethnicity format -- to collect data. Several
methodological problems also emerged and will be corrected prior to further testing. They are
discussed in detail in Appendix B, Section 2.

Even though there were many problems found in developing and testing aggregate forms, some
initial guidelines can be put forth at this time:

      If possible, allow for the reporting of every combination of multiple race responses.

      Provide definitions that assist in understanding the concepts of single race reports and
       multiple race reports as well as the distinction between ethnicity and race.

      Explain how the missing data should be reported.

      Professionally design the form and include clear instructions.

Development of Field Instructions and Training Procedures

Work to develop interviewer instructions and interviewer training procedures will begin in the
Spring of 1999. Plans include developing and testing different training modules and interviewer
instructions, depending on the mode of administration and the type of data collection. This work
will, in all likelihood, not address new issues or problems. However, since the new standards do
encompass several distinct changes, it seems timely to address in a more systematic way some
longstanding issues in the fielding of the questions, and ways that interviewers can be trained to
improve data quality. Specific procedures on how to ask the questions and, in some cases, how


                                                15
interviewer probes, definitions, and statements that can be used to answer respondent questions.

Schedule

Phase I was ongoing through 1998 and will be completed at the beginning of April 1999. Phase
II will begin in April 1999 and will be completed by the end of July 1999. A final report
encompassing both phases should be available by the end of September 1999.




                                               16

(Under development)




                                           17
        NEW STANDARDS

This part of the report describes options for tabulating data on race and ethnicity collected under
the new standards to meet various Federal needs for these data.

A. Decennial Census

The Census 2000 questionnaire will provide individuals the opportunity to self-report their racial
identity by selecting one or more races. For purposes of Census 2000 only, in an effort to
encourage response to this question, OMB has approved the use of a sixth category -- "Some
Other Race" -- in addition to the minimum five categories.

This discussion covers preliminary tabulations plans for the six categories of race and the two
categories of ethnicity ("Hispanic or Latino" and "Not Hispanic or Latino") and for possible
combinations of these racial and ethnic categories. It does not address tabulation plans for
detailed groups of American Indian and Alaska Native, Asian, or Native Hawaiian and Other
Pacific Islander populations for which information will be collected in Census 2000.
                          ,

For data from the Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal sites, table shells will be available on the Internet
through the Census Bureau's American FactFinder. The data user will be able to use the inquiry
system in the American FactFinder to obtain table shells filled with data for user-selected
geographic areas and for population universes defined by race and ethnicity down to the census
tract level. The amount of data on population characteristics available in table shells will be
roughly the same as in printed reports in 1990 for counties and for places of 10,000 or more
population.

Protection of Confidentiality in Data from Census 2000

To maintain confidentiality as required by law (Title 13, United States Code), the Census Bureau
uses a confidentiality edit to ensure that published data do not disclose information about specific
individuals, households, and housing units. The result is that a small amount of uncertainty is
introduced into some of the census data to prevent identification of specific individuals,
households, or households.

As with data from the 1990 census, a confidentiality edit will be implemented for data from
Census 2000 by selecting a sample of census households from internal census files and
interchanging their data with data from other households that have identical numbers of
household members, but that are in different locations within the same state. The net result of
this procedure is that the data user's ability to obtain census data is increased, particularly for
small geographic areas and small population groups.




                                                 18

The proposed approach reflects OMB's preliminary guidelines (See Part I, Section B) on
tabulations by race and ethnicity. The discussion of the approach includes data on both
population totals for racial and ethnic categories and on population characteristics (e.g., age and
sex) for racial and ethnic categories.

Before describing preliminary plans for tabulations by race and ethnicity, it is helpful to describe
both the maximum number of racial and/or ethnic categories for which data could be provided
and some of the other racial and/or ethnic categories for which data could be provided.

There are 63 potential single and multiple race categories, including 6 categories for those who
marked exactly one race and 57 categories for those who marked two or more races. These 57
categories of two or more races include the 15 possible combinations of two races (for example,
Asian and White), the 20 possible combinations of three races, the 15 possible combinations of
four races, the 6 possible combinations of five races, and the 1 possible combination of all six
races.

There are two ethnic categories (Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino). Thus there are
126 categories (63 x 2) in which the population could be classified by both race and ethnicity.

The 63 mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories of race may be collapsed down to 7
mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories by combining the 57 categories of two or more
races. These 7 categories are: White alone, Black or African American alone, American Indian
and Alaska Native alone, Asian alone, Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone, Some
other race alone, and Two or more races.

Alternative groupings for tabulations by race reflect OMB's preliminary guidelines to show "the
total selecting each particular race, whether alone or in combination." In combination literally
means "in combination with one or more other races." In this "all-inclusive" approach,
tabulations would be shown for each of six categories, which will overlap and will add to more
than the total population to the extent that individuals report more than one race. These six
categories are: White alone or in combination, Black or African American alone or in
combination, American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination, Asian alone or in.
combination, Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination, and Some
Other Race alone or in combination.

As in the case of the 63 racial categories, both tabulations by race of the 7 mutually exclusive and
exhaustive categories and tabulations by race alone or in combination could be classified by
ethnicity (Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino).

Because of concerns about the usefulness and reliability of data on population characteristics for
small populations, about issues with respect to confidentiality, and about providing data products


                                                19
in previous censuses) to present more detail by race and ethnicity for population totals than for
population characteristics. For example, Census 2000 data products might show a population
total for a specific racial or ethnic group (e.g., 50) in a small geographic area, but not show data
on characteristics such as household relationship, education, income, and tenure for this racial or
ethnic group.

Preliminary plans for tabulations by race and ethnicity for population totals and for population
characteristics are discussed in the following two sections. The amount of detail shown in
tabulations by race and ethnicity in data products from Census 2000 will vary with the purpose
and size of each product~ . Planned tabulations for population totals by race and ethnicity from
four data products are discussed: the Public Law 94-171 file (which is a IOO-percent data
product), the IOO-percent demographic profile, the 1OO-percent summary file, and IOO-percent
table shells. Planned tabulations for population characteristics by race and ethnicity are
discussed together for the lOO-percent and sample summary files and the IOO-percent and sample
table shells. (The 1DO-percent data products are based on data collected on all questionnaires. In
comparison, sample data products are based on data collected only on long-form questionnaires.)

As noted above, this discussion does not discuss tabulation plans for detailed groups of American
Indian and Alaska Native, Asian, or Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander populations. It
may be noted, however, that tabulations for these detailed categories will not be included on the
PL 94-171 file, but will be included in the other Census 2000 data products listed in the
preceding paragraph.

Population Totals: Preliminary Plans for Data by Race and Ethnicity from Census 2000

Public Law (PL) 94-171 Redistricting File. PL 94-171 requires that the Census Bureau work
closely with the "officers or public bodies having initial responsibility for the legislative
apportionment or districting of each state" to determine the specific tabulations needed from the
decennial census. Tabulations planned for this file are based on meetings and communications
with the Redistricting Task Force of the National Conference of State Legislatures and state-
appointed liaisons of the governors and legislatures. During this process, senior officials from
OMB, the Voting Rights Section of the Department of Justice, and the Census Bureau consulted
with the Task Force and state legislative officials.

The PL 94-171 file will include population totals down to the block level. The racial and ethnic
categories that the Census Bureau plans to include in the matrices (one-dimensional statistical
tables) on the PL 94-171 file are combined into one table outline and presented in Table 1. (The
PL 94-171 file also includes data on the population 18 years and over for each of these racial or
ethnic categories.)

From tabulations for the racial and ethnic categories shown in Table 1, it is possible also to
obtain tabulations by subtraction for the Hispanic or Latino population by race (total minus Not


                                                20
alone or in combination minus Asian alone).

The PL 94-171 file will be available on the Internet and on CD-ROM. A paper listing of data
from the PL 94-171 file, to be provided to officers or public bodies having initial responsibility
for the legislative apportionment or districting of each state, will include about one-half of the
tabulations shown above. The paper listing will not include tabulations for Race alone or in
combination, or for Race not alone or in combination.

100-Percent Demographic Profile. This profile is designed to provide for geographic areas
down to the census tract level an overview of 100-percent census data on a one-page table that
includes data on all population and housing topics for which data are collected on a 100-percent
basis: sex, age, race, Hispanic or Latino origin, household relationship, and housing occupancy
and tenure. Given the limited amount of space to show data on each topic, population totals by
race and ethnicity will be limited. Population totals will be shown for each of the major races
alone, for two or more races, and for each major race alone or in combination (as described
earlier), but will not be shown for the 57 specific categories of two or more races.

100-Percent Summary File. This file, which is the most detailed 100-percent data product
planned, will include some popUlation totals on race and ethnicity down to the block level and
additional population totals on race and ethnicity down only to the census tract level. The racial
and ethnic categories that the Census Bureau plans to include down to the block level in the
matrices on the 100-percent summary file are combined into one table outline and presented in
Table 2.

The additional categories that are included down only to the census tract level in the 100-percent
summary file are the 57 individual categories of two or more races crossed by the two ethnic
categories (Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino). These racial and ethnic categories
are combined into one table outline and presented in Table 3.

100-Percent Table Shells. Table shells represent a new data produ"ct for Census 2000. A table
shell is a one-page table outline with a fixed stub and boxhead (for example, showing popUlation
by age and sex). Table shells are supported by summary files in the same way that data in
various printed reports in 1990 were supported by summary tape files (STFs).

Population Characteristics: Preliminary Plans for Data by Race and Ethnicity from
Census 2000

100-Percent and Sample Summary Files and Table Shells. Plans for tabulations of population
characteristics by race and ethnicity from the 100-percent and sample summary tables and from
the 100-percent and sample table shells are discussed together here because the Census Bureau
plans to show population characteristics for the same list of racial and ethnic groups in all of
these data products.


                                                21
iterated (repeated) for each racial or ethnic category. This corresponds to the "B" matrices in
summary tape files (STFs) 2 and 4 in 1990 census data products in which the "B" matrices were
iterated for each of a list of racial and ethnic categories.

In the case of table shells, population characteristics would be available for each of the racial and
ethnic categories for which population characteristics are available on the summary files. The
user of table shells will be able to select from a list of topics (e.g., age and sex) and then select
the geographic area (e.g., state, county, place) and population universe (i.e., the racial or ethnic
category) to obtain the data desired. The scope of data available using table shells is limited to
data on summary files (in the same way that data in printed reports in 1990 were limited to data
on summary files). Table shells will present subsets of more detailed data from the summary
files in user-friendly formats (like tables in printed reports), and will show totals, subtotals, and
derived measures that are not included on the summary files.

The list of 27 racial and ethnic categories for which the Census Bureau plans to show population
characteristics in aggregated data products (as opposed to what is available from microdata files,
as discussed below) in Census 2000 is presented in Table 4. From tabulations for the list of
racial and ethnic categories shown in Table 4, it is possible also to obtain tabulations by
subtraction for the Hispanic or Latino population by race (total minus Not Hispanic or Latino),
for the population in a racial category in combination only (e.g., Asian alone or in combination
minus Asian alone), and for the complement to an all-inclusive group (e.g., total minus Asian
alone or in combination).

Micro data files. Tabulations on population characteristics by race and ethnicity described
above are limited to what is planned for aggregated data products. In addition, the Census
Bureau will produce 5-percent public-use microdata files (PUMS), as was done in 1990, which
will permit users to obtain tabulations for any racial or ethnic group for which data were
collected in the census. (This would include, for example, any of the 57 categories of more than
one race.) In 1990, in addition to the confidentiality edit described earlier, the PUMS files were
stripped of names and address, the order of records was rearranged on the file, and a minimum
population threshold of 100,000 was used.

In addition, and subject to the Census Bureau's strict confidentiality standards, the Census
Bureau plans to make available on the Internet through the American FactFinder, the microdata
files that underlie the 100-percent and sample summary files for Census 2000 so that data users
can create tabulations to their own specifications. These microdata files are the 100-percent
edited detail file (HEDF) and the sample edited detail file (SEDF). The full microdata files will
be made available to data users only in the form ofPUMS files, as described above.

If a data user wants data on population characteristics for a racial or ethnic group for which
characteristics are not available in the summary files or table shells and for a geographic area for
which a PUMSfile is not available, it will be possible -- again, subject to strict confidentiality


                                                 22
custom tabulation from the HEDF or the SEDF. For example, the data user will be able to obtain
population characteristics for one of the 57 categories of more than one race (e.g., White and
Asian). Because of the strict confidentiality standards, the quantity of data that can be obtained
will depend on several factors, including the geographic area, the size of the population universe
(e.g., the number of individuals who are Asian and White), and the extent of the characteristics
detail (number of data cells in a table showing population characteristics).




                                               23
                        in the PL 94-171 File Planned for Census 2000
           (See text regarding protection of confidentiality of data from Census 2000.
            "In combination" means "in combination with one or more other races")

                                                                                Not Hispanic
Race or ethnicity                                                                 or Latino

       Total
One race
  White
  Black or African American
  American Indian and Alaska Native
  Asian
  Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
  Some other race
Two or more races

Hispanic or Latino                                                                  (X)

White alone or in combination
Not White alone or in combination

Black or African American alone or in combination
Not Black or African American alone or in combination

American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination
Not American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination

Asian alone or in combination
Not Asian alone or in combination

Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination
Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination

Some other race alone or in combination
Not Some other race alone or in combination

(X) Not applicable.




                                               24
           Block Level in the 100-Percent Summary File Planned for Census 2000
           (See text regarding protection of confidentiality of data from Census 2000.
            "In combination" means "in combination with one or more other races")

                                                                     Not Hispanic          Hispanic
Race or ethnicity                                                   Total        or Latino          or Latino

         Total
One race
  White
  Black or African American
  American Indian and Alaska Native
  Asian
  Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
  Some other race
Two or more races

Hispanic or Latino                                                              (X)

White alone or in combination
  White alone
  White in combination only
Not White alone or in combination

Black or African American alone or in combination
   Black or African American alone
   Black or African American in combination only
Not Black or African American alone or in combination

American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination
  American Indian and Alaska Native alone
  American Indian and Alaska Native in combination only
Not American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination

Asian alone or in combination
   Asian alone
   Asian alone in combination only
Not Asian alone or in combination

Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination
  Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
  Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander in combination only
Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination

Some other race alone or in combination
  Some other race alone
  Some other race alone in combination only
Not Some other race alone or in combination

(X) Not applicable.




                                                        25
    Census Tract Level Only in the lOO-Percent Summary File Planned for Census 2000
          (See text regarding protection of confidentiality of data from Census 2000)


                                                                Not Hispanic    Hispanic
Race or ethnicity                                                or Latino     or Latino

      Two or more races
Two races (15 categories)
  White, and Black or African American
  White, and American Indian and Alaska Native
  White, and Asian
  White, and Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
  White, and Some other race
  Black or African American, and American Indian and Alaska Native
  Black or African American, and Asian
  Black or African American, and Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
  Black or African American, and Some other r(lce
  American Indian and Alaska Native, and Asian
  American Indian and Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
  American Indian and Alaska Native, and Some other race
  Asian, and Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
  Asian, and Some other race
  Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, and Some other race

Three races (20 categories)
   White, Black or African American, and American Indian and Alaska Native
   (continues with 19 other categories of three races)
Four races (15 categories)
   White, Black or African American, American Indian and Alaska Native, and Asian
   (continues with 14 other categories of four races)
Five races (6 categories)
   White, Black or African American, American Indian and Alaska Native, Asian, and
     Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
   (continues with 5 other categories of five races)
Six races (1 category)
   White, Black or African American, American Indian and Alaska Native, Asian,
     Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, and Some other race




                                            26
                       Files and Table Shells Planned for Census 2000
          (See text regarding protection of confidentiality of data from Census 2000.
           "In combination" means "in combination with one or more other races")

Race or ethnicity

White alone
Black or African American alone
American Indian and Alaska Native alone
Asian alone
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
Some other race alone
Two or more races

White alone or in combination
Black or African American alone or in combination
American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination
Asian alone or in combination
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination
Some other race alone or in combination

Hispanic or Latino

White alone, not Hispanic or Latino
Black or African American alone, not Hispanic or Latino
American Indian and Alaska Native alone, not Hispanic or Latino
Asian alone, not Hispanic or Latino
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone, not Hispanic or Latino
Some other race alone, not Hispanic or Latino
Two or more races, not Hispanic or Latino

White alone or in combination, not Hispanic or Latino
Black or African American alone or in combination, not Hispanic or Latino
American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination, not Hispanic or Latino
Asian alone or in combination, not Hispanic or Latino
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination, not Hispanic or Latino
Some other race alone or in combination, not Hispanic or Latino




                                              27

This section applies to the presentation of data collected under the new standards through surveys
and administrative records. Although these proposed tabulation guidelines are particularly
applicable in the near tenn, they also provide a framework that can be expanded in the future as it
becomes possible to present more data on multiple race responses. In general, data should be
presented in as much detail as possible (thereby satisfying the criteria congruence with
respondent's choice), subject to satisfying agency criteria for statistical reliability and
confidentiality (satisfying the criteria meet confidentiality and reliability standards.) Thus, data
on multiple race responses should be presented in as much detail as possible given sample sizes
and sample designs. In addition, to the extent possible, Federal agencies should report data using
standardized categories to facilitate comparisons across subject-matter areas and data systems,
thus satisfying the criteria range of applicability. statistical defensibility, and understandaQility
and communicability.

The decision to revise the policy for the collection of data on race reflects the increasing
complexity of our Nation's demographics. As a result, the ways that data on race are tabulated
and analyzed also will become more complex. The proposed guidelines in this section reflect
this complexity. The tabulation strategies illustrated here have simple structures, hence they
satisfy the criteria ease of use and skill required. Examples of tabulation strategies are provided
and illustrated using data collected as part of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS),
conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Since 1976, the NHIS has allowed respondents to report more than one race, but has
also asked respondents to indicate the single race with whic~ they most closely identified. The
data on race from this survey have been retabulated for illustrative purposes to be as comparable
as possible to the categories in the 1997 standards. (Unless otherwise noted, the tables in this
section are based on data combined from three years ofNHIS data. The resulting larger sample
size improves the reliability of the estimates and enables more categories to be shown.
However, even when combining three years of data on race, counts for some categories cannot be
shown due to small sample sizes.)

As noted above, agencies are to provide as much detail as possible while adhering to their own
standards for data quality and confidentiality. Under a typical data quality standard, a table cell
cannot be published if its relative standard error (or other measure of dispersion) is larger than
some value specified by the agency. In such a situation, the data cell is not published separately,
but the cell value is included in subtotals.

Under a confidentiality standard, a cell value must be suppressed (withheld from publication) if
knowledge of the cell value might enable someone to gain knowledge about one of the
respondents contributing data to the cell. If a cell is suppressed to preserve confidentiality, other
cells must also be suppressed so the cell value cannot be derived by subtraction. This is called
"complementary suppression." (The reader may wish to refer to Statistical Policy Working Paper
22: Report on Statistical Disclosure Limitation Methodology for more infonnation concerning


                                                 28

Agencies do not use a common set of standards for evaluating confidentiality and quality issues.
 To illustrate the application of agency standards that affect the cells that can be shown in tables
only a data quality standard is used here. A table cell has been arbitrarily classified as failing the
data quality standard if the sample size is smaller than 0.2 percent of the population for all but
Tabie C. To illustrate a table that might result from a smaller sample survey, in Table C a table
cell is classified as failing the data quality standard if the sample size is smaller than 2.0 percent
of the population. These admittedly arbitrary criteria are used to illustrate what might be
published from a large sample survey, and to illustrate the distributions that may result from the
implementation of the new standards. Note that since the only data being displayed in this report
are population counts, it is possible to show more data cells than would be the case if the table
presented attributes (income, education, health outcomes, etc.) of these groups. Individual
survey systems will make decisions as to what data can be shown based on the characteristics of
each system and the confidentiality and reliability guidelines established for that data system.

Two types ofresponses cannot be tabulated into the categories identified in the standard. The
first is when no information on race was provided. In this report the heading "Race Not
Reported" is used for this type of response. This response type can be further subdivided
according to the reason that no information was obtained -- refusal, don't know, and not
ascertained. The second is when a response was received that does not match any ofthe standard
racial categories. Such responses are tabulated using the heading "Other Race." A third heading,
"Not Tabulated Above" is used to include either single or more than one race categories that are
specified in the standard, but are not large enough to be published separately. For illustrative
purposes, these three headings are used in the tables in this section. Not all statistical
publications will use this model. Strategies for tabulating these kinds of responses will follow
agency policy and the analytic objectives of the report.

A remaining issue to be addressed by Federal agencies is that the rules used in editing and .
imputing respondents' data on race and ethnicity will affect the racial distributions derived from
Federal surveys and administrative records. As noted elsewhere in this report, rules for editing
and imputation of data on race and ethnicity should be an area of further research and
collaboration for Federal agencies, to ensure that the data reported are as comparable as possible.

Since the objective of this section is to illustrate different tabulation strategies, categories with
frequencies too small to be shown will not be treated the same way in all of the tables. In some
tables, the category is not shown at all and the cell value is included under "Not Tabulated
Above"; in other tables, the category is retained in order to clarify the structure of the table but
data are replaced by a "Q" to illustrate that they have been withheld from publication for data
quality considerations. When the data are replaced by "Q," a footnote is used to describe the
reason the data are not shown.

In all tables in this section, the "More Than One Race" heading includes respondents who


                                                  29
collection systems obtain information on a more detailed set of responses. When surveys collect
more detailed information on race than the minimum standard, some per~ons may indicate that
they identify with more than one ofthe more detailed groups. For example, within the Asian
group, respondents might indicate that they are of Chinese and Japanese heritage. These
respondents would not be included in the "More Than One Race" heading but would be included
in the total for Asians. If sample size permits, an additional Asian sub-category could be used to
indicate the number of individuals who marked more than one of the detailed Asian categories.

Table A illustrates the fundamental goal of the new standard and provides a detailed set of
categories for tabulating data on race. Table A displays the five single categories, and also
includes more detail on the Asian subgroups; it also displays a number of multiple-response
categories. Based on NHIS data, the most frequently marked race combinations are American
Indian and White, Asian and White, and Black and White. In other situations, the categories
used to present data would be a function of the overall sample size and the regional
characteristics of the population where the sample is selected. Whatever detailed categories are
presented, they should support recreating the minimum basic set of racial categories.

Table B shows a category for each of the five single racial groups in the new standards as well as
a "More Than One Race" heading. It is an example of a table that can be used when sample sizes
do not permit the presentation of greater detail. In this table, data are not shown separately for
Native Hawaiians and Other Pacific Islanders, one of the single race categories in the collection
standard, since they comprise less than 0.2 percent of the U.S. population. However, since this is
the only category that cannot be shown both the number and the percent for the Native Hawaiian
and Other Pacific Islander group are readily obtained by subtraction. This is an example of a: data
cell that is being suppressed for data quality concerns. If it were suppressed for confidentiality
concerns, another cell would also have to be suppressed to prevent the cell value from being
obtained by subtraction.

As was the case under the 1977 standard, it will often not be possible to tabulate data using all of
the categories used to collect the information. Even with three years of data from the NHIS,
Tables A and B could not present data for Native Hawaiians and Other Pacific Islanders because
they total less than 0.2 percent of the population. If data for one or more of the five minimum
racial categories fail the requirements for data quality or confidentiality, standard agency
products should include them in an aggregation such as "Not Tabulated Above," rather than
combining them with categories that are publishable alone. For example, if the data for Native
Hawaiians and Other Pacific Islanders cannot be published separately, these data should not be
combined with data in the Asian category (except when such combinations are needed for
comparability with data collected under the old standard). Instead, the data on Native Hawaiians
and Other Pacific Islanders should be included in the total and either omitted from the detailed
tabulations completely, replaced with a symbol and footnoted as in Tables A and B, or included
in a separate heading for all groups not specifically tabulated (i.e., under the Not Tabulated
Above heading.) This last approach is illustrated in Table C. For this table, only one year's


                                                30
the population. This is intended to provide an illustration of what might happen when total
sample sizes are smaller and data from fewer categories can be reliably presented. Because the
Asian, Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, More Than One Race, and Race Not
Reported respondents each comprise less than 2 percent of the population, these categories were
not listed separately in Table C but were included both in the Total and the Not Tabulated Above
rows.

In order to display as much data as possible as well as to reflect the complexity of reporting on
race, some additional categories may be tabulated and reported along with the basic tabulations.
These categories may not be mutually exclusive but would combine categories to create useful
analytic distinctions. For example, a heading could be created for persons reporting that they are
Asian whether as a single race or in combination with any other race(s). Parallel categories could
be created for any of the five single racial categories. The reSUlting counts are called "all
inclusive." They form distributions for each individual racial group; that is, the sum of the
percent ofrespondents who mark a particular group alone, the percent who mark that group and
at least one other group, and the percent who did not mark that group is 100 percent. The all
inclusive distributions may provide information on population groups that might not have
sufficient size in the sample to be included in basic tabulations. Table D provides a suggested
tabulation strategy. Three years ofNHIS data are used for this Table, and the 0.2 percent cutoff
is used to determine whether data can be shown. The all inclusive NHOPI category does not
meet the criteria for inclusion (0.2 percent of the population) and is not shown.

Note that when the tabulation involves counts or percentages, the analyst can subtract the count
or percentage for each single race from the all inclusive count or percentage to obtain the count
of individuals reporting each race in combination with any other race(s). For example, the Black
or African American all inclusive count minus the Black or African American single race count
will yield a count for those reporting Black or African American in combination with one or
more other races. This would not be possible if the tabulation included summary statistics (mean,
median, or percent) for attributes such as income, education or health outcomes.

Tables A - D describe tabulation alternatives for data on race collected using the new standards.
The new standards also affect the collection and reporting of data on Hispanic or Latino origin.
The new standards call for asking a question on Hispanic or Latino origin followed by a question
on race but also allows under limited circumstances for a single, combined question where
Hispanic or Latino origin is included in a list along with the five standard racial categories. In
the combined question, respondents are also instructed to "mark one or more." In either case,
Hispanic origin may be reported alone or in combination with one or more races. As was the
case for the tabulation of data on race, data on Hispanic or Latino ethnicity can also be presented
for specific subgroups (e.g., Mexican, Cuban, and Puerto Rican) as shown in Table E. The
tabulation headings used will be a function of the overall sample size and the population
composition where the sample is selected.
Even when separate questions are used to collect data on Hispanic or Latino origin and race,


                                                31
preferred. Whether data are collected using the single question or the two question format,
education and health data are frequently reported with racial data for Hispanics or Latinos as a
separate group along with racial data for non-Hispanics or non-Latinos. Data collected under the
new standards using either format will support the analysis of data on both Hispanics or Latinos
and non-Hispanics or non-Latinos by race (Table F). For example, Table F shows that among
Hispanics or Latinos, the sample size permits the presentation of data for Blacks, Whites, those
of "other" races, and those selecting more than one race. Tabulations which incorporate the
Hispanic or Latino subgroup information can be developed by expanding Table F. Since
respondents are free to select one or more categories in the combined format, data collected from
a surveyor administrative reporting where a combined format is used can also be tabulated using
Tables E or F.




                                               32


 Race                                                          N                        %

 Total                                                     328317                   100.00

         AlAN                                                2616                      .79

         Asian                                               9718                     3.26

                 Asian Indian                                1287                      .42

                 Chinese                                     2245                      .75

                 Filipino                                    1965                      .63

                 Japanese                                     920                      .34

                 Korean                                       966                      .33

                 Vietnamese                                  1102                      .38

         Black                                              45259                    12.32

         NHOPI                                                 Q                        Q

         Other                                               9734                     2.22

         White                                             250054                    78.24

         More than one race                                  5435                     1.62

                 AIAN/White                                  2618                      .81

                 Asian/White                                  741                      .24

                 Black/White                                  849                      .23

         Race Not Reported                                   5237                     1.45

Q = Does not meet statistical criteria for reliability  0.2 percent of population).
AIAN=American Indian and Alaska Native
NHOPI = Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander (for example, Hawaiian, Guamanian, or Samoan)

SOURCE: NCHS/CDC National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995, Unpnblished Tabulations




                                                      33


 Race                                                             N'                    %

 Total                                                        328317                100.00

         AlAN                                                   2616                   .79

         Asian                                                  9718                  3.26

         Black                                                 45259                 12.32

         NHOPI                                                    Q                     Q
         Other                                                  9734                  2.22

         White                                                250054                 78.24

         More than one race                                     5435                  1.62

         Race Not Reported                                      5237                  1.45

Q = Does not meet statistical criteria for reliability  0.2 percent of population).
AIAN=American Indian and Alaska Native
NHOPI = Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander (for example, Hawaiian, Guamanian, or Samoan)

SOURCE: NCHS/CDC National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995, Unpublished Tabulations.




                                                         34


 Race                                                        N                            %

 Total                                                   102467                    100.00

         Asian                                            2894                          3.32

         Black                                            13468                     12.22

         Other                                            5127                          2.64

         White                                           76441                      77.94

         NTA                                              4537                          3.88

Note: Statistical criteria for reliability  2 percent of population).
AIAN=American Indian and Alaska Native
NHOPI = Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander (for example, Hawaiian, Guamanian, or Samoan)
NTA=Not Tabulated Above (Includes Race Not Reported, AlAN, NHOPI, and all responses that indicated More
Than One Race)

SOURCE: NCHS/CDC National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995, Unpublished Tabulations




                                                    35


 Race                                                        N                    %

 Total                                                 328317                 100.00

         AlAN                                            2616                    .79

         Asian                                           9718                   3.26

                 Asian Indian                            1287                    .42

                 Chinese                                 2245                    .75

                 Filipino                                1965                    .63

                 Japanese                                   920                  .34

                 Korean                                     966                  .33

                 Vietnamese                              1102                    .38

         Black                                          45259                  12.32

         NHOPI                                               Q                    Q

         Other                                           9734                   2.22

         White                                        250054                   78.24

         More than one race                              5435                   1.62

                 AlAN/White                              2618                    .81

                 Asian/White                                741                  .24

                 Black/White                                849                  .23

         Race Not Reported                               5237                   1.45



 AlAN all inclusive                                      5724                   1.74

        AlAN and other race( s)                          3108                    .95

 Asian all inclusive                                    10710                   3.57

        Asian and other race( s)                            992                  .31

 Black all inclusive                                    46731                  12.72

        Black and other race(s)                          1472                    .40

 White all inclusive                                  254688                   79.65

        White and other race(s)                          4634                   1.41
Q = Does not meet statistical criteria for reliability  0.2 percent of population).
AIAN=American Indian and Alaska Native
NHOP[ = Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander (for example, Hawaiian, Guamanian, or Samoan)

SOURCE: NCHS/CDC National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995, Unpublished Tabulations




                                                       36


 Ethnicity                                                          N              %

 Total                                                          328317         100.00

 Hispanic/Latino                                                41585            9.78

         Cuban                                                    2151            .54

         Mexican                                                26042            5.86

         Puerto Rican                                            4809            1.25

 Not Hispanic/Latino                                          283735            89.36

 Ethnicity not reported                                           2997            .85

Note: Statistical criteria for reliability  0.2 percent ofpopulation).

SOURCE: NCHS/CDC National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995, Unpublished Tabulations




                                                           37


 Ethnicity/Race                                                N                            %

 Total                                                   328317                        100.00

 Hispanic or Latino                                         41585                        9.78

         AlAN                                                  Q                            Q

         Asian                                                 Q                            Q

         Black                                                950                          .24

         NHOPI                                                 Q                            Q

         Other                                               8348                        1.80

         White                                              28742                        6.88

         More than one race                                   985                          .26

         Race Not Reported                                   1816                          .42

 Not Hispanic or Latino                                  283735                         89.36

         AlAN                                                2160                          .69

         Asian                                               9291                        3.14

                 Asian Indian                                1263                          .42

                 Chinese                                     2208                          .74

                 Filipino                                    1828                          .60

                 Japanese                                     903                          .33

                 Korean                                       944                          .32

                 Vietnamese                                  1082                          .47

         Black                                              45259                       11.99

         NHOPI                                                 Q                            Q

         Other                                               1303                          .41

         White                                           219923                         70.96

         More than one race                                  4377                         1.35

                 AlAN/White                                  2270                          .72

                 Asian/White                                  613                          .20

                 Black/White                                  677                          .19




                                                       38

 Ethnicity Not Reported                                  2997                          .85

      White                                              1389                          .41

      Race Not Reported                                   977                          .29

Q = Does not meet statistical criteria for reliability  0.2 percent ofpopulation).
AIAN=American Indian and Alaska Native
NHOPI = Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander (for example, Hawaiian, Guamanian, or Samoan)

SOURCE: NCHS/CDC National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995, Unpublished Tabulations




                                                    39
        STANDARDS

This part of the report discusses some important uses of data under the new standards, reflecting
in large measure work that is ongoing.

A. Redistricting

One of the first official statutory uses of data on race and ethnicity collected under the new
standards will be for legislative redistricting following Census 2000. The new data fonnat
should not require substantial changes in the way redistricting will be conducted.

How the 1990 Census Racial and Ethnic Data Were Used

The 1990 census Public Law 94-171 ("redistricting count") tabulations (which were released to
the states for redistricting purposes) reported data down to the block level for the total population
and the voting age population (ages 18 years and older) for four racial groups (American Indian
and Alaska Native, Asian and Pacific Islander, Black, and White) and a residual category
("other" race). Data on these racial groups were also cross-tabulated by Hispanic origin.
Categories were mutually exclusive (each person was counted only once), and the categories
added to the total population reported for a geographic region.

States and p~litical subdivisions that are covered under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act are
required to demonstrate, to the United States Attorney General or to a Federal district court in the
District of Columbia, that their redistricting plans will not reduce the voting strength of their
minority citizens and that the plans do not have a racially discriminatory purpose. All states and
political subdivisions, however, are prohibited by Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act from using
redistricting plans that have the effect of diluting their resident's voting strength on account of
race. The U.S. Department of Justice or private citizens may file lawsuits to enforce these laws.

In order to comply with those Federal laws, slates and their political subdivisions used the
redistricting count tabulations to assess the racial and ethnic compositions and distributions of
their residents as they drew their redistricting plans. The data were used to identify areas in
which racial and ethnic minorities were residentially segregated, in order, for example, to avoid
splintering those areas among several districts. The data also were used in some areas to
detem1ine whether voting patterns were racially polarized. After the redistricting process was
complete, courts would rely on the redistricting count data, together with other evidence, to
decide any legal challenge that was filed against the redistricting plan.

How the 2000 Census Data Can Be Used for Redistricting in 2001

In Census 2000 the major changes to the reporting of data on race and ethnicity are (1) the
instruction to "mark one or more" racial categories and (2) the splitting of the "Asian or Pacific


                                                40
Islander." Hispanic or Latino origin will be ascertained in a separate question, as in 1990 census.

For the purposes of the 2000 Census Dress Rehearsal, the Census Bureau will provide
tabulations of the number of persons who identified with only one of the five individual racial
categories or with the residual category ("single race" counts), plus tabulations of the total
number of persons who identified with each of the five individual racial categories either alone
(e.g., White only) or in combination with any other categories (e.g., White plus any other racial
category), referred to as "all inclusive" counts. Both the "single race" counts and the "all
inclusive" counts will be cross-tabulated by Hispanic or Latino origin. It should be noted that the
"all inclusive" counts will add to more than 100 percent of the population since a person's
response will be counted in all of the racial categories selected. (See Appendix C for more
information on Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal prototype redistricting data.)

It is not expected that provision of the redistricting count data in the new format will lead to
significant changes in redistricting practices or decisions. The new data categories will not affect
the total population counts used for the apportionment of Congress, or for compliance with one-
person, one-vote requirements.

Once the Dress Rehearsal data are released and analyzed, there will be more information
available about the practical effects of the new standards. It can be expected that the more that
the single-count and all-inclusive-count populations share the same residential patterns, the less
likely it will be that jurisdictions' redistricting choices will affect those populations differently.
Research also has indicated that, at least nationwide, there is unlikely to be a significant
difference between the "single count" Black population and the "all-inclusive" Black population.
 In addition, jurisdictions with substantial Hispanic or Latino populations will have a separate
count of all persons identifying themselves as Hispanic or Latino, because ethnicity is collected
in a separate question.

Alternatives to the single-race/all-inclusive approach to redistricting data are under consideration.
 The U. S. Department of Justice has not yet reached a decision on the question of whether
advantages would result from the use of one of the allocation methods described in Appendix D
for voting rights issues. While allocation does not conform with the criterion that data uses
should reflect "congruence with respondent's choice," it would facilitate comparisons with the
1990 census data. (Allocation methods assign an individual's multiple race response to a single
race category.)

Some have suggested that an allocation approach would have the advantage of giving
redistricting authorities, the states and their political subdivisions, one number to use in making
their redistricting choices. Others have suggested that instead it would require states to use and
consider three data sets: single-race counts, all-inclusive counts, and the allocated counts. If a
decision is made to use an allocation approach, the Department of Justice would discuss with the
Census Bureau the technical feasibility of including matrices using the chosen allocation method


                                                  41
Bureau has met its legal deadline of April 1, 2001, for producing the data specified in PL 94-171.
The working group would appreciate feedback from users on these issues.




                                               42

One of the Federal Government's most significant uses of data on race and ethnicity is in its
efforts to ensure that every individual has an equal opportunity for employment. Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, prohibits discrimination in employment based upon race,
color, sex, religion, and national origin. Executive Order No. 11246, as amended, similarly
prohibits discrimination in employment by government contractors. Executive Order 11246 also
requires contractors covered by its provisions to ensure affirmatively that they do not
discriminate against their employees and applicants for employment.

Responsibility for equal employment opportunity is shared among a number of Federal agencies
including: the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), the Department of Justice,
the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) in the Department of Labor, the
Office of Personnel Management, and the Department of Education. Title VII is enforced by the
EEOC against private employers and by the Department of Justice against state and local
government employers. Executive Order 11246 is enforced by the OFCCP.

Representatives from these agencies have been meeting to determine how best to implement the
1997 standards for reporting of data on race and ethnicity. This section describes some of the
data related activities carried out by the agencies, how the data were previously collected and
used, the changes the agencies have agreed upon, and some of the alternatives that are currently
under discussion.

As the new standards are implemented, agencies whose primary mission is civil rights
enforcement will face particularly complex challenges. The EEO agencies will continue to
consider the burden imposed on those responding to data requests as they make various
tabulation, aggregation, and other decisions. All participants in these important decisions are
reminded that it is not the intent of the 1997 standards to diminish the availability and quality of
information collected and available for Federal civil rights enforcement and related purposes.

Data Needs and Uses

There are two basic theories of employment discrimination: disparate treatment and disparate
impact. Disparate treatment can either affect individuals because of their protected
characteristics, or in pattern and practice cases, it can affect all persons in the group who have an
employment relationship with that employer.

Individual disparate treatment cases rely primarily on evidence of how an individual was treated
in comparison to other similarly situated individuals. In some instances, statistical evidence of
disparities in treatment between similarly situated individuals can suggest that some individuals
were subject to employment discrimination because of their protected class status.

In disparate impact cases, statistics on the number of available and qualified minority workers


                                                 43
agencies compare statistics on the racial breakdown of an employer's workforce to the racial
compositiof1 of the available qualified labor pool. These analyses also consider statistics on the
jobholder's employment-related characteristics, such as educational attainment or occupational
experience, compared with similar data on those persons qualified for, and interested in, the at-
issue jobs. This analysis is the first step in determining whether there is reason to believe that the
employer's selection procedures improperly excluded individuals on the basis of their race,
ethnicity, or gender. After this analysis, the employer may be asked to show that its selection
procedures for the position(s) in question are job-related and consistent with business necessity.
The workforce data often come from the employer's annual reports filed with Federal agencies
(see "Data on Employer's Workforce" below), and the benchmark data come from a special file
covering EEO-related data drawn from the most recent decennial census (see "The Benchmark
File" below.) In some disparate impact cases, the selection or de-selection rates of different
groups within the employer's workforce are compared without reference to external benchmarks.

Data on Employer's Work Force. Data on an employer's workforce are collected annually on
the Employer Information Reports (EEO-l and EEO-4 surveys) covering private and state or
local government employment, respectively, and on the EEO-5 and IPEDS (formerly EEO-6)
surveys of employment in elementary/secondary and higher education, respectively. The current
EEO forms collect general information about the employer and its workforce. Employers
provide counts of employees within nine job categories by gender and five racial/ethnic
categories (White--not of Hispanic origin, Black--not of Hispanic origin, Hispanic, Asian or
Pacific Islander, and American Indian or Alaskan Native) for each facility.

The Benchmark File. In 1990, a special EEO file based on the decennial census data was
produced by the Census Bureau, in accordance with specifications provided by the EEO
agencies. It included five matrices of counts for various geographic entities including the United
States, States, metropolitan areas, counties, and places of 50,000 or more in population. The five
tables presented various cross-tabulations of the number of people in each labor force category by
gender, EEO racial/ethnic categories (six categories, the five noted above plus "other, not of
Hispanic origin"), occupation (512 categories), industry (98 categories), educational attainment
(six categories), earnings (9 categories) or age (seven categories).

Summary of Data Use for EEO Analysis. The basic inquiry requires identification of the
relevant labor force for each case, followed by a detemlination as to whether the employer's
work force differs to a statistically significant extent from the benchmark comparison group. The
relevant labor force depends on the employment action at issue. For entry-level positions that
require few skills or experience, the benchmark may be some lesser skilled subset of the civilian
labor force in the geographic area in which the employer operates. Depending on the
qualifications required for a position, the relevant labor force may be further delineated, for
example, by age, education, or occupation. For promotions, the relevant labor pool typically will
be the employees eligible for the promotion. The basic inquiry is always the same: is the
number/percent of, for example, Blacks, found in the employer's work force significantly


                                                 44
of qualified and interested Blacks in the labor force. The comparative information on the labor
force generally comes from the benchmark file from the most recent decennial census.

The wide range of factors, e.g. qualifications, availability, location, affecting employment
decisions by both employers and individual workers influences whether the employer's work
force will replicate the availability of individuals at any level of labor force aggregation. Absent
discriminatory practices, it is also unlikely that significant disparities should exist between the
proportion of qualified minority or female workers in positions throughout the employer's work
force and the available and qualified labor pool.

Statistical analysis measures the disparity between the actual participation of minorities or
women in the employer's workforce and their expected representatiori to determine whether any
disparity can be attributed to chance. The analysis is based on an assumption that available and
qualified minorities and women are recruited, apply and are selected on a nondiscriminatory
basis by the employer.

Following statistical practice, if the likelihood of chance differences is less than 0.05 (the five
percent probability significance level), regulatory agencies and the courts generally accept the
alternative inference that unlawful factors may have influenced employer's decision making. In
litigation, this inference can constitute a prima facie showing of discrimination, which then
requires the employer to explain its practices or face liability. In several cases, the Supreme
Court accepted the use of a statistic approximating the five percent probability level, a two-three
standard deviation difference, but emphasized that a range of techniques can be used to reflect
the fact patterns of each case. See Hazelwood School District v. United States, 433 U.S. 299,
311 n. 17 (1977), and Watson v. Ft. Worth Bank & Trust, 487 U.S. 977,995 n.3 (1988).

The following example illustrates the statistical comparison of the racial profile of an employer~s
workforce and the racial profile of similar job-holders in that employer's labor market area. In
this example, the ABC Corporation, a large producer of computer software in City X, employs
350 programmers. Eleven, or 3.2 percent of these programmers are Black.

Using the decennial census benchmark data, it is found that Blacks constitute 3.72 percent of
available programmers working in City X. Using that benchmark proportion, the expected
number of Black programmers in a company in City X with 350 programmers is found to be 13
(3.72 percent times 350). The difference between the number of Black programmers in ABC
Corporation and the number expected is minus 2 (II minus 13). In "standard deviation l " terms,
the disparity (-2/350) is -.57 standard deviations. Such a difference, while negative, is not
statistically significant (to be statistically significant, it would need to be less than -1.96). Thus,
the number of Black computer programmers employed by the ABC Corporation is not suggestive

      1 The standard deviation is computed as sqrt(p(l-p )/n), where p is the fraction from the
benchmark file, and n is the number of employees in the company.


                                                  45

Changes Needed to EEO Forms and Instructions to Meet the New Standards

Employer Record-keeping. The instructions accompanying the current EEO forms state that
the race and ethnicity of an employer's work force may be obtained either by "visual surveys of
the work force, or from post-employment records." The instructions state explicitly that eliciting
information from the employee via direct inquiry is not encouraged. With the implementation of
the 1997 standards, this guidance will change. Self-identification will be the preferred method of
 collecting data on race and ethnicity from employees. Employers will also be encouraged to use
the two-question format with Hispanic ethnicity first, and to allow those employees who wish to
do so to select more than one race. Employers will be asked to maintain this information in their
data files. It is currently thought that employers will not be required to resurvey current staff,
although some will likely do so. If employers do not resurvey current staff, the data available to
be collected on the EEO forms will only slowly become comparable to the benchmark data
reported in Census 2000.

  The OFCCP regulations do not specify how Federal contractors (employers) should gather the
  data necessary to complete the work force analysis or the utilization analysis for Affirmative
. Action Programs. The implementing regulations, however, require the filing of an EEO-l report
  and, by implication, the data reported in the work force utilization analysis must be consistent
  with the EEO-l reporting requirements.

Planned Changes to the EEO Forms. To be consistent with the new standards, the following
changes to the EEO forms are planned:

(1)      Add a separate category "Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander" to EEO forms and
       . instructions, and replace the category "Asian or Pacific Islander" with "Asian."

(2)     Make the following changes in terminology:
        a.    The term "Eskimo or Aleut" replaced by "Alaska Native,"
        b.    The term "Black" replaced by "Black or African-American," and
        c.    The term "Hispanic" replaced by "Hispanic or Latino."

(3)     Capture Hispanic or Latino ethnicity in a separate category or question.

These planned changes do not incorporate a change of instructions to "mark one or more races."
It has not yet been determined how best to revise the forms that collect aggregations of data about
the employer's workforce to account for individuals who report more than one race. Efforts to
date to design and test an aggregate reporting form are discussed earlier in this report.
Alternatives for using the data for EEO purposes (that might lead to changes in the EEO forms)
are described below.
Ensuring Common Approaches in EEO Reporting


                                                46
definitions for the racial and ethnic categories used to enforce EEO laws and regulations.
Clearly, whatever system is adopted, the enforcement agencies will need to consider the complex
issues related to implementing the new standards, bridging to EEO enforcement conducted using
data collected under the old standard, and continuing to conduct the important business of
ensuring equal employment opportunity during the transition years.

Because of the complexities in collecting and using the data reported under the new standards for
civil rights enforcement purposes, the EEO agencies are still in the process of considering the
best way to analyze these data. A number of alternative approaches are currently under review.
Three alternatives are briefly described in the following sections. Each alternative would require
the preparation of a suitable decennial census benchmark file. Readers are invited to comment
on these alternatives and to suggest additional ideas and options.

Tabulation Alternative 1: Using a Bridging Method. The EEO agencies have considered the
methods discussed in Appendix D of this report, and have concluded that one of the allocation
methods proposed for bridging would be useful during the transition period. The EEO agencies
considered the allocation method that assigns an individual who selected more than one race to
the largest of the nonwhite groups he/she marked as a viable alternative for EEO purposes. The
largest nonwhite group may be ascertained from the racial composition of the population for the
relevant geography.

This allocation method can be used to assign responses from individuals who reported more than
one race to single race categories. With this method, no change would be needed in the statistical
methods currently used by the EEO agencies, and for a few years, employers who begin
collecting data under the new standards would use this allocation method to report on their EEO
forms the racial data for new hires who select more than one race. Employers could also be
asked to record on their EEO forms the total number of individuals in their files who selected
more than one race. This would provide the EEO agencies with a measure of the changing racial
characteristics in work force data and would indicate when the final alternative should be
implemented.

This method represents an interim solution that would precede full implementation of the new
standards. Following careful evaluation of Census 2000 data, decisions could be made that phase
in the new standards in an analytically appropriate manner.

Tabulation Alternative 2: The Lower and Upper Boundary Approach. Under the new
standards, employees will be able to identify themselves as members of more than one racial
group. As a result, some individuals who were identified as members of only one group, for
example, Black, under the previous standards, may now identify as members of more than one
group, fot example, Black and White, under the new standards. Thus, when data are reported it
will be possible to determine two counts for each racial group. The lower count, or lower


                                               47
marked only the Black category. The larger count, or upper boundary, adds to the lower
boundary those individuals who identify with the given racial category and one or more other
racial categories. Thus, the upper boundary Black count includes everyone who marked Black
either alone or in combination with one or more other racial categories. The remainder of the
population consists of those individuals who did not identify as Black.

As a practical matter, in most geographic locations the upper and lower boundaries will not
currently be substantially different for purposes of employment data because few adults are
expected to report themselves as members of more than one racial group. This assessment is
based upon data provided in Appendix D of this report, and documentation of the National
Content Survey and the Race and Ethnic Targeted Test conducted by the Census Bureau. Data
from some geographic regions are expected to reflect larger numbers and percentages of
respondents reporting themselves as belonging to more than one racial group.

An interagency group is working on possible modifications to survey fonns, such as the EEO-l,
that collect aggregated data on the characteristics of many individuals for a single organization,
to capture infonnation needed for the upper/lower boundary approach. The tests conducted to
date are described in detail in Appendix B of this report.

Tabulation Alternative 3: Collect Micro Data from Employers. An alternative approach to
using an aggregate reporting form, similar to the EEO-l, is to ask respondents to provide a micro
data file containing one record (without identifiers) for each employee. The micro record would
include the employee's race or races, ethnicity, gender, and occupational category. This
approach might be simpler for employers, and would provide agencies the maximum amount of
flexibility in using the information. Implementation of this approach appears to be a longer-tenn
solution. The EEO agencies would need to work with respondents in designing and
implementing the reporting format and method, and they would need to acquire the relevant
software and hardware to process the infonnation.

Illustrations of Comparisons Under Alternative Tabulation Approaches

To illustrate the alternatives, consider the example described earlier in this section. Recall that
the ABC Corporation, a large producer of computer software in City X, employs 350
programmers. It is assumed that the ABC Corporation started maintaining self-reported data on
race (allowing employees to select one or more races) for their new hires more than a year ago.
As a result, their internal files contain a mixture of data. collected under the old and new
standards. For their 250 programmers hired before the new standards were implemented,
information on race in internal files is recorded as one of the four racial groups. These files
indicate that 8, or 3.2 percent of the long-tenn programming staff members, are Black. For the
100 recent employees, race is recorded as one or more of the five groups. According to these
records, one of the new programmers has reported that he is Black, one has reported that she is
Black and White, and one has reported that he is Black and American Indian. None of the other


                                                48
combination with another race.

In benchmark data based on Census 2000, the following percentages of programmers in City X
have reported that they are Black: 3.3 percent have reported the single race Black, .23 percent
have reported that they are Black and White, and: 11 percent have reported that they are Black
and American Indian. A total of.42 percent have reported that they are Black and some other
race or races.

Comparisons Under Alternative 1: Allocation. Because there are more Blacks in City X than
any racial group other than White, under the allocation method known as "largest non-white
group", ABC Corporation would count the 8 long term Black employees and the 3 new
employees who selected Black alone or in combination with another race, and report that they
have 11 Black programmers (approximately 3.2 percent of their programmers). Similarly the
benchmark proportions would count in the Black category everyone who marked Black either
alone or with other race(s). This would count a total of 3.72 percent of the available
programmers as Black.

With these transformations, the counts and percentages are identical to the example provided
earlier and the analysis would lead to identical results. If a different racial group were used in the
analysis, or a different allocation method were used, results would not necessarily be identical to
the earlier example.

Comparisons Under Alternative 2: Upper/ Lower Bound. For the upper/ lower bound
method, ABC Corporation would report that they have 9 programmers (2.6 percent) in the single
race (or lower boundary) Black category, and 2 employees (.6 percent) who have reported Black
in combination with another race. Thus, the "al! inclusive" (or upper boundary) count for Black
programmers is 11 (3.2 percent).

The benchmark file has 3.3 percent of the programmers in the single race (or lower boundary)
Black category, and .42 percent o[the programmers who report as Black and at least one other
race, yielding a total of 3.72 percent of programmers in the "all inclusive" (or upper boundary)
category.

Given past patterns of discrimination, one would most likely argue that the "all inclusive"
category would be most appropriate to use. In this example, the resulting counts and percentages
are identical to the example provided earlier, and to the l,'esults of the allocation method.

The analysis could be conducted using the data for the single race category -- or lower bound, as
follows. Using the benchmark proportion 3.2 percent, the expected number of Black
programmers in a company with 350 programmers in City X is found to be 11 (approximately 3.2
percent of 350). The difference between the number of single race Black programmers in ABC
Corporation and the number expected is minus 2 (9 minus 11). In "standard deviation" terms the


                                                 49
                                                                                  i
significant, it would need to be less than -1.96). Thus, the number of Black computer
programmers employed by the ABC Corporation is not suggestive of an under representation of
Black computer programmers in the employer's work force. In this case, the analysis using the
lower bound leads to the same conclusion as the analysis using the upper bound, though the
numbers are somewhat different.

Note that if a different allocation method was used with tabulation alternative 1, or if one of the
other racial groups were used in the example, the upper bound ("all inclusive" count) would not
be identical to the count based on the tabulation allocation method. The reader is referred to
Appendix D for a detailed discussion of the impact of the various allocation methods.

Comparison Alternative 3: Full Data Reporting. With this method, ABC Corporation will
compile a micro data listing of employee characteristics to submit for EEO purposes. The table
below illustrates the contents of such a micro data file. This example is intended to illustrate the
complete recording of sex, race, and ethnicity. It makes use of the single job category
"programmer," and therefore cannot be viewed as a real prototype for EEO reporting. In this
table X denotes "yes," zero denotes "no," and blank indicates that the data are not available.

The first record (employee number 1) is a Black, non-Hispanic male programmer. His data are
recorded in the new format: he was hired after the new reporting system was adopted and had an
opportunity to self-select one or more races. He chose to report himself as Black. On the other
hand, employee 4 has been an employee for some time, and his data are in the old format. He is
also a Black male programmer, but the information provided in this record is what was recorded
in the company files prior to conversion to the new reporting system.

If this type of information became available from all employers, the EEO agencies could use any
of the tests described above, or they would be able to transition to applying the EEO
methodology to any groups that become large enough to monitor for EEO, including those that
involve more than one race.




                                                 50

Employee      Sex     Hispanic      Race      Programmer          New Fonnat
Number                              W B I A H

   1            M        0           0 XOO 0            X         X
   2            F        X           X X 0 0 0          X         X
   3            M        0           oX X 0 0           X                X
   4            M        0           OX 0 0             X         0
   5.           F        0           oX 0 0             X         0
   6            F        0           oX 0 0             X         0
   7            M        0           oX 0 0             X         0
   8            F        0            oX 0 0            X         0
   9            M        X           oX 0 0             X         0
  10            M        0           oX 0 0             X         0
                                                                    ,
  11            M        0           oX 0 0             X         0
  12            F        X           XO 0 0 0           X         X
  13

W=White
B=Black
I=American Indian and Alaska Native
A=Asian
H=Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander


Comparisons using Tabulation Alternative 3 would require benchmark data from the Census
Bureau for a subset of the 63 different unique combinations of reporting of race. Decisions
concerning the size of the groups for which tabulations are needed would need to be made by the
EEO agencies, infonned by the data from the decennial census.




                                               51

 The revisions to the standards for collecting and presenting Federal data on race and ethnicity
 pose many challenges to the Census Bureau's Intercensal Population Estimates Program.
 Because the population estimates are data driven, changes to the program to provide new racial
 categories will depend upon the availability of data from a variety of sources. Although changes
 are possible, it will require discussions with data providers and data users, as well as research and
 analysis of data collected under the new standards, before the Census Bureau can identify the
 racial categories that can be used in the Intercensal Population Estimates Program.

 Following some background discussion, this section presents a description of the Intercensal
 Population Estimates Program, its methodology, and its major uses, and then turns to some ofthe
 major issues that must be addressed.

 Background

 In 1977, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) issued Race and Ethnic Standards for
 Federal Statistics and Administrative Reporting. Because the intercensal population estimates
 are limited in their detail by the availability of administrative data, it was not until 1993 that the
 Intercensal Population Estimates Program could modify its racial categories to follow fully the
 1977 standards by providing data for the population in the four major racial categories -- White;
 Black; Asian or Pacific Islander; and American Indian, Eskimo and Aleut. To comply with the
 1977 standards, the Intercensal Population Estimates Program developed estimates by race
 separately for the population by Hispanic origin (Hispanic, non-Hispanic).

 The 1997 standards present many challenges with two in particular posing the greatest challenge.
  One'is that respondents to Federal data collections, including Census 2000, surveys, and vital
 statistics registrations, will be allowed to select one or more races. The other is that the Asian or
 Pacific Islander aggregate category has been split into two. categories -- one called "Asian" and
 the other called "Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander."

  Because the intercensal population estimates serve several diverse purposes, exploring the
, possible outcomes of the estimates process and examining the implications of the new standards
  are important. The intercensal population estimates are used as controls for many Federal
  surveys, as denominators for important Federal statistics, and as indicators for important program
  and policy decisions.

 Because the issues raised by the 1997 standards are complicated and diverse, it will take
 considerable research and experimentation before the Intercensal Population Estimates Program
 can produce population estimates outputs that fully follow the new standards. 'The next sections
 describe the program and discuss the major issues that must be addressed in changing program
 outputs.

The Intercensal Population Estimates Program, under Title 13, develops and releases annual
estimates of the total population and its demographic characteristics. For the Nation, states, and
counties, these characteristics include annual estimates by:

        Age --                single years of age (age 0 to age 99) and 100+;
        Sex --                Male/Female
        Race--         White; Black; Asian and Pacific Islander; and American Indian, Eskimo,
                              and Aleut;
        Hispanic origin --    Hispanic/non-Hispanic

The Intercensal Population Estimates Program currently provides estimates of the total
population offunctioning governmental units (cities, incorporated places, and minor civil
divisions). The Census Bureau is considering expansion of the program to include smaller and
more diverse units of geography (such as School Districts), as well as the development of
demographic characteristics for functioning governmental units and other smaller geographic
units.

How Are the Population Estimates Used?

The population estimates are used in the intercensal period for funding allocations, as controls
for Census Bureau and other Federal surveys, as denominators for vital statistics and other
demographic events, and as planning tools for government and private programs.

Funding Allocations. Federal programs totaling $180 billion use these annual population
estimates to make important program decisions and to distribute these funds.

Survey Controls. The population estimates are used as control totals for the Current Population
Survey (CPS), the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), the new American
Community Survey (ACS), other Federal surveys, as well as many private surveys.

Most Federal surveys use national level population estimates by age, sex, race, and Hispanic
origin as controls for weighting survey data. The ACS currently uses county level population
estimates by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin as controls for weighting survey data.

Denominators for Demographic Events. The National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS)
currently uses the national, state, and county population estimates by age, sex, race, and Hispanic
origin as denominators to create birth and death rates and to calculate life tables by race and sex.
In addition to the use by NCHS, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
frequently relies upon the estimates of population at various geographic levels as denominators
for various health related and disease incidence rates. The National Cancer Institute (NCI) uses
the county population estimates by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin as denominators for the


                                                53

Planning Tools. The intercensal population estimates are frequently used as planning tools and
as barometers to measure an area's growth and change since the last decennial census. In making
important policy decisions, local planners frequently cite the overall population level and the
demographic characteristics products of the lntercensal Population Estimates Program.

Methodology for Developing Intercensal Population Estimates

The Intercensal Population Estimates Program develops its population estimates by age, sex,
race, and Hispanic origin using the demographically recognized cohort-component technique. In
this technique, each component of population change -- births, deaths, international migration,
and internal migration --is estimated separately by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin. Various
administrative records provide infonnation needed to develop these components of population
change. The estimates process begins with the most recent decennial census results and
combines the estimated components of population change to develop the intercensal population
estimates.

The 1990 Census Base Population. Although the enumeration ofthe resident popUlation in the
1990 census, without adjustment for net undercoverage, was adopted as a standard for the
estimates, changes were made in the distribution of the population by age and race. These
modifications were made to bring the definition of age and race into confonnity with definitions
used for data from other sources, such as vital statistics. (See Comparability Issues below for a
complete discussion of the modification of the 1990 Decennial Census.)

Birth and Death Components. In brief, NCHS provides annual counts and distributions of
births and deaths by age, race, sex, and Hispanic origin by county to the Census Bureau in a
specially developed individual record file of the birth and death events. These individual records
contain the detailed race and Hispanic classifications available from the birth and death
certificates collected by NCHS.

International Migration Component. The international net migration components are based on
a variety of administrative sources and analytic estimates. The Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS) supplies data on legal immigrants. The Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR)
supplies data on persons admitted to the United States as refugees. Both sources supply data on
country of birth. The Census Bureau estimates the distribution by race and Hispanic origin from
the country-of-birth tallies, using data from the 1990 Census on the foreign-born population who
entered the United States from 1985 to 1990.

The other components of international migration such as emigration and undocumented
migration are developed using a combination of basic demographic modeling techniques. By
examining data from other administrative records in combination with an analysis of the
decennial census, the Census Bureau models the level and demographic characteristics of these


                                                54

Internal Migration Component. The data on internal migration are developed using a basic
administrative records method. This method relies on annual extracts of tax returns provided by
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). In this approach, using the Social Security Number (SSN)
on the return, The Census Bureau can match the tax returns for two years and obtain state of
residence for the two periods. By comparing the state of residence at the two points in time,
annual measures of migration can be developed for states.

Until recently, the Census Bureau had only developed the national population estimates by age,
race, sex, and Hispanic origin and the estimates of the total population for states and counties.
During the current decade, the Census Bureau started to develop a set of state and county
population estimates by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin.

These state population estimates are developed using the basic cohort component technique
outlined above. Since the standard tax return provides no demographic characteristics of the tax
filer, the Census Bureau must further modify the basic administrative records method to estimate
internal migration by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin. To obtain demographic characteristics,
the Bureau has relied on the annual extract of tax returns provided by the IRS, and a 20 percent
sample of information on the Social Security Administration Application File (NUMIDENT).
This NUMIDENT file includes SSN, month and year of birth, race, sex, and six characters of the
last name for each SSN holder in the sample file.

The extract of the NUMIDENT file has been merged with the tax returns file by SSN to derive
demographic characteristics of IRS filers. Because the Census Bureau was able to receive only a
20% sample of this basic NUMIDENT file, the Bureau appended the demographic characteristics
of the primary filer to only the same 20 percent sample of tax returns. Besides demographic
characteristics ofthe primary filers, the model requires demographic characteristics of those
persons claimed as exemptions on the tax return. The rules for assigning demographic
characteristics to dependents are straightforward and rely on basic familial and demographic
relationships.

Because until this year, the NUMIDENT File was restricted to a 20 percent sample, the Census
Bureau could not use the merged tax file and SSA data to develop county popUlation estimates by
age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin. To develop the current sets of county popUlation estimates
by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin, a ratio approach is employed. This approach combines the
full set of age, race, sex, and Hispanic origin detail for the county in 1990 with the newly
developed state population estimates by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin and the estimates of
the total population of the county. With the delivery of the 100 percent NUMIDENT file to the
Census Bureau, work on employing the cohort component technique to develop the county
estimates by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin is anticipated.




                                                55

The intercensal population estimates are "data driven." As noted above, the decennial census, the
National Center for Health Statistics, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and the Social
Security Administration are all important sources for developing intercensal population
estimates. Using the current methodology, estimates cannot be produced without the availability
of these data.

Decennial Census Data. The Census 2000 will mark the first time that decennial population
data are available using the new OMB standards for collecting racial data. The Census Bureau is
developing the approaches and timetables for tabulating these data from the Census 2000.

Birth and Death Data. The National Vital Statistics System is the basis for the Nation's official
statistics on births and deaths (including infant deaths). The data are provided through vital
registration systems maintained and operated by the individual states and territories where the
original certificates are filed. While the legal authority for vital registration rests with the states
and territories, the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) is required to produce national
vital statistics by collecting data from the vital records of all the states. The NCHS cooperates
with the states in developing the standard forms for data collection as well as standard procedures
for data preparation and processing in order to promote a uniform national data base. The NCHS
shares in the costs incurred by the states through contractual agreements with each state. Under
this arrangement, NCHS obtains and publishes vital statistics based on all births and deaths (e.g.,
3,891,494 and 2,314,690, respectively, in 1996) occurring in the United States.

Implementation of the 1997 standards on vital records will require changes in data collection and
processing systems at all levels of goverrunent and very likely will take at least several years to
accomplish throughout the United States. In addition to revising computer systems at the state
and Federal levels, the electronic software that is used in hospitals to record and report over 90
percent of all births in the United States needs to be converted. Most importantly, the procedures
used to collect birth and death data in hospitals and funeral homes will need to be revised and the
appropriate staff need to be trained.

It can be anticipated that not all registration areas will implement the 1997 standards at the same
time or with complete coverage and compliance at the start. For example, some states may
implement the revised race question on birth and death certificates in the year 2000 in order to be
compatible with Census 2000, while others may prefer or need to wait until the next revisions of
the U.S. Standard Certificates of Birth and Death are implemented in 2002. During 1998 and
1999, the NCHS is sponsoring a committee of state vital statistics officials and representatives of
the relevant professions in a series of meetings to evaluate the entire content and format of the
current Standard Certificates. The committee's goal is to submit certificate revisions to the
Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services, in July 1999 for clearance by the
Department. Implementation by the registration areas is expected to occur in January 2002.
Some states have indicated a desire to make changes in the race and ethnicity items at the same


                                                 56

 International Migration Components. As discussed above, the international migration
 components are based on a variety of administrative sources and analytic estimates. The
 Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) supplies data on legal immigrants. The Office of
 Refugee Resettlement (ORR) supplies data on persons admitted to the United States as refugees .
. Both sources supply data on country of birth.

To develop data on the race and Hispanic origin of the entering immigrants, the Census Bureau
combines the information on country of birth from the INS files with information from the most
recent decennial census. Because the INS and other data sources on international migration do
not code race or Hispanic origin, no change in these sources is anticipated. The Census Bureau
will need to examine the results of Census 2000 and develop new algorithms to accommodate the
revised categories for data on race.

Internal Migration Components. To develop the internal migration component, the Census
Bureau currently relies upon the annual extract of tax returns provided by the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS), and a 20 percent sample of information on the Social Security Administration
Application File (NUMIDENT). Under an agreement between the Census Bureau and the Social
Security Administration, the Census Bureau has recently gained access to a full 100 percent
NUMIDENT file. This opens additional opportunities for developing subnational population
estimates by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin.

This component also presents the biggest obstacle to modifying categories for data on race in the
intercensal population estimates process. Under the Social Security system, data on race are
provided as part of the Social Security card application process. For the oldest among the
population currently covered in the NUMIDENT files, the last application date could refer to the
beginning of the Social Security system.

Until 1980, the Social Security Administration application system provided three racial
categories -- White, Black, and Other. Beginning in 1980, the SSA modified the racial
categories on the SSA application form to include five categories -- (l) Asian, Asian-American
or Pacific Islander; (2) Hispanic; (3) Black (non-Hispanic); (4) North American Indian or
Alaskan Native; (5) White (non-Hispanic). Although SSA modified the racial categories
application card, people who already had an SSA card did not have to resubmit their data on race.
 Thus, pre-1980 entries on the SSA file have information for three racial categories (White,
Black, and Other), while entries after 1980 have information for five racial categories. The
application for a Social Security card needs to be updated to reflect the 1997 standards.

Another change to the Social Security application procedure has presented challenges to the use
of data on race. Beginning in the late 1980's, the Social Security Administration introduced the
"enumeration at birth program." Under this program, parents could request a Social Security
Number for their newborn children with the birth registration process. Because the birth


                                               57
newborn onto the SSA file. While information on race is available for the birth mother and
father on the basic birth registration certificate, this data are not made available to the Social
Security Administration and is not on the basic NUMIDENT file received by the Census Bureau.

Comparability Issues

Even the availability of the required source data does not ensure the capability to produce
reasonable and accurate population estimates. Production of population estimates by the major
demographic characteristics depends upon the availability of comparable data across the various
datasources. While comparability issues with respect to race reporting are not new, the
increased complexities of the new racial categories are likely to exacerbate the problems.

The issues about comparability in race reporting are present in the current set ofintercensal
population estimates. Data from the 1990 census on race posed several of these problems.

Although the enumeration of the resident population in the 1990 census, without adjustment for
net under coverage, was adopted as a standard for the estimates, changes were made to that
distribution of the population by age and race. These modifications were made to bring the
definition of age and race into conformity with definitions used for data from other sources, such
as vital statistics.

For age, the aim was to correct biases in census age tabulations that resulted from displacement
of age reporting from the reference date of the census. In 1990 census publications, age is based
on respondents' direct reports of age at last birthday, with some editing for age misstatement.
This definition proved inadequate for postcensal estimates however, as many respondents
reported their age (even if correctly) at the time of completion of the census form or interview by
an enumerator, either of which could have occurred several months after the April 1 reference
date. As a result, age was slightly biased upward. Modification was based on a respecification
of age, for most individual respondents, according to their year of birth. Age was derived from
year of birth by allocating date of birth to the first quarter and last three quarters of each year,
subtracting year of birth from 1990 for those born before April 1, and from 1989 for those born
after April 1. The allocation was based on an historical series of registered births by month.

For race, the objective of the modification was to conform to the definition ofrace specified in
the 1977 standards. In the 1990 census, a substantial number of people (roughly 9.8 million) did
not specify a racial group that could be classified in any of the categories on the census form:
White; Black; American Indian, Eskimo, or Aleut; Asian or Pacific Islander. A large majority of
these people were of Hispanic origin (based on their response to a separate, Hispanic origin
question on the form), and many wrote in their Hispanic origin, or Hispanic origin type (for
example, Mexican or Puerto Rican) as their race. People of unspecified race were allocated to
one of the four tabulated racial groups (White; Black; American Indian, Eskimo or Aleut; and
Asian or Pacific Islander) based on their response to the Hispanic origin question. These four


                                                58
in other administrative sources than are the original census tabulations.

Census 2000 wi II pose challenges about reporting of race. The expanded number of categories
and the possibility for reporting more than one race translates into over 60 possibilities. The
large number of categories that are likely to have few responses will present challenges to the
Intercensal Population Estimates Program.

When combining across data sets and agencies, the problems of comparability in reporting of
race become more severe. Clearly, the added complexity of reporting more than one race will
add to this problem, particularly as different reporting situations (such as the census or the birth
and death certificates) engender differential tendencies to report more than one race. Differences
in allocation and editing procedures will almost certainly exacerbate the problem as exemplified
by the problem of using data from different data universes in the calculation of rates.

Future Direction

The process of developing a set of intercensal population estimates consistent with the 1997
standards will not be an easy one. Until data are available, making any commitments about the
probable set of products is impossible. The Census Bureau realizes, however, that many data
users need to know its plans in order to make their own program decisions.

To begin this process, the Census Bureau is fonning a technical interagency group of key data
providers and key data users to address many of the major issues. Members of this group will
provide input on: (I) the feasibility of using one consistent set of categories on race across all
geographic levels; (2) the feasibility of using population size as the only criteria for detennining
which categories by race will hav~ separate population estimates; (3) the minimum cell size
below which population estimates will not be produced; (4) the continued development of
population estimates by mutually exclusive categories on race; and (5) the use of consistent
methodologies for the different categories by race in the population estimates program. This
technical group will also examine issues related to data allocation and editing -- important
factors related to the data consistency issues.

Although detailed data on race from Cerisus 2000 will not be available until mid 2001, during the
next few months, the interagency group can address and reach consensus on most of the issues
outlined above. Through these discussions with the data providers and data users, the Intercensal
Population Estimates Program can begin to fonn some tentative plans. Although it is too soon to
speculate on any outcomes, it is likely that the Intercensal Population Estimates Program will
need to be flexible. During the coming decade, as more data become available using the 1997
standards, it is likely that the Census Bureau will continue the expansion of the population
estimates program to include additional categories by race.




                                                 59

(Under Development)




                                 60

This part of the report provides a summary of the Bridge Report: Tabulation Options for Trend
Analysis, which is contained in Appendix D.

A. Introduction

Agencies whose data are used to display time trends in economic, social, and health
characteristics by racial and ethnic groups may need to consider bridging methods to assist users
in understanding the data collected under the new standard. For some period of time, referred to
as the bridge period, agencies may display historical data along with two estimates for the present
time period. The first, a tabulation of the data collected under the new standard (see Part III B),
and the second, a "bridging estimate" or prediction of how the responses would have been
collected and coded under the old standard. Once the bridge period is over, the bridge estimates
will no longer be needed.

It should not be assumed that bridging is useful or required in every situation. Agencies should
carefully consider whether they need bridging estimates. Bridging estimates may not be needed
if agencies can tolerate a "break" in their data series or if comparison to another data series
provides users with enough information about the change. Ifbridging estimates are not used,
however, agencies should footnote the first occurrence of data collected under the new standard.

There are at least two purposes of bridge estimates: (1) to help users understand the relationship
between the old and new data series (as noted above); and (2) to provide consistent numerators
and denominators for the transition period, before all data are available in the new format. If
there is a need for bridging, agencies should carefully evaluate alternative methods. The work
presented in Appendix D, and summarized below, is intended to help inform agencies about the
statistical characteristics of selected bridging methods.

Agencies are encouraged to plan and conduct methodological research that will lead to more
informed decisions concerning bridging methods and their uses. Such methodological research
has long been used to quantify changes in data collection procedures. For example, when
methods for coding industry, occupation, or diseases are updated, it is common practice to code
data using both sets of coding rules to determine the nature and extent of the changes introduced
by the change in procedures.

The analyses presented in Appendix D make use of survey data in which the same respondent
provided racial information in response to both a question structured under the old standard, and
in response to questions similar to those that might be structured under the new standard. These
are examples of methodological approaches that can be adopted by agencies, if necessary. In
particular, since 1976, the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) has added a follow-up
question for those reporting more than one racial identity, asking them to select the one that they
feel best describes them. This information is directly used in some of the most promising bridge


                                                61
race and ethnicity, even just once after the implementation of the new standards, would provide
valuable survey-specific information for bridging to the past. As agencies conduct such
experiments, the results may assist other agencies in understanding the changes associated with
transitioning to the new standard.

The results discussed here and in Appendix D represent the work of a group of statistical and
policy analysts drawn from Federal statistical agencies that use and produce data on race and
ethnicity. They have spent the past year considering these tabulation issues and conducting
research to develop tabulation guidelines for constructing "bridges" between racial data collected
under the new standards and racial data collected under the old standards. The report sets forth
criteria by which different bridging methods should be evaluated and describes the different
methods that have been considered thus far. The results of the research conducted on several
methods for creating bridges are also presented.

This part of the report discusses different options for tabulating racial data in order to create
bridges from data collected under the 1997 standards, which have five racial categories and
permit the reporting of more than one race, back to the data collected under the previous
standards, which identified four racial categories. An "Other" category appears in much of the
analysis, because it is included in the decennial census and some other surveys.

All of these methods (and the research on them reported here) involve the use of individual-level
records. Analysis is limited to data collected using the separate questions for race and Hispanic
origin. Under the new standards, when reporting is based on self-identification, the two-question
format is to be used; even in the case of observer identification, this is the preferred format. It is
expected that some users will bridge to a distribution created using the combined format for the
question on race and ethnicity. Thus, bridging both to the old racial distribution arising from the
use of two questions and one based on a combined, single question are analyzed. At this time,
the analysis of bridging to the combined distribution has not been completed, but those results
will be included in the report when they become available. Based on the research, the strengths
and weaknesses of each tabulation method are discussed. Until all the analysis has been
completed, however, recommendations will not be made.

B. Methods for Bridging

The goal of developing bridging methodology for data on race is to identify a statistical model
that will take individuals' responses to the new questions on race and classify those responses as
closely as possible to the responses we hypothesize they would have given using the old single
race categories. Such a task will be relatively easy or be more difficult depending on how an
individual identifies himself or herself under the new standards. For bridging purposes,
individuals with only a single racial background are likely to identify as they did before, and no
statistical model is needed for bridging. However, those with a mixed racial heritage who were
previously required to identify only one part of their background may, under the new standards,


                                                 62
racial group, some model will be necessary to translate those multiple responses into the one,
single response we hypothesize that the individual most likely would have reported under the old
standards.

Framework. Several different methods have been identified for creating a single race
distribution from data including mUltiple race responses. These methods vary in both the
assumptions that are made and the procedures that are followed. Before describing the particular
methods examined in this report, it is useful to describe some of their major underlying
characteristics.                                .

One major distinction among the methods is whether an individual's responses are assigned to a
single racial category (termed whole assignment) or to multiple categories (termed fractional
assignment). Whole assignment can be based on a set of deterministic rules or based on some
probabilistic distribution. For example, a deterministic rule might assign all White and American
Indian responses into the American Indian category, while a probabilistic rule might randomly
assign 60 percent of the White and American Indian responses into the American Indian
category, and 40 percent into the White category. In the above example, it is unlikely that all
individuals identifying as White and American Indian under the new standards would have
previously identified as American Indian, so the deterministic rule will result in
misclassifications for all those people who had previously identified as White. With a
probabilistic rule, an individual's responses are randomly assigned to either the American Indian
category or the White category (such as with 60 percent and 40 percent probabilities,
respectively, based on previously collected data). However, even if the overall probabilities
matched exactly the aggregate distribution under the old standards, there is no guarantee that the
40 percent who were categorized as White would have classified themselves that way. In fact, in
the worst case, all 40 percent who were classified as White would actually have identified as
American Indian under the old standards, and a corresponding percentage ofthose categorized as
American Indian would have identified as White.

When fractional assignment is used, multiple race responses are categorized into more than one
category where each category receives a fraction of a count, and the sum of the fractions equals
one. In the above examples of whole assignment, a person's responses were placed into one and
only one category, in an attempt to mimic the past. An alternative is to use a deterministic rule to
assign some fraction of the multiple race responses to each of the racial categories identified. For
example, a mUltiple response of White and American Indian might count as "one-half' in the
tabulations for American Indians and "one-half' in the tabulations for Whites. These fractions,
like the probabilities in the earlier example, could be varied for different combinations of
multiple races to attempt to reflect how often people might identify with one group compared
with another.

Bridge Tabulation Methods. All of the bridge tabulation methods focus on the assignment of
the responses from individuals who identify with more than one racial group. Responses from


                                                63
have been the same under the old standards. The response "Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander"
is assigned to the old racial category of "Asian or Pacific Islander." The specific methods for
assigning multiple race responses into single race categories are Deterministic Whole
Assignment, Deterministic Fractional Assignment, and Probabilistic Whole Assignment.

Two sets of results for each of the following tabulation methods are produced. The first set
ignores the use of any auxiliary information other than that needed to carry out the particular
tabulation method. The other set of results for each method uses the one piece of information
that is certain to be common to all data collections done following the new standards, that is,
ethnicity. Thus, whether or not an individual is Hispanic is taken into account when a tabulation
method is used.                                                                       .

(1) Deterministic whole assignment. These methods use fixed, deterministic rules for assigning
multiple responses back to one and only one of the racial categories from the old standards. Four
alternatives are examined. The first (Smallest Group) assigns responses that include White and
another group to the other group, but responses with two or more racial groups other than White
are assigned into the group with the fewest number of individuals identifying that group as a
single race. The second alternative (Largest Group Other Than White) assigns responses that
include White with some other racial group, to the other group, but responses with two or more
racial groups other than White are assigned into the group with the highest single-race count.
The third alternative (Largest Group) assigns responses with two or more racial groups into the
group with the largest number of individuals as a single race. In this latter case, any combination
with White is assigned to the White category, and combinations that do not include White are
assigned to the group with the largest single-race count. The fourth alternative (Plurality) assigns
responses based on data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). The NHIS has
permitted respondents to select more than one race for a number of years, with only the first two
responses captured. However, respondents reporting more than one race were given a follow-up
question asking them to select the one race with which they most closely identify (called Main
Race here). For these respondents, the proportion choosing each of the two possibilities as their
main race was calculated. All responses in a particular multiple-race category using the Plurality
method are assigned to the group with the highest proportion of responses on the follow-up
question about main race.

(2) Deterministic fractional assignment. These methods use fixed, deterministic rules for
fractional weighting of multiple-race responses, that is, assigning a fraction to each one of the
individual racial categories that are identified. These fractions must sum to 1. Two alternatives
are examined. The first (Deterministic Equal Fractions) assigns each of the multiple responses in
equal fractions to each racial group identified. Thus, responses with two racial groups are
assigned half to each group; those with three groups are assigned one-third to each, etc. The
second alternative (Deterministic NHIS Fractions) assigns responses by fractions to each racial
group identified, with the fractions drawn from empirical results from the NHIS (as described
above).


                                                64
multiple race responses back to one and only one ofthe previous racial categories. Two
alternatives are examined. These parallel the. two alternatives discussed under Deterministic
Fractional Assignment, except that, for a given set of fractions, the response is assigned to only
one racial category. The fractions specify the probabilities used to select a particular category.
The first alternative uses equal selection probabilities. The second uses the NHIS fractions
where possible, and equal fractions when no information is available from NHIS. Probabilistic
Whole Assignment will yield nearly, on average, the same population counts as Deterministic
Fractional Assignment. Only the results from Deterministic Fractional Assignment are
presented in this report. In practice, there would be a difference between Deterministic
Fractional Assignment and Probabilistic Whole Assignment when computing variances for
tabulated estimates, and the two methods will yield relatively small differences in distributions
for respondent characteristics. In general, Probabilistic Whole Assignment would yield a higher
estimated variance than the Deterministic Fractional approach, with the variances for both
methods underestimating the true variance. Probabilistic methods which incorporate a "Multiple'
Imputation" statistical technique would result in an unbiased estimate of variance, but at the price
of being more difficult to implement (See Rubin 1987.).

(4) All Inclusive. A final tabulation method considered is termed the "All Inclusive" method.
Under this method all responses are used. Responses are assigned to each of the categories that
an individual selects. The sum of the categories totals more than 100 percent.

C. Methods of Evaluation

Data Sources

National Health Interview Survey. The NHIS is a continuing nationwide sample survey
designed to measure the health status of residents of the United States (Benson and Marano,
1995; Massey et a!., 1989). The analysis here uses data from an analytic file that contains three
years ofNHIS data (1993,1994, and 1995). For each of these years there were about 45,000
households interviewed, resulting in slightly more than 100,000 individuals per year. The total
sample for the bridge analysis is 323,080 (5237 respondents did not provide data on race).

Since 1976, the NHIS has allowed respondents to choose more than one racial category. As the
respondent is handed a card with numbered racial categories, the interviewer asks, "What is the
number of the group or groups that represent your race". If a respondent selects more than one
category, the interviewer then asks, "Which of those groups would you say best describes your
race?"

Although the listed racial groups have changed over time, for 1993 to 1995, the. card shown to
respondents included 16 separate racial categories (white, black, American Indian, Aleut,
Eskimo, Chinese, Filipino, Hawaiian, Korean, Vietnamese, Japanese, Asian Indian, Samoan,
Guamanian, and other Asian and Pacific Islander). Although not on the flashcard, respondents


                                                65
the four previous racial categories: White, Black, American Indian or Alaskan Native (AlAN),
and Asian or Pacific Islander (API), plus Other.

For this analysis, a variable called Detailed Race was created from responses to the first question,
which allowed identification' with more than one racial group. This information is not included
on public use data files of the NHIS. However, on internal files, the first two race groups
mentioned are recorded for each observation. Even if a respondent selected more than two
groups, only two were recorded on the intermediate file. From the two recorded racial responses,
Detailed Race was coded into five single race groups (White, Black, AlAN, API, Other) and 11
multiple race groups (WhitelBlack, White/ AlAN, White/API, White/Other, Black!AlAN,
Black!API, Black!Other, AlAN/API, AlAN/Other, and APVOther). For most analyses, multiple
race combinations that had insufficient numbers were aggregated into the category "Other
Combinations." Individuals who had two racial groups recorded for Detailed Race but a third
group recorded for the "group that-best describes race" were coded into "Other Combinations."

The Main Race variable, used as a reference point representing the racial distribution under the
old standards, is primarily derived from Detailed Race and the responses to the second question,
which asks the respondent for the group that best describes hislher race (Benson and Marano,
1995). For respondents who selected one Detailed Race group, Main Race is the same as
Detailed Race. For respondents who selected more than one racial group, Main Race is the one
group reported as best describing their race. Some respondents who had chosen more than one
race for the Detailed Race question responded as "Multiple race" or "Other" for the Main Race
question. For this analysis, these responses were combined into the "Other" category.
Categories for Main Race were White, Black, AlAN, API, and Other.

May 1995 Supplement on Race and Ethnicity to the Current Population Survey (CPS).
The May 1995 CPS Supplement was one in a series of studies conducted for the Federal
agencies' review of the standards for data on race and ethnicity. The Supplement was designed
to address the following issues: (1) the effect of having a "multiracial" race category among the
list of races; (2) the effect of adding "Hispanic" to the list of racial categories; and (3) the
preferences for alternative names for racial and ethnic categories (e.g., African-American for
Black, and Latino for Hispanic). The Supplement was organized into four panels representing a
two-by-two experimental design for studying the first and second issues outlined above. Each
panel was given to one-fourth of the sample, or about 15,000 households (30,000 individuals).
All respondents in a household received the same set of questions; household members 15 years
and older were asked to respond for themselves, and parents answered for children under 15.

Only two of the panels in the CPS Supplement permitted respondents to report in a multiracial
category (panels 2 and 4), and only one panel had separate race and Hispanic origin questions
(panel 2) as ultimately recommended in the new standards. Therefore, panel 2 data were used to
analyze the effects of the different tabulation methods for the two-question format. The smaller
sample (about 30,000 observations) hampers analysis and generalizations when the focus is on


                                                66

There are additional limitations to these data for evaluating the bridging methods. The option
respondents were given to identify multiple races in the CPS Supplement was a multiracial
category with a follow-up question asking respondents to indicate all the racial groups with
which they identified. The new standards allow people to identify directly with all the racial
groups they choose and do not include a "multiracial" category. Furthennore, a large percentage
of individuals who chose the multiracial category in panel 2 of the Supplement did not specify
more than one racial group (see Tucker et a!., 1996). For purposes of this evaluation, individuals
were classified as belonging to the specific racial categories they identified. Those who
identified as being multiracial but then did not give two or more specific racial groups were
reclassified in the one racial category they gave. Thus, the distribution of the CPS Supplement
data reported here differs from that which was published in earlier reports, which classified as
multiracial any person who identified with the multiracial category even if they only specified
one racial group. This new distribution is referred to here as the "Edited Distribution."

This edited distribution was used with the various tabulation methods. As in NHIS, the resulting
distributions were compared to a reference distribution based on the respondents' original
answers (in the first CPS interview) to the race question that followed the old standards.

1998 Washington State Population Survey. The 1998 Washington State Population Survey
(WSPS) was designed to provide infonnation on Washington residents between decennial
censuses. The survey collected data on employment, income, education, and health, along with
basic derilOgraphic infonnation. The WSPS was done by telephone and included 7,279
households with telephones. Blacks, Asians, Hispanics and American Indians were over
sampled. The designated respondent was the individual with the greatest knowledge about the
household. The respondent weights reflect this over sampling and, thus, results are
representative of the Washington popUlation as a whole. The response rate for the entire sample
was between 50 and 60 percent.

Infonnation about the race of the respondent was collected twice during the course of the
interview. At the beginning of the survey, the respondent was asked, "Are you of Hispanic
origin?" Following that question, the respondent was asked, "What is your race?" The
categories were the ones appearing under the old standards, but the order was as follows: Black;
American Indian, Aleut, or Eskimo; Asian or Pacific Islander; and White. An "Other" category
also was allowed, and the interviewer recorded the verbatim response on a "specify" line. Near
the end of the survey, the respondent was asked race questions confonning to the new standards.
 Besides the same Hispanic origin question, the respondent was asked to specify country of
origin. For race, the respondent was asked to select one or more categories. This time the
ordering of the categories was White; Black or African American (or Haitian or Negro);
American Indian or Alaska Native; Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander; Asian. Again, an
"Other" category was provided. There also was a follow-up question for Asian respondents to
specify country of origin.


                                               67
methods. The reference distribution came from the answers to the original race question.

Advantages and Disadvantages of These Data Sources

Only the Washington State data closely resemble the way the question on race will be asked
under the new standards. Yet, all three can offer insights into the relationship between how
individuals will actually respond to the new question on race and how they responded to the
question under the old standards. The NHIS and the CPS Supplement are nationally
representative, and the Washington State data serve as an example for evaluating the tabulation
methods at the state level. Simulations using 1990 census data also were conducted, but the
results differed little from those for the other data sets. At this point, it is believed that an
analysis of data from the 1998 Dress Rehearsal for Census 2000 would be of greater utility.
Furthermore, the Dress Rehearsal data will provide examples of the effects of the new standards
at the local level. Thus, this analysis will be included in the next version of this report.

Description of New Analyses

The analyses concentrated on the bridge tabulation methods. These analyses can be divided into
three broad areas: (1) descriptions of racial distributions under the alternative bridging tabulation
methods; (2) rates of racial "misclassification" for these alternatives; and, (3) sensitivity of
outcome measures to the bridging alternatives.

Distribution of Race. For the first phase of the analysis (using the NHIS, the CPS Supplement,
and the data from Washington State), the distributions of race under the allocation alternatives
described previously were calculated: All Inclusive, Deterministic Whole Allocation (Smallest
Group, Largest Group Other Than White, Largest Group, and Plurality) and Fractional Allocation
(Equal Fractions and NHIS Fractions). These new distributions were compared to the reference
distribution in each data set. At this time, it is unknown what percentage of people in the United
States will identify with more than one racial group when given the opportunity to do so in
Census 2000 and in subsequent surveys. For purposes of illustrating the effects of a greater
proportion of individuals identifying more than one racial background, analyses were conducted
increasing the proportion of multiple race responses two-, four-, six- and eight-fold using the
NHIS, the CPS Supplement, and the Washington State micro data sources. The racial
distributions were compared using each of the tabulation methods to see effects with increasing
levels of reporting more than one race. Of necessity, these tabulations assume that the increases
are the same across the different combinations of more than one race. The accuracy of this
assumption cannot be tested. The purpose of these analyses is not to attempt to make accurate
predictions about the extent of multiple race reporting or its composition, but rather to see more
clearly possible differences among tabulation methods that may only become apparent with a
greater percentage of more than one race reporting.

Misclassification of Race. Besides evaluating the overall racial distributions produced by the


                                                68
NHIS, the CPS Supplement, and the Washington State survey, these misclassification rates were
formed by comparing an individual's answer to the race question under the old standards to the
assigned category of the individual's response(s) to the race question under the new standards
using each of the tabulation methods. The misclassification rate and its standard error for each
race by tabulation method were produced.

Preliminary Outcomes Assessment. In the last phase of the analysis, the impact of multiple-
race reporting on outcome measures was assessed. This process is important because users in
many of the Federal agencies are not typically examining race distributions, but rather trends and
indicators for the Nation (e.g., health outcomes, economic well-being, educational attainment)
across racial groups. This is where the majority of work will need to be done within individual
agencies as the new standards are implemented. An initial examination of how common
statistics could be affected by reporting of more than one race was conducted. Five outcome
measures were examined, three from the NHIS and two from the CPS Supplement. From the
NHIS, three routine health outcomes were calculated: percent of respondents in poor or fair
health, percent of children living with a single mother, and percent of respondents with no health
insurance. From the CPS Supplement, the proportions of respondents who were unemployed and
the labor force participation rates for different racial groups were calculated. These estimates
based on the bridging alternatives are not meant to be precise measures of these factors, but are
used to demonstrate the possible impact reporting ofmuitiple races and the tabulation methods
may have on these and similar estimates.

D. Examination of the Results with Respect to the Evaluation Criteria

Bridging to the past will be needed for measuring change in a variety of circumstances. Besides
measuring population growth, any number of economic, social, and health outcomes must be
monitored. This work will involve different population groups at different levels of geography.
As a first step toward providing the information users will need to make informed decisions
about the methods, the strengths and weaknesses of the bridging methods with respect to the
evaluation criteria outlined at the beginning of this report are discussed, based on the results of
the statistical analyses conducted. The details of these statistical analyses can be found in
Appendix D.

Measure Change Over Time. As indicated earlier, measuring change over time is the criterion
that is of greatest importance in evaluating the bridging methods. The first and second phases of
the analysis shed light on the performance of the various methods in this area. In essence, an
ideal bridging method in this case is one that not only accurately recreates the population
distribution under the old standards such that the only difference remaining is a function oftrue
change over time, but also assigns an individual's response to the old category that would have
been chosen. The methodology used in these studies allows users, within limits, to see how well
the bridging methods using racial data collected under the new standards can match data from the
same respondents collected (at about the same time) under the old standards. To the extent that


                                                69
change. If the match is poor, it is not possible to isolate the true change.

When comparing the different methods to their reference distributions, the racial categories that
were most sensitive to which method is chosen were the numerically small ones, particularly the
AlAN category. While different data sets were used in each study and the racial questions were
not the same, the studies indicate that the Largest Group Deterministic Whole Assignment
method, the Plurality method, and the two Deterministic Fractional Assignment methods produce
distributions closer to the reference distributions than do the other Deterministic Whole
Assignment methods and the All Inclusive method. Controlling for ethnicity had no effect on
these results. One reason the Largest Group Assignment method results are so close is that it has
little effect on the smaller races, because most assignments are made to Black or White, and the
percentages for these two races are so large that the relatively small increase they receive is not
noticeable. The Plurality method produces a good fit, because it makes assignments at the level
of specific racial combinations. The performance of the NHIS Fractional Assignment method
can be discounted to a degree in the NHIS study because the analysis is somewhat circular;
however, the results from the CPS Supplement and the Washington State Population Survey
(WSPS) show this method yields a relatively close match. The Equal Fractional Assignment
method produces a reasonable match in these studies. The primary reason that the other two
Whole Assignment methods and the All Inclusive method do not perform as well is that they
alter the White percentage to some extent and substantially increase the percentage in the AlAN
category.

In the case ofmisclassification rates, some contradictory results emerge. While the AlAN and
"Other" categories have high misclassification rates across all tabulation methods in the CPS
Supplement, the same is not true for the other two surveys .. The Smallest Group Whole
Assignment and the Largest Group Other Than White Whole Assignment methods produce the
most comparable results for the AlAN category in both surveys and for the "Other" category in
the WSPS; however, these methods have higher overall misclassification rates. Both the CPS
Supplement and the WSPS have large misclassification rates for these two categories when using
many of the tabulation methods.

When the distributions of the outcome variables are examined, all methods produce comparable,
and relatively close matches for all health outcomes. For the AIAN unemployment rate, the
Largest Group Whole Assignment method and the NHIS Fractional Assignment method appear
to produce the least comparable results, but none of the differences are significant. There are
significant differences in the AlAN labor force participation rates for several of the tabulation
methods. It is likely that which method is best at matching a reference distribution for outcome
measures will depend on the outcome being examined. 'Unfortunately, the data to assess the best
tabulation method for each outcome may never be readily available.

All of these conclusions should be viewed with caution. Many assumptions had to be made in
these studies. It is unclear how people will respond to the new racial question in the future, and


                                                70
Furthermore, most ofthis work on developing bridging methods relied on sample data, and small
samples at that.

Congruence with Respondent's Choice. This criterion concerns how well the full range ofthe
respondent's choices is represented in the racial distribution. It is more important for evaluating
ongoing tabulations under the new standards, but the bridging methods can be differentiated with'
respect to this criterion, too. None of the Deterministic Whole Assignment methods take into
account the full range of the respondent's selections, but the Plurality method at least controls for
the particular racial combination chosen by the respondent under the new standards. The All
Inclusive method accurately reflects all selections by tabulating actual responses and not people.
The Equal Fraction Assignment method tabulates people, but, like the All Inclusive method,
treats all responses equally. The NHIS Fractional Assignment method takes all responses into
account, but assignment is based on attempting to estimate in which single-race category the
respondent would prefer to be counted.

Range of Applicability. This criterion refers to how well the bridging method can be applied in
different contexts. The All Inclusive method provides the same results in every context, because
assignment does not depend on the particular detailed racial distribution. This method is not
suitable for users who need a distribution that adds to 100 percent. Of the Deterministic Whole
Assignment methods, the Largest Group Assignment method is the least sensitive to context and
can be used in a wide variety of applications. The other Deterministic Whole Assignment
methods are as easy to use as the Largest Group Whole Assignment method, but the results for
the small racial categories will vary to a greater extent with the context, particularly according to
level of geography. The Equal Fraction Assignment method is as generalizable as the All
Inclusive method, but it is not quite as easy to use. The NHIS Fractional Assignment method and
the Plurality method may be the most problematic, because they currently only represent a
national preference distribution based on data from 1993 to 1995. The use of this distribution at
the local level would be likely to produce inaccurate results in a number of cases. That is not to
say that the other methods do not face the same problem.

Meet Confide~tiality and Reliability Standards. Because these methods all attempt to
reproduce the racial categories under the old standards, the same confidentiality problems that
existed over the last 20 years will continue to exist. No increase in problems is anticipated. In
the case of reliability, however, the situation is different. The All Inclusive method will not
produce less reliable data than data produced under the old standards. The Equal Fraction
Assignment method may have reliability problems as a result of only adding fractional counts to
some of the smaller categories if these categories have a higJ:! probability of being chosen as the
preferred single race. The same would be true if equal fractions were used to make whole
assignments. In sample surveys, the Deterministic Whole Assignment methods will have
reliability problems to the extent that there is a large variance on the individual race proportions.
 This is likely to occur when small samples are involved. The Largest Group Whole assignment
method should have the fewest problems with respect to reliability, and the Smallest Group


                                                 71
however, in that an individual's response may be assigned to different categories at different
levels of geography. The NHIS Fractional Assignment method, as well as methods where
fractions are used for whole assignment (i.e., the Plurality method), is based upon a sample
distribution with its own variance properties. Reliability for the very small combinations will be
quite bad unless many years of data are combined, and this presents its own problems.

Minimize Disruptions to the Single Race Distributions. This criterion is only relevant for
evaluation of bridging methods. Its purpose is to see how different the resulting bridge
distribution is from the single-race distribution for detailed race under the new standards. To the
extent that a bridging method can meet the other bridging criteria and still not differ substantially
from the single-race proportions in the ongoing distribution, it will have value for looking both
forward and backward in time. An evaluation of the different methods according to this criterion
involves the comparison of the bridge distributions to the detailed race distribution under the new
standards in each case.

For the CPS Supplement, the Plurality method is marginally closer than the Largest Group
Whole Assignment method and the Fractional methods. While the All Inclusive method and the
other Deterministic Whole Assignment methods match for the White category, they differ
substantially from the single-race AlAN category in the detailed distribution and are marginally
worse for the API category. The NHIS Fractional method is the closest in both the NHIS and
WSPS.

Statistically Defensible. To be statistically defensible, the bridging method must conform to
acceptqble statistical conventions. The All Inclusive method makes no assumption about how
respondents would assign themselves in the single race situation. The NHIS Fractional
Assignment method and the Plurality method are based on an observed distribution, and, to that
extent, involve less judgment than the rest of the methods that assign people and not responses.
While the Equal Fractional Assignment method is based on judgment, it does not make
assumptions about the relative importance of any given race. The Largest Group Whole
Assignment method does assign greater importance to one of the races, but it also follows
common, but different, statistical practice than the equal fraction approach. Both attempt to
minimize the error in assignment. The Smallest Group Whole Assignment method and the
Largest Group Other Than White Whole Assignment method do not follow statistical practice,
but, instead, rely on the historical record of discrimination; even in these cases, however, the
assigned category is based on an observed distribution.

Ease of Use. "Ease of use" refers to how complicated it is to produce the bridge results. The
Equal Fractional Assignment method makes assignments that do not depend on the particular
detailed racial distribution at hand. It and the NHIS Fractional Assignment method do require
the duplication of individual records or the creation, on every record, of a variable for each racial
category under the old standards in order to be able to assign fractions for any combination of
categories. If the fractional methods are used to assign a respondent to a single category (whole


                                                 72
the Equal Fractional method, does not depend on the particular distribution, but it does produce
proportions that add to more than 100 percent unless they are raked or repercentaged to a base of
100 percent each time. The Deterministic Whole Assignment methods and the NHIS Fractional
method would require an extra step unless only national figures are used, because the relative
size of the groups must be determined for each detailed distribution. Otherwise, they are as easy
to use as the whole probabilistic methods.

Skill Required. This criterion refers to the skills required to carry out the bridge operations.
The amount of computer expertise to perform the operations associated with each ofthese
methods is fairly trivial. The Deterministic Whole Assignment methods require almost no
statistical knowledge. Some familiarity with the statistical adjustment literature would be useful
for understanding the Deterministic Fractional Assignment procedures. If the All Inclusive
method were used, users might need to understand statistical raking.

Understandability and Communicability. This criterion concerns how easily the methods can
be explained and understood by the average user. The Deterministic Whole Assignment methods
are both easy to explain and easy to understand . .The fractional assignment of individuals to a
single category also is not difficult to follow. Assigning fractions of a person to different
categories may be easy to explain, but the average user may find it difficult to accept the idea.
The All Inclusive method also is easily explained, but, unless the percentages are raked to 100
percent, users may have a problem understanding how to use the results.




                                             References

Benson, V. and Marano, M. (1995), "Current Estimates from the National Health Interview
      Survey, 1994," National Center for Health Statistics, Vital Health Statistics, 10(193).

Massey, J. T., Moore, T. F., Parsons, V. L., and Tadros W. (1989), "Design and Estimation for
      the National Health Interview Survey, 1985-1994," National Center for Health Statistics,
      Vital Health Statistics, 2(110).

Rubin, D. R. (1987), Multiple Imputationfor Nonresponse in Surveys, New York: Wiley, 1987.

Tucker,   c., McKay, R., Kojetin, B., Harrison, R., de la Puente, M., Stinson, L., and Robison, E.
          (1996), "Testing Methods of Collecting Racial and Ethnic Information: Results of the
          Current Population Survey Supplement on Race and Ethnicity," Bureau of Labor
          Statistics Statistical Notes, No. 40.




                                                 73

                    Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting
                            Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity

                       (Excerpt from Federal Register, October 30, 1997)

        This classification provides a minimum standard for maintaining, collecting, and
presenting data on race and ethnicity for all Federal reporting purposes. The categories in this
classification are social-political constructs and should not be interpreted as being scientific or
anthropological in nature. They are not to be used as determinants of eligibility for participation
in any Federal program. The standards have been developed to provide a common language for
uniformity and comparability in the collection and use of data on race and ethnicity by Federal
agencies.

       The standards have five categories for data on race: American Indian or Alaska Native,
Asian, Black or African American, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and White. There
are two categories for data on ethnicity: "Hispanic or Latino," and "Not Hispanic or Latino."

1. Categories and Definitions

       The minimum categories for data on race and ethnicity for Federal statistics, program
administrative reporting, and civil rights compliance reporting are defined as follows:

       American Indian or Alaska Native. A person having origins in any of the original
       peoples of North and South America (including Central America), and who maintains
       tribal affiliation or community attachment.

       Asian. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast
       Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan,
       Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.

       Black or African American. A person having origins in any of the black racial groups
       of Africa. Terms such as "Haitian" or "Negro" can be used in addition to "Black or
       African American."

       Hispanic or Latino. A person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central
       American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless ofrace. The term, "Spanish
       origin," can be used in addition to "Hispanic or Latino."

       Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. A person having origins in any of the
       original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.

       White. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of Europe, the Middle
       East, or North Africa.
Recommended forms for the instruction accompanying the multiple response question are "Mark
one or more" and "Select one or more."

2. Data Formats

        The standards provide two formats that may be used for data on race and ethnicity. Self-
reporting or self-identification using two separate questions is the preferred method for collecting
data on race and ethnicity. Tn situations where self-reporting is not practicable or feasible, the
combined format may be used.

        In no case shall the provisions of the standards be construed to limit the collection of data
to the categories described above. The collection of greater detail is encouraged; however, any
collection that uses more detail shall be organized in such a way that the additional categories can
be aggregated into these minimum categories for data on race and ethnicity.

        With respect to tabulation, the procedures used by Federal agencies shall result in the
production of as much detailed information on race and ethnicity as possible. However, Federal
agencies shall not present data on detailed categories if doing so would compromise data quality
or confidentiality standards.

a. Two-question format

        To provide flexibility and ensure data quality, separate questions shall be used wherever
feasible for reporting race and ethnicity. When race and ethnicity are collected separately,
ethnicity shall be collected first. Ifrace and ethnicity are collected separately, the minimum
designations are:

Race:

        --   American Indian or Alaska Native
        --   Asian
        --   Black or African American
        --   Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
        --   White

Ethnicity:

        -- Hispanic or Latino
        -- Not Hispanic or Latino

        When data on race and ethnicity are collected separately, provision shall be made to
report the number of respondents in each racial category who are Hispanic or Latino.

        When aggregate data are presented, data producers shall provide the number of
categories. In addition to these numbers, data producers are strongly encouraged to provide the
detailed distributions, including all possible combinations, of multiple responses to the race
question. If data on multiple responses are collapsed, at a minimum the total number of
respondents reporting "more than one race" shall be made available.

b. Combined format

        The combined format may be used, if necessary, for observer-collected data on race and
ethnicity. Both race (including multiple responses) and ethnicity shall be collected when
appropriate and feasible, although the selection of one category in the combined format is
acceptable. If a combined format is used, there are six minimum categories:

       -- American Indian or Alaska Native
       -- Asian
       -- Black or African American
       -- Hispanic or Latino
       -- Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
       -- White

        When aggregate data are presented, data producers shall provide the number of
respondents who marked (or selected) only one category, separately for each of the six
categories. In addition to these numbers, data producers are strongly encouraged to provide the
detailed distributions, including all possible combinations, of multiple responses. In cases where
data on multiple responses are collapsed, the total number of respondents reporting "Hispanic or
Latino and one or more races" and the total number of respondents reporting "more than one
race" (regardless of ethnicity) shall be provided.

3. Use of the Standards for Record Keeping and Reporting

       The minimum standard categories shall be used for reporting as follows:

a. Statistical reporting

        These standards shall be used at a minimum for all federally sponsored statistical data
collections that include data on race and/or ethnicity, except when the collection involves a
sample of such size that the data on the smaller categories would be unreliable, or when the
collection effort focuses on a specific racial or ethnic group. Any other variation will have to be
specifically authorized by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) through the information
collection clearance process. In those cases where the data collection is not subject to the
information collection clearance process, a direct request for a variance shall be made to OMB.

b. General program administrative and grant reporting

       These standards shall be used for all Federal administrative reporting or record keeping
must request a variance from OMB. Variances will be considered if the agency can demonstrate
that it is not reasonable for the primary reporter to determine racial or ethnic background in terms
of the specified categories, that detennination of racial or ethnic background is not critical to the
administration of the program in question, or that the specific program is directed to only one or
a limited number ofracial or ethnic groups.

c. Civil rights and other compliance reporting

        These standards shall be used by all Federal agencies in either the separate or combined
fonnat for civil rights and other compliance reporting from the public and private sectors and all
levels of government. Any variation requiring less detailed data or data which cannot be
aggregated into the basic categories must be specifically approved by OMB for executive
agencies. More detailed reporting which can be aggregated to the basic categories may be used at
the agencies' discretion.

4. Presentation of Data on Race and Ethnicity

        Displays of statistical, administrative, and compliance data on race and ethnicity shall use
the categories listed above. The term "nonwhite" is not acceptable for use in the presentation of
Federal Government data. It shall not be used in any publication or in.the text of any report.

       In cases where the standard categories are considered inappropriate for presentation of
data on particular programs or for particular regional areas, the sponsoring agency may use:

a.     The designations "Black or African American and Other Races" or "All Other Races" as
       collective descriptions of minority races when the most summary distinction between the
       majority and minority races is appropriate;

b.      The designations "White," "Black or African American," and "All Other Races" when the
        distinction among the majority race, the principal minority race, and other races is
      . appropriate; or

c.     The designation of a particular minority race or races, and the inclusion of "Whites" with
       "All Other Races" when such a collective description is appropriate.

       In displaying detailed information that represents a combination ofrace and ethnicity, the
description of the data being displayed shall clearly indicate that both bases of classification are
being used.

        When the primary focus of a report is on two or more specific identifiable groups in the
popUlation, one or more of which is racial or ethnic, it is acceptable to display data for each of
the particular groups separately and to describe data relating to the remainder of the population
by an appropriate collective description.

       The provisions of these standards are effective immediately for all new and revised record
keeping or reporting requirements that include racial and/or ethnic information. All existing
record keeping or reporting requirements shall be made consistent with these standards at the
time they are submitted for extension, or not later than January 1, 2003.

                    Procedural Implementation of the New Standards for
                          Data on Race and Ethnicity -- Phase I Report


An interagency committee was established to develop guidelines that will assist Federal
agencies in their implementation of the Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and
Presenting Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity issued on October 30, 1997. The
procedural implementation guidelines address three areas: (1) wording and format of
questions that ask for self-reported race and Hispanic or Latino origin; (2) wording and
format of instructions and forms that collect aggregate race and Hispanic or Latino
origin data; and (3) instructions and training procedures for field interviewers and
administrative personnel who will be using these questions and forms.


Members 'of the committee represent the Departments of Health and Human Services,
Commerce, Education, Labor, and Veterans Affairs, and the General Accounting Office.
    An OMB Clearance Package was approved in March 1998 which authorized the
pretesting of different questions and forms. This report describes the study objectives
of the three areas, the research design, and the progress to date for Phase I. A second
phase will focus on additional issues not resolved in Phase I.


1.       Development and Testing of Self-Reported Race and Hispanic or Latino Origin Ouestions


A goal of this research is to provide guidance on the wording and format of self-reported race
and Hispanic or Latino origin questions used in a variety of data collection efforts. Following
are three of the most significant changes to the ways in which race and Hispanic or Latino origin
questions are to be asked by Federal agencies.


        Self-report or self-identification using two separate questions is the preferred method for
         collecting data on race and ethnicity. When race and ethnicity are collected separately,
         ethnicity shall be collected first.


                                                  1


      Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander is to be treated as a distinct category from
       Asian.


The committee's primary objective is to develop and test a series of questions that agencies can
use to guide the design of future data collection instruments. To design the test questions, the
committee reviewed current survey practice, prior research on measuring race and ethnicity, and
the survey literature on questionnaire design. This led to the identification of three factors which
influenced the general design, format, and wording of race and ethnicity test questions. First,
questions needed to be as similar as possible to those that were subjected to extensive testing
prior to the issuance of the revised standards. In particular, questions used in previous research
from the Current Population Survey, the National Content Survey, and the Race and Ethnic
Targeted Test (see Federal Register Notice July 1997 for discussion of the results of those tests)
were considered. Second, questions needed to be tested in both face-to-face interviews as well as
telephone interviews. ' And third, both short and long versions of questions needed to be
developed--short in that the question should seek to collect the minimum information specified in
the revised standards and long in that the question should collect subgroup information .
                                                        

The minimum level of detail for race questions is the five revised categories--American Indian or
Alaska Native, Asian, Black or African American, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander,
and White. Long versions of the race question provide for reporting of subgroups such as
Chinese, Japanese, Samoan, and so forth. For Hispanic or Latino origin questions, the minimum
level of detail is a Yes or No response indicating Hispanic or Latino origin background. Long
versions of the question provide for reporting of subgroups such as Puerto Rican, Cuban, and so


         'Mode can also include whether the question administration is done using a computer; at
this time, there is no plan for testing computer-administered instruments.




                                                 2


At this time, there are no plans to assess comparability of responses across modes; that is, the
final report will offer guidelines on ways to ask a question when using a particular mode rather
than provide an analysis of the effects of response distributions when using a particular mode. It
will be incumbent upon individual agencies to make final determinations on the exact wording
and format of questions and the potential measurement error that may be associated with a given
design should be assessed.


1.1      Research Design


Qualitative research using cognitive pretesting methods are being used to test race and Hispanic
or Latino origin questions. The research plan includes two phases. Phase I is still in progress;
most of it has been completed and took place during 1998 in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan
area. Eventually, Phase I will include approximately 50 laboratory interviews conducted face-
to-face or by telephone. Phase II will be similar in scope to Phase I, will begin in 1999, and will
be conducted in selected geographic sites outside of the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area.


Phase I does not include tests of self-administered race and ethnicity questions since the Census
Bureau has already conducted considerable research in preparation for Census 2000. The Census
Bureau conducted cognitive research as well as large scale field interviews as part ofthe Census
Bureau's National Content Survey, Race and Ethnicity Targeted Test, and Census 2000 Dress
Rehearsal test. Therefore, the self-administered format options contained in Section l.3.2 ofthis
report are based mostly on the research accomplished by the Census Bureau.


Phase I cognitive testing is conducted as part of a 10-20 minute survey which asks general
household information (such as who lives in the household, the age, gender, education level,
marital status, and income level of household members) followed by Hispanic or Latino origin
and race questions. After the survey is completed, the subject is debriefed by a cognitive
interviewer to discuss the meaning of the words and phrases in the race and Hispanic or Latino


                                                 3


 It is important to remember that only a few questions have been selected for testing; other
 variations of ethnicity and race questions could certainly have been tested and may, in fact, work
 just as well or better in a particular survey. For example, all of the Hispanic or Latino origin test
 questions include the word Spanish in the question; that is, the test question asks Are you
 Spanish. Hispanic. or Latino? rather than Are you Hispanic or Latino? It is relevant, then, to
 note that the options on the following pages reflect what worked well among the different
. questions tested, not what is the best way to ask a race or Hispanic or Latino origin question.
 Phase I test results and the examples presented should not imply limitations or constraints to
 other question designs that comply with the revised standards.


The research design for Phase I has been modified over the past six months and currently has six
 experimental conditions. Two conditions test the questions bytelephone and four conditions test
 the questions face-to-face. Optimally, each test condition will include at least 8 subjects, I
 whose parents are both American Indian or Alaska Native, 1 whose parents are both Asian, 1
 whose parents are both Black or African American, 1 whose parents are both Native Hawaiian or
Other Pacific Islander, 1 whose parents are both White, 1 whose parents are both Hispanic or
Latino (regardless of race), and 2 whose parents are different races (regardless of the particular
race combinations).2 Participants are recruited mostly by newspaper advertisements and flyers.
Some additional recruitment efforts may be directed at community centers or other organizations
in order to reach individuals who are Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, American Indian
or Alaska Native, and individuals who are more than one race. Subjects are paid $25 for one
hour, and interviews are audio-taped or video-taped, depending on the interview site.
Attachment C shows the progress to date by test condition.


         2Participants are not asked to report their race or ethnicity during the telephone
screening interview. Rather. they are asked to report the race and ethnicity of their mother and
their father, along with a few other demographic questions about each of their parents. The
reported race of their parents are used to assign subjects to a particular test condition. Also, it is
compared with the race(s) individuals report themselves to be in order to provide further
information on the process of self-identification of race and Hispanic or Latino origin.


                                                   4


Thirty-two cognitive interviews (25 face-to-face and 7 telephone) have been completed.
Generally, subjects were able to provide answers to both long and short versions ofrace and
Hispanic or Latino origin questions. As expected, subjects who were interviewed face-to-face
seemed to use and rely on the flashcards to select a response. Subjects interviewed by telephone
had a bit more difficulty answering the race questions since they had to listen to a relatively long
list of response options.


1.2.1   Testing Hispanic or Latino Origin Questions


Two subjects answered "Yes" to the Hispanic or Latino origin question and 30 answered "No. "
 During debriefings, all subjects were asked their impressions of the other Hispanic or Latino
test questions and were shown various versions of the Hispanic or Latino flashcard. Subjects
were generally familiar with Hispanic or Latino origin questions, regardless of the particular test
condition. As found in previous research, subjects define Hispanic and Latino differently but
they are comfortable with both terms used in the same question. Since the test questions also
included the term Spanish (which is allowed by the revised standards), subjects were asked their
opinion about including the word Spanish; most stated they thought that the word Spanish was
important to include. Subjects commonly defined Hispanic as indicating geographic location or
Spanish origin, Spanish as indicating European origin or coming from the country of Spain, and
Latino as a cultural concept associated with Latin American cooking, dress, and language.


Face-to-face interviews: All of the 25 subjects interviewed face-to-face seemed to find the
Hispanic or Latino origin flashcards useful. Two flashcard versions were tested; Flashcard 7A
and Flashcard 7B each list the detailed Hispanic or Latino origin subgroups but in different ways.
When shown both flashcards, subjects preferred Flashcard 7A which lists the subgroups under
the main category "Yes, Spanish, Hispanic, Latino."




                                                 5
                   ~o    Not Spanish, Hispanic, Latino

                         Yes Spanish, Hispanic, Latino
                         Includes Mexican, Mexican American,
                         Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, or
                         other Spanish, Hispanic, Latino




                   IFlashcard 78                                      I
                   No    Not Spanish, Hispanic, Latino

                   Yes   Spanish, Hispanic, Latino
                         Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano
                         Puerto Rican
                         Cuban
                         Other Spanish, Hispanic Latino




Telephone interviews: For the 7 subjects interviewed by telephone, 4 were asked a short


           Short         Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?




Hispanic or Latino question and 3 were asked a long version, both shown below.




          ILong          Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?




                                               6

                          Which one of the fol/owing are you? Are you Mexican,
                          Mexican American, Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, or of
                          another Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino group?




Regardless of version, all of the telephone subjects were able to answer the first part of the
question without difficulty. The second part of the long version has not been tested with enough
Hispanic or Latino subjects, since one needs to answer "Yes" to the first part in order to test the
second part. However, interviewers expressed concern that the long version may present some
response problems since respondents will have to recall six possible categories without use of a
flashcard or other visual aid.


1.2.2   Testing Race Questions


Among the 32 subjects interviewed, 13 reported their race as Black, 3 reported Asian, 2 reported
Native Hawaiian, 4 reported more than one race, and 10 reported White, of which 2 also reported
Hispanic or Latino origin. No American Indians or Alaska Natives were interviewed in Phase I.
Two of the 4 subjects who reported more than one race for themselves reported their parents as
both being the same race. These two subjects based their multiple race reports on the
backgrounds of grandparents or great-grandparents which is consistent with prior research. Of
the four subjects who reported more than one race, three reported combinations of Native




                                                 7
one race replied White and Asian.


Face-to-face interviews: Subjects who were interviewed face-to-face heard the question read
and were handed a flashcard containing the response options. Several subjects indicated initial
surprise at not seeing a Hispanic or Latino category or its equivalent. For example, one subject
said "Given the choices here, I don't see what I should put down. I guess I have to say White.
but that's not right." When asked the meaning of certain race temls, some subjects referred to
geographic origin, some mentioned facial or skin color characteristics, and others mentioned a
particular culture or heritage.


Among the three flashcards tested, subjects preferred Flashcard 9 or Flashcard 10 (see below). In
one case, a Filipino subject responded differently depending on the flashcard used. She was first
shown a long version (Flashcard 10) and responded "Filipino, I guess under Asian." In the
debriefing, she was then shown a short version (Flashcard 9) and again was asked her race. She
responded "Other Pacific Islander because the Philippines are a Pacific Island. So I guess my



            IFlashcard 9
answer would be different depending on the list used. "




       3Several subjects were specially recruited through a Native Hawaiian source which
accounts for the frequency of Native Hawaiian responses.




                                                8
      Black or African American
      American Indian or Alaska Native
      Asian
      Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander




IFlashcard10                                      I
      White
      Black or African American
      American Indian or Alaska Native
      Asian
             Asian Indian Japanese
             Chinese         Korean
             Filipino Vietnamese
             Other Asian
      Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
             Native Hawaiian
             Guamanian or Chamorro
             Samoan
             Other Pacific Islander




                                 9
race question as shown below.


           Short        I'm going to read a Jist of racial categories. Please select
           one or more to best describe your race. Are you White, Black or African
           American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, or Native Hawaiian
           or Other Pacific Islander?




There was some indication that hearing a list with alternative terms representing one category
(i.e., Black or African American is one category, not two) may result in confusion. Specifically,
two subjects thought the interviewer asked them to choose between Black or African American
and commented that they did not like having to make a choice. This problem can be addressed
through interviewer training that teaches the interviewer to pause longer after saying each category
term or phrase; that is, if the interviewer is reading a list of "... White, Black or African American,
Asian, ... " she/he should pause between the words White and Black, not pause between Black or
African American, and pause again between African American and Asian. This should help the
telephone respondent hear that Black or African American is one choice, not two. There was
some evidence that the instruction to "... select one or more... " was misunderstood on the
telephone to mean that the subject had to select more than one race. Interviewers will need to be
trained to perceive and correct for this.


1.2.3   Concepts of Race and Ethnicity

                                                  10
between the terms used in describing race, ethnicity, nationality, and ancestry. In the cognitive
interviews, understanding of the intent of a race or Hispanic origin question was shared but
individual differences in the interpretation and meaning of terms used was found, as was
confusion regarding the separation of Hispanic or Latino origin from race. The following'
examples from the cognitive interviews illustrate these findings.
              It means ethnic background. Not the country. I think people tend to cross quickly
               between using the terms race and country. When I say "Yes, I am Hawaiian" I
               mean that in my bloodstream I have Hawaii. My blood inheritance.

              Race I guess means the color somebody is. Or, their cultural heritage.

              The word race means the biological heritage from which you descend.

              Race means the culture that someone is from.

              The way I think of race, I think of it as a negative, probably because of what we've
               read about in the 60's--race riots, etc. It always seems to have a negative
               connotation. I prefer to use ethnicity.

              I answer differently sometimes, depending on what's beneficial to my family or me.

              Sometimes you see Hispanic as a choice for race.     If Hispanic had been offered as a
               race then I would have chosen that.

              The race question is difficult because it doesn't have enough categories, it's too
               restrictive. With only five categories, there are two that are too specific--American
               Indian and Native Hawaiian--and there's a list of countries for the Asians. It
               doesn't specifY anything about Central or South American descent. Everybody
               comes from different backgrounds; even White Americans can probably check off
               Irish, etc.


1.3    Guidelines for the Design of Race and Ethnicity Questions


As has been discussed earlier in this chapter, the Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and
Presenting Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity issued on October 30, 1997 set forth principles that
should be followed when collecting race and ethnicity data for Federal reporting purposes. These

                                                11
ethnicity questions contained in Federal data collection instruments. In addition, there is a rich
literature on questionnaire design and data collection methods as well as the measurement of race
and ethnicity. Readers are strongly encouraged to consult the literature and are referred to a
suggested reference list contained at the end of this chapter. By no means comprehensive, this list
should provide at least a starting point for those seeking further guidance. Following the
guidelines below are examples of questions to illustrate specific formats and wording depending on
the mode of data collection.


Guideline 1: Communicate clearly an instruction that allows multiple responses to the race
question. The revised standards are clear that the format and wording used in a race question must
communicate to the respondent an instruction that multiple responses are acceptable. Based on
research findings, the recommended forms for this instruction are Mark one or more or Select one
or more. The committee supports these recommendations but recognizes that other possible
instructions may be preferred, especially when integrating a race question within an existing data
collection instrument. For example, some mail instruments do not word questions in a personal
way; that is, rather than What is your age? an instrument may simply have Age with a line for an
entry. Taking this case further, if one has an item simply worded as Race with a line for an entry,
then an instruction must be included to communicate that multiple race responses are acceptable.
Variations could include Race - enter one or more. Regardless of exact wording, the instruction
must be evident to the respondent.


Guideline 2: Consider using an instruction to answer both the Hispanic or Latino question and the
race question.   This has particular relevance for mail surveys or questionnaires that are self-
administered since there is no interviewer interaction. An instruction such as the following may
improve potential item non-response, especially among Hispanic respondents.


       NOTE: Please answer BOTH Questions 1 and 2 (Hispanic or Latino and Race/

       4Modified version as shown in the Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal forms



                                                 12
infonnation, consider options to collect further infonnation through write-in entries or follow-up
questions asked by the interviewer. Write-in entries or follow-up questions would be most
commonly used for 'other' responses such as Other Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino, Other Pacific
Islander, or Other Asian. Also, write-in or follow-up infonnation may be desired to obtain the
name of the enrolled or principles tribe for American Indian or Alaska Native responses.
Questions shown in section 1.3.2 includes examples for write-in responses.


Guideline 4: Take mode carefully into account when designing questions and instructions.         This
guideline may seem obvious but it is often the case that surveys are conducted using a mixed mode
(i.e., the initial interview attempt may be personal visit but a telephone interview is pennissible).
Since the questions should be designed with the mode in mind, there may need to be different
versions of questions, depending on the mode of administration. Below is a brief discussion of
some additional issues to consider depending on mode.


For surveys conducted face-to-face by an interviewer, use of a flashcard is very helpful to the
respondent. The wording of the question has to incorporate the instruction to look at the flashcard.
Further, the design of the flashcard is important; it should clearly and neatly contain all available
response categories. Similarly, the design, layout, and visual appearance of a self-administered
questionnaire is very important and should be carefully considered.


For telephone surveys, questions generally are shorter with fewer response categories. This
presents a problem with questions that need to collect detailed infonnation (see Guideline 3
discussed above). One solution may be to allow a follow-up question similar to the example
shown in Section 1.3.4 that was tested to collect detailed Hispanic or Latino infonnation. Using
the race question as another example, if the respondent is read, Please select one or more to best
describe your race. Are you White, Black or African American, American Indian or Alaska Native,
Asian, or Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander? and responds I am Asian, a follow-up
question such as Which one of the following are you? Are you Asian Indian, Chinese, Filipino,


                                                 13


Guideline 5: Provide definitions to the minimum race categories when possible. This guideline is
particularly relevant when the short version (only the five minimum categories) of a race question
is used. Individual interpretation of the five categories could lead to response error, especially for
respondents unsure of the definitions of Asian and Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander.
For self-administered forms, providing the definition of the category should be considered if space
and formatting limitations can be overcome. For interviewer-administered questions, the
definitions should be readily available to the interviewer (usually in a manual that provides
question-by-question specifications) to assist the respondent if needed.


Guideline 6: Adhere to the specific terminology as stated in the October 30, 1997 revised
standards. The revised standards address the words and terms to use, and also indicates other
terms that can be considered. For example, the name of the Black category should be Black or
African American and additional terms such as Haitian or Negro can be used if desired. In another
example, American Indian should be used and Native American should not be substituted for
American Indian. Reviewing the terms specified in the revised standards is strongly encouraged
before designing questions on race and Hispanic or Latino origin.


1.3.2    Examples of Hispanic or Latino Origin and Race Test Questions --



   ICD

  Are you Spanish/Hispanic/Latino?

           DYes
           o   No




         Self-AdministrationS


         5Questions 2 and 5 are similar to the Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal Long Form. Question

                                                 14

  Are you Spanish/Hispanic/Latino? Mark [8] the "No" box if not Spanish/Hispanic/Latino.

         o   No, not Spanish/Hispanic/Latino
         o   Yes, Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano
         o   Yes, Puerto Rican
         o   Yes,Cuban




   I~


         o   Yes, other Spanish/Hispanic/Latino - Print group




3 a~~ are similar to the Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal Short Form. Write-in entries are
presented in these questions since they will appear on Census 2000 Forms.




                                                 15
       o   Yes, Mexican, Mexican Am, Chicano               o Yes, Cuban




10

What is your race? Mark   l:&l one or more races to indicate what you consider yourself to
be.

       o   White
       o   Black or African American
       o   American Indian or Alaska Native
       o   Asian
       o   Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander




                                               16




10


What is your race? Mark   [:&l one or more races to indicate what you consider yourself to be.

      o   White
      o   Black or African American




I~




                                               17
   IZ
    a     r    A";"In Indian         u                 ...I   Nal ve HawaIIan
          0    Chinese                   0 Korean             0 Guamanian or Chamorro
          0    Filipino              0   Vietnamese 0         Samoan
          0    Other Asian -                        0         Other Pacific Islander -




1.3.3   Examples of Hispanic or Latino Origin and Race Test Questions -
        Face-to Face Administration




(j) Interviewer hands respondent Flashcard 7 and asks
        Are you Spanish, His(lanic, or Latino?



    FLASHCARD 7




          No       Not Spanish, Hispanic, Latino

          Yes    Spanish, Hispanic, Latino
          Includes Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano
          Puerto Rican, Cuban, or other Spanish, Hispanic,
          Latino




                                                      18
        Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?


        If "Yes", and respondent does not state detailed background, ask
        Which one of these groups are you?


        If respondent hesitates or does not answer, ask
        Are you Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban or of
        another Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino group?


        NOTE:          For Question 7, the objective is for interviewer to record Yes or No
                       only. For Question 8, the objective is for interviewer to record
                       detailed Hispanic or latino background for all respondents who
                       answer Yes, of Hispanic or Latino origin.

CD   Interviewer hands respondent Flashcard 9 and says
        Please select one or more of the following categories to best describe your



     IFLASHCARD 9




          White
          Black or African American
          American Indian or Alaska Native
          Asian
          Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander

        race.




                                                  20

      Please select one or more of the following categories to best describe your



  /FLASHCARD 10




        White
        Black or African American
        American Indian or Alaska Native
        Asian
               Asian Indian     Japanese
                Chinese                Korean
                Filipino        Vietnamese
                Other Asian
        Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander
               Native Hawaiian
               Guamanian or Chamorro
               Samoan
               Other Pacific Islander

      race.




1.3.4 Examples of Hispanic or Latino Origin and Race Test Questions -
     Telephone Administration

                                                22

@ Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?
              If "Yes", ask
              Which on'e of the following are you? Are you Mexican, Mexican
              American, Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, or of another Spanish,
              Hispanic, or Latino group?


@ I'm going to read a list of racial categories. Please select one or more to best
       describe your race. Are you White, Black or African American, American
       Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, or Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander?


1.4    Continuing Research on Self-Reported Race and EthniCity Questions


Phase I will be completed by April 1, 1999. Phase II research will begin in Spring 1999
and conclude by July 31, 1999. Phase II will follow the same research design as Phase I
but will be expanded geographically and will focus on testing with individuals who are
Hispanic or Latino, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian and other
Pacific Islander, and individuals with multiple racial heritage, In addition to research
conducted by the committee, other studies could be initiated by agencies or interested
groups, The committee expects to continue the review and modification of these
guidelines as implementation occurs, feedback from agencies is received, and new
research findings become available.




2.     Development and Testing of Aggregate Reporting Forms


A second goal of this research is to provide guidance on the design of reporting forms
that will be used by administrative personnel to aggregate race and Hispanic or Latino
origin data for a given population (e,g" reporting race and ethnicity for a school

                                            23
fundamental changes to the ways in which race and Hispanic or Latino origin data have
previously been aggregated and reported.


In the past, agencies were required to report, at a minimum, the number of individuals
who marked one of the four race categories, as well as the number of individuals who
reported either Hispanic or Latino origin or not of Hispanic or Latino origin. A standard or
prototype reporting form was not provided to Federal agencies. Rather, agencies
developed their own forms depending on the characteristics of a given program and the
data collection effort.


The October 30, 1997 revised standards specify that, ata minimum, the number of
individuals who marked one of the five race categories and the number who marked
more than one race category are to be reported and that the race of those indicating
Hispanic or Latino origin be reported if available. In many cases, greater detail about the
combinations of specific multiple race responses will be needed. The following are some
of the decisions issued in the revised standards that impact the design of aggregate
reporting forms.


      When self-identification is not feasible or appropriate, a combined question can be
       used and should include a separate Hispanic or Latino category co-equal with the
       other categories.


      When the combined format is used, an attempt should be made to record ethnicity
       and race but the option to indicate only one category (Le., Hispanic or Latino, with
       no race designation) is acceptable.


      When data are collected in a combined format and data on multiple responses are
       collapsed, the total number of respondents reporting 'Hispanic or Latino and one
       or more races' and the total number of respondents reporting 'more than one
       race' (regardless of ethnicity) shall be provided.

                                             24
       to report the number of respondents in each racial category who are Hispanic or
       Latino.


      In addition to providing the number of people who marked one of the five racial
       categories, data producers are strongly encouraged to provide the detailed
       distributions of multiple responses. At a minimum, the total number of
       respondents reporting 'more than one race' shall be made available.


The committee's goal is to test different forms in order to offer guidelines to Federal
agencies. These guidelines should serve as a reference tool for agencies as they
develop their own version of aggregate reporting forms based on agency data needs and
program characteristics.




                                            25


The development of test forms has been a collaborative effort among the committee
members, experts in questionnaire design and survey research, and policy and statistical
analysts from the federal government who have been involved in the revision of
standards for race and ethnicity data. In developing test forms, a decision was made to
only use the minimum race categories specified in the revised standards. Thus, the
forms only aggregate the numbers of American Indians or Alaska Natives, Asians, Blacks
or African Americans, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders, and Whites and do
not aggregate subgroups such as Chinese, Japanese, Samoan, and so forth. However,
any form could easily be extended in order to capture other subgroup data, and it is
expected that agencies will develop forms that meet their specific data needs.


Phase I is still in progress. Twenty cognitive interviews, 10 in cognitive laboratories and
10 on-site at establishments and agencies, are planned for this phase of the research.
To test the forms, the subjects need to be familiar with reporting aggregate data for a
given population (e.g., total numbers of students by demographic characteristics) but not
necessarily familiar with the revised standards. For Phase I, participants are recruited
mostly through committee contacts with representatives in various Federal, state and
local agencies as well as those in the private sector.


Three different forms have been developed for testing purposes. The committee
recognized from the outset that many organizations collect and maintain data at the
individual level that includes Hispanic or Latino co-equal with other race categories.
However, the design of the forms was an attempt to see how subjects would approach
the task of aggregating separate Hispanic or Latino counts with the expectation that in
the future, agencies will gradually modify the ways in which individual race and Hispanic
or Latino origin data are collected. A brief description of each form follows.




                                            26
      the Hispanic or Latino origin responses. There are 31 reporting lines representing
      every combination of both single and multiple race responses for the five minimum
      race categories. Total numbers for each race group are then entered under one of
      three Hispanic or Latino origin ,status columns: Yes, of Hispanic or Latino origin;
      No, not of Hispanic or Latino origin; No Hispanic or Latino origin information
      provided. This form conceptualizes what an automated data collection format
      would include. It can easily be expanded or reduced depending on the specific
      race combinations listed.


     Form RH-2 has two parts. First, it asks for the aggregate number of individuals
      who reported each single race, the number of individuals who reported more than
      one race, and the number of individuals for whom race information is missing.
      Second, for records of individuals who reported more than one race, the form then
      asks for a count of the number of times each race was included in a multiple race
      response. These numbers are reported in one of three columns: Hispanic or
      Latinos, non-Hispanic or Latinos, or separate Hispanic or Latino origin question
      but with no answer given.


     Form RH-3 has two parts and is similar conceptually to RH-2. However, it is
      designed to report aggregated race data crosstabulated with other variables. RH-
      3A asks for the aggregate number of individuals who reported each single race
      and the aggregate number of individuals who reported more than one race
      crosstabulated by Hispanic or Latino origin and gender. RH-38 is completed only
      for records reporting more than one race. The number of times each race was
      indicated is then crosstabulated by Hispanic or Latino origin and gender.


2.2   Results


Expert panel: A panel comprised of questionnaire design specialists and experts well-
versed in aggregate reporting by establishments was convened in July 1998 to discuss

                                           27
should be redesigned so that they would be easy to complete with little or no instructions.
There were many reformatting suggestions, such as trying to follow the step-by-step
narrative approach used by Internal Revenue Service tax forms that guide a respondent
in calculating and entering a numeric report. Also, several of the experts thought that a
reporting form should be developed that allowed for the aggregation of Hispanic or Latino
origin individuals co-equal with individuals reporting race information; this suggestion was
based on the knowledge that current practice among many institutions is to collect
individual race and ethnicity data using a combined format.


The feedback from the expert panelled to three significant changes in the test forms.
First, one form was redesigned to allow for the aggregate reporting of every combination
of multiple race responses (among the five minimum race categories). A second form
was redesigned to capture single race responses, the total count of multiple race
responses, and the number of times a racial group was reported within multiple race
combinations. Using Asian reports as an example, the second form was designed to
aggregate the total number of students who reported only Asian and the total number of
students who reported Asian plus one or more other races. Third, a form was redesigned
to provide a template for crosstabulating race reports with other demographic data.


Cognitive interviews: Fourteen interviews have been accomplished thus far, 7 in
cognitive laboratories and 7 on-site. Of the 14 respondents interviewed, 5 were Federal
government personnel, 6 worked in private industry, 2 worked in local correctional
facilities, and 1 worked in a school. For the laboratory testing, subjects were given
'dummy' records of applications that contained multiple race responses as well as
combined Hispanic or Latino origin and race questions. Dummy records were used in
order to see how subjects would complete the forms based on different kinds of source
data. Examples of the questions used in the dummy records are below followed by the
results of testing each of the three forms. For testing conducted on-site, actual agency
records were used. Attachment B contains the general interview protocol. Attachment 0
shows the progress to date by test condition.

                                            28




Race: Mark one or more

01 0 White                        04 0 American Indian or Alaska Native
02 0 Black or African American    05 0 Asian
03 0 Hispanic or Latino           06 0 Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander




 IExample 2  Two question format used on dummy records                            I
9. Are you                  1U.   Kace: MarK one or more
   Spanish/Hispanic/Latino?       01 0 White
   01 0 Yes                      02 0 Black or African American
   02 0 No                       03 0 American Indian or Alaska Native
                                 040 Asian
                                 05 0 Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander



                                       29


This form has been tested with four subjects. There were no appreciable differences
between the laboratory and on-site interviews other than the fact that the agency data
used on-site was substantially different than the data elements for Form RH-1. While
Form RH-1 is the easiest of the three forms to complete, the subjects demonstrated
some difficulty grasping the concept of multiple race responses and said the form
appeared complex when they first looked at it. Several subjects stated that a separate
set of instructions on how to complete the form is needed. One subject reviewed the
form and did not think it provided all the needed reporting categories because Hispanic
was not listed as a race. Even though the subject noticed that there was an individual
column for Hispanic individuals to be reported, he was confused because Hispanic was
not listed among the rows with the other race groups.


Once subjects began to c?mplete the form, they were able to adapt to its format and
report numbers accurately in the correct rows. However, entering the correct number in
the appropriate Hispanic column remained a problem. One subject stated "Everything
was pretty straightforward and I really didn't have any difficulty filling out my
employees ... but why are there three Hispanic columns? Why is the focus there? It
seems sort of arbitrary. "
In particular, subjects seemed to have the most difficulty knowing where to report
Hispanic individuals with no race information.



                                             30
only have two Hispanic columns (Yes, of Hispanic or Latino origin; No, not of Hispanic Or
Latino origin) because subjects had a lot of difficulty discriminating between the column
Individuals who marked NO, Hispanic origin and the column Individuals who did not
provide Hispanic origin information. 6 The revised RH-1 will also attempt to make clearer
where to record individuals for whom no race information is available. Last, an improved
set of instructio[ls will be developed and tested. Following is a sample of part of the form
that was tested followed by the test instructions.

 FORM RH-1                                                                            Individuals   Individuals   Individuals
                                                                                         who           who           who did
                                                                                        marked        marked           NOT
                                                                                         YES,           NO,          provide
                                                                                       Hispanic      Hispanic       Hispanic
                                                                                        Origin        Origin          Origin
                                                                                                                   informatio
                                                                                                                        n
              1 White ........................................................
 Individual
 s            2 Black/African American .............................
 who
 marked       3 Asian .........................................................
 ONLY
 ITfJr        4 American Indian/Alaska Native .................
  race
              5 Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander .....
                                   B........................................... :..
              7 White +            Asian .......................................
              8 White +            Am Indian/Alaska Nat. ............
                                                                                                                       .
 Individual   9 White +            Nat Hawaiian/O!?I ...................
 swho
 marked       10 Black/African Am + Asian ......................
 TWO
 races        ~1~~lack/African Am             + Am Indian/Alaska
              12 Black/African Am + Nat Hawaiian/OPI ..
              13Asian + Am Indian/AlaSka Nat. .............
              14 Asian + Nat Hawaiian/OPI. ....................


 Race         32 Individuals who DID NOT provide race
 missing      information

 Total                     33 ............................................
                 Sum of rows 1 through 32



       6 RH-1 as well as RH-2 and RH-3 used Hispanic origin rather than Hispanic or
Latino origin. This was an oversight that will be corrected in future testing.




                                                                             31
three, four, and five race groups. For space reasons, only the first third of the form is
shown above.




   RH-l INSTRUCTIONS




                                            32

          1.     We are requesting separate counts for individuals who mark only one race
  and for those who mark more than one race-- one race, two races, three races, etc.

         2.     For the purposes of this form, 'Hispanic' is an ethnic group and is not a race.

        3.       If you are entering information for individuals of Hispanic origin for whom no
 race data are available, please enter these individuals in your count on Line 32, 'Individuals
 who DID NOT provide race information' and Column (1) 'Individuals who marked YES,
 Hispanic origin'.

         4.     If you do not have any racial/ethnic information for individuals, or the
 information your organization has does not fit a racial/ethnic category, then please enter
 these individuals in your count in Row 32 'Individuals who DID NOT provide race
 information' and Column (3) 'Individuals who did not provide Hispanic Origin information'.




2.2.2 Form RH-2


                                              33
found in Form RH-1, participants interviewed on-site as well as the laboratory subjects
using a combined race/ethnicity dummy record were the most confused because the test
form separates counts of Hispanics from counts of race groups which is not currently
done at their agency or organization. With one exception, the subjects interviewed both
in the laboratory and on-site were not experienced in manually aggregating data from
individual source documents. Rather, they were familiar working with data already
aggregated and contained in automated files, most of which include Hispanic as one of
the race/ethnicity reporting categories. For example, one subject stated "The only one I
got confused and stumped on was .... under the multi-race count ... It was hard for me not
to treat Hispanic as a race category. I guess I've been trained and indoctrinated." A
second subject said "It's basically asking how Hispanics were separated into groups of
races. I think the part that confuses me is that our Hispanics do not view themselves as
another race. And so that is kind of what threw me off... it's asking for Hispanics who
had marked 'White, ' but they don 'f. They would have checked Hispanic. "


Whether in the laboratory or on-site, all subjects were confused at first by the second half
of the form which requires the reporting of the number of times a race was marked
among the multiple race responses. Below is a modified portion of the form that asks for
these counts. As indicated in the RH-1 discussion, Form RH-2 will be revised prior to
further testing.




                                           34



  CcuJt ofrm "". r,co ." matIaJ for~' 렁,   Hispanics               NON   Separate Hispanic Origin
  /IJ.kJ. ~ THAll! (ace
                                                        Hispanics         Question with no answer
                                                                          given

  Number of times WHITE
  was marked



  Number of times BLACK/AFRICAN
  AMERICAN was marked



   Number of times ASIAN
   was marked



   Number of times AMERICAt"1
  INDIAN/ ALASKA NATIVE was
  marked


  Number of times NATIVE
  HAWAIIAN / OTHER PACIFIC
  ISLANDER was marked




                                                  35


Two interviews were completed with Form RH-3. Neither subject completed the form
accurately or seemed to understand its intent. This form allows for race information to be
crosstabulated by other demographic information. The top portion of the form is shown
below. The two subjects interviewed only had experience working with automated data
and therefore, had no experience or knowledge of the tasks involved in manually
aggregating responses .. One subject, a Federal government EEO officer, stated that
Hispanic is considered a race and she demonstrated difficulty in not knowing where to
report Hispanic individuals as well as what to do for Hispanic or Latino individuals who
also mark one race (Should I count this as a multiple race count?). The other subject did
not understand the form at all and was only familiar with producing aggregate reports
from automated data systems. Form RH-3 needs some additional testing before
revisions can be made.




        FORM RH-3A                 AGGREGATE REPORTING OF POPULATION BY RACE, HISPANIC
                                         ORIGIN AND GENDER


        Hispanic and                       IndivitJuals Who Marked Only ONE Race           Individuals   Individuals   Total
        Cender                                                                                Who           Who         Pop
        Characteristics                                                                      Marked       Did NOT
                                   White    Black!      Asian    American       Native
                                                                                            MORE         Report Race
                                            African               Indian!      Hawaiian!    THAN
                                           American               Alaska        Other        ONE
                                                                  Native        Pacific
                                                                                              Race
                                                                                   "
        Total Population

        Hispanic          Male

                       Female

                       Total

        Not            Male
        Hispanic
                          Female

                       Total

        No Hispanic    Male
        Information
                       Female

                       Total




                                                                 37


Based on the laboratory interviews, on-site visits, and discussions with many state and
local government personnel and personnel working in private industry, several
methodological problems regarding the development and testing of aggregate reporting
forms were identified.


Differences between the format of the individual (source) data and the format of the
aggregate form: One of the problems in trying to test a prototype form that would assist
agencies in developing aggregate reporting methods is that the format of the individual
data varies across programs, agencies, and organizations. To develop an aggregate
reporting form, general questionnaire design principles would call for using the same or
similar categories as those used for the individual data. For example, if the individual
data uses a combined race/ethnicity question in which Hispanic or Latino is one of the
response options, then one would expect to design an aggregate form that follows the

                                            38
reporters, members of the committee found that a combined race/ethnicity question has
been used often and that a variety of terms and words are used to represent a race
category. Thus, subjects have difficulty complying with the testing task because they are
essentially being asked to reformat and redefine their data in order to complete the test
form.


Regardless of whether an agency is using a combined question or whether an agency is
using the terms set forth in the revised standards, the point here is that data reporters
expect an aggregate form to be similar conceptually to individual records. Since the test
forms were developed independent of what the individual records contain, the test forms
were perceived as unsuitable for reporting agency race and ethnicity data.


To illustrate this problem, at one corrections center, the racial identification is made by
the arresting officer and includes the categories: (1) Black, (2) White, (3) Oriental, (4)
Indian, (5) Black Hispanic, (6) White Hispanic, (7) Oriental Hispanic, (8) Indian Hispanic,
and (9) unknown. The information is made by observation, and it is unclear to what
extent Hispanic information is assessed accurately. At a different corrections center in
the same state, race and ethnicity data are automated and keyed using two separate
fields as follows: (B) Black, (A) Asian/Pacific Islander/Oriental, (I) American Indian/Alaska
Native, (C) Caucasian, and (U) Unknown; in a separate field either (H) Hispanic is
entered or the field is left blank. The data are obtained from a police officer who records it
on an intake form which is then keyed at the time of entrance to the facility. The database
at this facility allows for missing/unknown race information which the subject said
accounts for roughly 10% of the facility population.
Neither one of these subjects worked easily with the test form because it was so different
from their agency's individual source data and aggregate reports they have completed in
the past.


Difficulties in performing a complicated manual task. A second testing problem was that
only one subject was familiar with manual aggregating and reporting of race and ethnicity

                                             39
were developed and tested, they could then easily be adapted to automated reporters.
While this may be true, the testing process itself was strained because the individuals
interviewed had considerable difficulty applying their data reporting process to manual
completion of the test forms. Improving the instructions will partially reduce this problem
but redesigning the forms is necessary too.


Visual appearance of the forms: The committee recognized that the forms look
complicated. While it was thought that draft forms would suffice for testing purposes, the
importance of the appearance and layout of the forms were underestimated. Prior to
further testing, the forms will be redesigned to look more professional and reduce the
initial perception of complexity.


Mix of laboratory and on-site tests: Conducting both laboratory and on-site visits is
methodologically much more complicated than had been foreseen. Simply put, testing in
the laboratory using dummy records is not similar enough to a like task at an agency
level. This is because the laboratory subjects actually performed the task of categorizing
and manually aggregating data in order to fill out the test form. On-site, however, the
data the subjects worked with for testing were already aggregated and therefore, the task
was substantially different and subjects could not simply disaggregate the data as
needed to fill out the form. This problem can be partially remedied by developing
different protocols for laboratory and on-site tests as well as ensuring that the interview is
conducted with a staff member who has access to the individual source data.


2.4    Guidelines for Aggregate Reporting of Race and Ethnicity Data


As referred to previously, the Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting
Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity issued on October 30, 1997 set forth principles that
should be followed when aggregating race and ethnicity data for Federal reporting
purposes. The committee tested three different reporting forms with the hopes of
providing guidelines to agencies for the development of new reporting forms. None of the

                                            40
 interviews suggest that minor revisions and improved formatting of Form RH-1 may work
 for agencies that collect each multiple race combination reported. The Phase II revision
of Form RH-1, along with improved instructions, may also serve to help develop computer
 specifications for those who will be developing automated reporting systems.


 For agencies that need a total number of multiple race responses followed by the number
of times each race was reported, the concepts underlying Forms RH-2 and RH-3 will
 provide the data needed and may be worth pursuing. However, the current forms need
substantial revision and, more importantly, considerable attention still needs to be paid to
developing instructions that are easy to understand and will lead to accurate completion
of the forms. A remaining problem that can only be overcome in time is the need for
. agencies to change the way individual data are collected. Redesign of the forms will not
address the disconnect between the format of the individual data and the format of
aggregate forms that meet the revised standards. A few general guidelines, though, can
be offered at this point and should be considered by agencies as they move forward with
implementing the revised standards.




                                           41
responses. A system that collects every multiple race combination along with Hispanic or
Latino origin information will allow the maximum flexibility for an agency in further
reporting and analysis. It would be expected that only automated systems could achieve
this, unless the population sizes for a given agency or organization are small enough to
allow manual record keeping and tabulations. Most of interviews thus far confirmed that
for agencies that automate individual records, new combinations of multiple races could
                                              7
be incorporated into their current systems.       Practically, though, modifying a reporting
system to accept numerous combinations of race and ethnicity reports has several
difficulties, most notably (1) the burden associated with reporting at least 62 8 unique
combinations of race and Hispanic or Latino origin crossed by other variables and (2) the
issue of data suppression due to confidentiality and privacy concerns.


Guideline 2: Professionally design the form and include clear instructions.
Taking care to professionally design a reporting form may seem obvious but the need for
this is heightened when the form is complex and appears difficult to complete. Many
future respondents reporting race and ethnicity data will be working with new terms and
concepts and therefore, may be more prone to error if instructions are not clear and
completion of forms are not self-evident. In particular, instructions must address what the

       7Contacts at establishments have stated that the costs of modifying their current
automated systems may be high and that accommodating a reporting change would require a
decision at senior management levels.

        8The figure of 62 is based upon the possible combinations of 5 race categories and 2
ethnicitycategories (Yes or No regarding Hispanic or Latino origin). The figure could be
substantially higher if subgroups (e.g., Japanese, Samoan, Cuban, Puerto Rican, etc.) are used
when collecting race and ethnicity data as well as combinations that account for missing race
data and missing Hispanic or Latino origin data.




                                              42


Guideline 3: Provide definitions that assist in understanding the concepts of single race
reports and multiple race reports as well as the distinction between ethnicity and race.
These definitions might be able to be integrated into the instructions accompanying the
form or on the form itself. Another option is to develop an information sheet that explains
these and other relevant definitions.


Guideline 4: Explain how the respondent should treat different kinds of missing data.
One clear problem that emerged in the cognitive testing was that respondents were
unsure how to handle missing data. Missing data can take a variety of forms (i.e,
Hispanic is reported but race. data is missing; race is reported but Hispanic information is
missing) and each type should be addressed to avoid reporting errors.


2.5    Continuing Research on Aggregate Reporting of Race and Ethnicity


Phase I will be completed by April 1, 1999. Phase II will begin in the Spring 1999 and be
completed by July 31, 1999. Its research design is currently being revised and may
include further testing and refinement of forms and instructions. It may also include a
more focused effort to conduct on-site visits with various agencies to better understand
the reporting problems posed by aggregate reporting of race and ethnicity data. It is
relevant to note that many of the problems identified in this research are not new and
have been known and documented in the past. Phase II will concentrate on developing
guidelines that will inform the reporting process, improve data quality, and assist data
reporters in aggregating data containing multiple race responses.


3.0    Field Instructions and Training Procedures


Work to develop interview instructions and interviewer training procedures will begin in
the Spring of 1999 and conclude on July 31, 1999. Different training modules and
interviewer instructions depending on the mode of administration and the type of data

                                            43
collection operations.


Work on field instruction and training will, in all likeliness, not address new issues or
problems. For example, some household interviewers have for years been using
flashcards for race questions and are experienced in helping a respondent understand
response categories and so forth. However, since the revised standards do encompass
several distinct changes, it seems timely to address in a more    systemati~   way issues in
the fielding of the questions, and ways that interviewers can be trained to improve data
quality. Specific procedures on how to ask the questions and, in some cases, how to
instruct the respondent to use the flashcard will be developed as well as suggested
interviewer probes, definitions, and statements that can be used to answer respondent
questions. It is known from past surveys that at a minimum, guidance should be provided
regarding the following:


     What should the interviewer say if the response is multiracial, biracial, or some
      other term or phrase without a specific race combination mentioned?


     What should the interviewer say if the response is Hispanic, Latino, or some other
      term indicating Hispanic or Latino origin?


     What are the general probes and/or definitions that interviewers should use for
      responses such as American, Swedish, Jewish, and so forth?


     What is the intervi.ewer response to a refusal or a response of "other?"




                                             44

Aday, L. (1989). Designing and conducting health surveys: A comprehensive guide.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Bates, N., de la Puente, M., DeMaio, T. J., & Martin, E. A. (1994). Research on race and
ethnicity: Results from questionnaire design tests. Proceedings of the Annual Research
Conference, (pp. 107-136). Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the Census.

Belson, W.A. (1981). The design and understanding of survey questions. Aldershot,
England: Gower.

Biemer, P. P., Groves, R. M., Lyberg, L. E., Mathiowetz, N. A. & Sudman, S. (Eds.).
(1991). Measurement error in surveys. New York: Wiley.

Bureau of the Census (1996). Findings on questions on race and Hispanic origin tested
in the 1996 National Content Survey. Population Division Working Paper No. 16.

Bureau of the Census (1997). Results of the 1996 Race and Ethnic Targeted Test. Staff
in Population Division and Decennial Statistical Studies Division. Population Division
Working Paper No. 18.

Cantor, D., Schechter, S. & Kerwin, J. (1996). Evaluation of changes to the race
question on birth certificates. Proceedings of the Government Statistics Section,
American Statistical Association, 241-245.

Converse, J. M., & Presser, S. (1986). Survey questions: Handcrafting the standard
questionnaire. Beverly Hills: Sage.

DeMaio, T. J. (Ed.). (1983). Approaches to developing questionnaires. Statistical Policy
Working Paper No.1 O. Washington, DC: Statistical Policy Office, Office of Management
and Budget.

Dillman, D. A. (1978). Mail and telephone surveys: The total design method. New York:
Wiley.

Edmonston, B., Goldstein, J., & Tamayo Lott, J. (1994). Spotlight on heterogeneity: An
assessment of the federal standards for race and ethnicity classification. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.

Evinger, S. (1995). How shall we measure our nation's diversity? Chance, Winter 1995,
7-14.



Farley, R. (1993). Questions about race, Spanish origin and ancestry: Findings from the

                                          45
Subcommittee on Census, Statistics and Postal Personnel, House of Representatives,
April 14.

Fowler, F. J. (1993). Survey research methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Gerber, E., & de la Puente, M. (1996). The development and cognitive testing of race
and ethnic origin questions for the Year 2000 Decennial Census. Proceedings of the
Annual Research Conference, (pp. 190-232). Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of the
Census.

Groves, R. M., Biemer, P. P., Lyberg, L. E., Massey, J. T., Nicholls II, W. L. & Waksberg
J. (Eds.). (1988). Telephone survey methodology. New York: Wiley.

Groves, R. M. (1989). Survey errors and survey costs. New York: Wiley.

Lyberg, L., Biemer, P., Collins, M., de Leeuw, E., Dippo, C., Schwarz, N. & Trewin, D.
(Eds.) (1997). Survey measurement and process quality. New York: Wiley.

Office of Management and Budget (1997). Recommendations from the Interagency
Committee for the Review of the Racial and Ethnic Standards to the Office of
Management and Budget concerning changes to the standards for the classification of
federal data on race and ethnicity. Federal Register. Vol. 62 (131),36844-36946.

Office of Management and Budget (1997). Revisions to the standards for the
classification of federal data on race and ethnicity. Federal Register, Vol. 62 (210),
58781-58790.

Payne, S. L. (1951). The art of asking questions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.

Schechter, S. (In press). Revising the standards for data on race and ethnicity:
Comments on the process and thoughts on future implications. Statistical Policy Working
Paper: Seminar on Interagency Coordination and Cooperation. Washington, DC:
Statistical Policy Office, Office of Management and Budget.

Schwarz, N., & Sudman, S. (1996). Answering questions: Methodology for determining
cognitive and communicative processes in survey research. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.

Sirken, M., Herrmann, D., Schechter, S., Schwarz, N., Tanur, J., & Tourangeau, R.
(Eds.). (in press). Cognition and survey research. New York: Wiley.

Sudman, S., & Bradburn, N. (1982). Asking questions. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Tanur, J. M. (Ed.). (1992). Questions about questions: Inquiries into the cognitive bases


                                            46
I
I
        of surveys. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.




                                               47

    /
i       Tucker, C., McKay, R., Kojetin, B., Harrison, R., de la Puente, M., Stinson, L., &
I
        Robinson, E. (1996). Testing methods of collecting racial and ethnic information:
        Results of the Current Population Survey Supplement on race and ethnicity. Bureau of
        Labor Statistics Statistical Notes, No. 40.

        Tucker, C. (in press). Revision of the classification system for race and ethnicity.
        Statistical Policy Working Paper: Seminar on Interagency Coordination and Cooperation.
        Washington, DC: Statistical Policy Office, Office of Management and Budget.

        u.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (1996). Racial
        and ethnic classifications used by public schools. NCES 96-092, by N. Carey and E.
        Farris, J. Carpenter, project officer, Washington, DC. .




                                                 48
EMAILS CREATED
ARMS - BOX 014 - FOLDER 008


[2/18/1999] [2]


Date: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Start time: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Interviewer:
            ----------
From Scott's telephone screening, subject's race is_ _ _ _ and Hispanic or Latino
origin status is _ _ _ _ _ __


This interview is for the   condition marked below:
       CONDITION 1           Hisp Short + Race Short       Telephone interview
       CONDITION 2           Hisp Long + Race Short        Telephone interview
       CONDITION 3           HispShort + Race Short        Face-to-face (Flashcards 1 and
                                                           3)
       CONDITION 4           Hisp Long + Race Short        Face-to-face (Flashcards 2 and
                                                           3)
       CONDITION 5           Hisp Long + Race Long/2 banks Face-to-face (Flashcards 2 and
                            4)
       CONDITION 6           Hisp Long + Race Long/3 banks Face-to-face (Flashcards 2 and
                            5)


Before we begin, do you have any questions to ask of me?
(If yes, answer as neutrally as possible. If specific to questionnaire, tell respondent we
will talk about this later).

Begin Interview - Modify wording as necessary if interview is conducted on telephone.

Okay, let's begin. Pretend you are at home and I've knocked on the door/telephoned
you and asked you to participate in an interview. You agree and I begin the interview.

01.    What are the names of all persons living here (in this house/apartment)? Start
       with the name of a person living here who owns or rents this house/apartment.

       Person 1_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                  Person 4 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
       Person 2_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                  Person 5_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
       Person 3_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                  Person 6 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __


02.    What is (use name) person #2's relationship to (use name) person #1?

                                              49
         Enter relationship above next to name.

03.      What is (your/_ _ 's) date of birth? Ask for all household members.

         Person 1                          Person 4 - - -
         Person 2                          Person 5 - - -
         Person 3                          Person 6 _ __

04.      What is (your/_ _ 's) age in years? Ask for all household members.

         Person 1                              Person 4_ _ _ _ _ _ __
         Person 2                              Person 5_ _ _ _ _ _ __
         Person 3                              Person 6_ _ _ _ _ _ __


05.      Are you (is           ) now married, widowed, divorced, separated, or never
            married?
      Only ask for subject and remaining adults in household.

         Person 1_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __               Person 4_ _ _ _ _ __
         Person 2_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __               Person 5_ _ _ _ _ __
         Person 3_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __               Person 6_ _ _ _ _ __


      PROBE: What does separated mean to you?


      PROBE: Do you consider divorced and separated the same thing or different things?


06.      What is (your/___ 's) sex? Ask for all household members and mark M or F
         above in 05.


07.      What is the highest level of school (you/          ) (have/has) completed or the
         highest degree (you/            ) (have/has) received?

         Person 1_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                   Person 4_ _ _ _ _ __
         Person 2_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                   Person 5_ _ _ _ _ __
         Person 3_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                   Person 6_ _ _ _ _ __



                                             50
  PROBE: What does completed mean to you?


Q8.   Interviewer hands respondent Hispanic/Latino Flashcard.
      Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino?

      Be sure to record the verbatim response. Ask the probes after getting
      Hispanic origin for all household members.


  Person 1___________________               Person 4____________

  Person 2, ___________________             Person 5________

  Person 3___________________               Person 6_______________




  PROBE: Can you tell me what this question is asking?



  PROBE: What does Spanish, Hispanic, Latino mean to you?



  PROBE: Do all three words mean the same thing or do they mean something
  different?



  PROBE: When you looked at the flashcard, what did you think your answer was
  suppose to be?




  PROBE: What does Puerto Rican mean to you? What does Cuban mean? Etc.




                                       51

      Please select one or more of the following categories to best describe your
      race.

      Be sure to record the verbatim response in the order that the racers) are
      named. Ask the probes after getting race for all household members.

  Person 1___________________               Person 4_ _ _ _ _ _ __

  Person 2___________________               Person 5_ _ _ _ _ _ __

  Person 3_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __                Person 6_________




  PROBE: Can you tell me what this question is asking?




  PROBE: What does the word race mean to you?




  PROBE: Does Black or African American mean the same thing or do they mean
  something different? What do they mean to you?




  PROBE: Does American Indian or Alaska Native mean the same thing or do
  they mean something different? What do they mean to you?




  PROBE: What does Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander mean to you? Do
  they mean the same thing or do they mean something different?




                                       52
the card easy or hard to read?


PROBE: Show the subject the other two flashcards. Ask the subject what is the
difference between each flashcard. Also ask whether the subject has a
preference for one flashcard over another.


PROBE: Is there anything missing from the flashcard that you would have
expected to see or were looking for?




                                   53

l. You told me that you are (or other person is)          (RACE). But are there any other races
   in your family background that might apply to you (other person)?        '



2. (If yes) What are those other races?


3. When you've completed fonns or interviews which asked for (your lother person's) race, have
   you always answered with the same race, or has your answer been different?



4. If yes, Hispanic ...... have you ever reported your race as Hispanic or Latino? Do you find race
   questions confusing or easy to answer?




5. Were there any questions in this interview that you think some people might find difficult? If
   so, which ones? Why?




6. Were there any questions in this interview that you think some people might find sensitive? If
   so, which ones? Why?




7. Is there anything in these questions that you think we should change?
   What are those changes?




                                                54


_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Starting Time
_________ Interviewer


                                       INTRODUCTION

Hello, my name is         , and I work for            . Today, we are asking for your help
in testing a new form which asks for some general information about the people who
work in your agency (organization, firm). We have found that the best way to design
these forms is to try them out with a variety of people to see how easy or hard they are to
complete.

What I would like you to do is first look at the form and tell me what you think it is asking
you to do. There are no right or wrong answers but your first impression will help us
understand how other people will interpret the purpose of the form. Then, I'd like you to
try to fill it out without asking me to help you. After completing the form, I will ask you
some questions about your answers, and you can also tell me more about what you like
and don't like about the form.

Before we begin, do you have any questions to ask of me?
(If yes, answer as neutrally as possible. If specific to questionnaire, tell respondent we
will talk about this later).
Okay. Here's the form. Please take a minute to look at it and then I'll ask you some
questions.



1. Can you tell me in your own words what this form is asking you to do?



2. What is your general reaction to the form?



3. How easy or difficult is it to understand? Are you pretty sure you know what to do or are you
   confused?




                                                55
might have a better idea of how to complete the form.


NOTE:       On-site establishment interviews are conducted using the organization's personnel
            data. Lab interviews are conducted by giving participants 100 "dummy" records.


Pretend that your school/organization gained 100 new students/employees during the year. You
are responsible for reporting the race and Hispanic or Latino origin of those 100
students/employees to your boss. For example, your boss wants to know how many white were
students/employees, how many black or African American students/employees, etc.




Now, I would like to let you know about some recent changes in OMB reporting requirements.


First of all, it is specified that respondents may select more than one race.



Second, the category Asian/Pacific Islander has been broken out into two categories: Asian and
Native Hawaiian.




You may want to use these blanks sheets as worksheets to extract the information from these
records of your 100 new students/employees.




Now use these numbers to fill out the form. If you aren't sure what to do, try to guess rather than
ask me a question. (make a note if you have a questiori) We can talk afterwards about what you
are unsure of.




                                                 56


1.    Now that you have worked with the form, can you tell me in your own words what the form
      asked you to do?



2.    2.     What question or questions does your agency ask to obtain race/ethnicity
      data from its students (clients)?



3.    How well would this form work for report racial and ethnic data in your current data
      system?



4.    How are your school's/company's race/ethnicity data broken out?



5.    Do your records include multi-racial data? If yes, would you be able to categorize it in a
      way that you could complete this form?



6.    How did you arrive at your numbers? Go over with me the parts of the form you
      completed and what you did to enter the number.



7.    What does (racial group) mean to you?



8.    What does the Hispanic or Latino instruction mean to you?



9.    What does single race only on this form mean to you?



10.   What does plus one or more other races on this form mean to you?


                                              57
                    which ones? Why? (What makes them difficult?)



12.   What about the amount of detail that this form asks for.... Do you think the form asks for
      enough detail? Do you think the form asks for too much detail?



13.   What did you like about the form?



14.   What did you dislike abOLit the form?



15.   Were there any questions that you find sensitive? Ifso, which ones?



16.   Is there anything on this form that you think we should change? If yes, what are those
      changes?



17.   How did you interpret the 'total population' boxes?



18.   Did you have any records that you couldn't fit into one ofthe boxes? Where did you put
      people whom you couldn't fit into a category? How have you handled situations like this in
      the past?



19.   How long would it take for you to gather the information to complete this form?



20.   What did you think about the instructions? What should.be changed?




                                              58
      ethnicity standards and that multiple race responses are now acceptable in government
      surveys?




                                             59

SELF-REPORTED RACE AND HISPANIC ORIGIN QUESTIONS


 Conditio      Interview      Hispanic    Race              Race and Ethnic Background of Subject's Mother and Father     Tota
 n             Mode           Question    Question                                                                        I
                                                       America    Asian   Black/At.   Native    White   Hispanic   More
                                                                                                        9
                                                       n Indian           American    Hawl                         than
                                                                                      OPI                          one
                                                                                                                   race

 1             Telephone     Short        Short                           2                     2                         4


 2             Telephone      Long        Short                           3                                               3


 3             Face-to-       Short       Short                           2                                        1      3
               face

 4             Face-to-       Long        Short                                       1         2                         3
               face

 5             Face-to-       Long        Long                    1       3           1         2       1          1      9
               face                       with
                                          two bank
                                          flashcard

 6              Face-to-      Long        Long                    2       3                     2       1          2      10
                face                      with
                                          three
                                          bank
                                          flashcard




       9   Both subjects who reported their parents as Hispanic reported their race as White.



                                                  60




          61


AGGREGATE REPORTING FORMS


 Condition                           Laboratory        On-site establishment   Total
                                     Interviews        interviews

 RH-1                                2                 2                       4
 Every combination

 RH-2                                4                 4                       8
 Counts of population and times of
 multiple race responses



 RH-3                                1                 1                       2
 Crosstabulated counts of
 population and times of multiple
 race responses

 Total                               7                 7                       14




                                                  62

                  Census 2000 Dress Rehearsal Prototype Redistricting Data


Under the provisions of Public Law (PL) 94-171, the Census Bureau is required to work closely
with state legislatures and governors to design special decennial census data tabulations that will
meet the states' needs for census information for legislative redistricting. Since the enactment of
PL 94-171 in 1975, the states have requested the Census Bureau to include in the PL
Redistricting Data products a breakdown by race, Hispanic origin, and voting age to enable them
to comply with provisions ofthe 1965 Voting Rights Act (as amended) and the court decisions
on "one-personlone-vote."

During the past several months, the Census Bureau has designed the tabulations that will be
produced from the 1998 Dress Rehearsal to simulate the information that will be produced from
the 2000 census to satisfy these redistricting data needs of state legislatures in compliance with
Public Law 94-171.

In November 1997 and April 1998 Census Bureau officials met with the Redistricting Task Force
of the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) and reviewed the then-proposed Dress
Rehearsal PL 94-171 Redistricting Data file that would include 63 racial categories (cross-
classified by voting age and by "Not Hispanic or Latino") for each census block, state-specified
voting district, census tract, place, county, etc. The resulting product, identified as the "PL 63
Matrix," would contain over 260 data items for each geographic area (e.g., county, election
precinct, census block).

State legislative officials expressed concern about the prospect of having to create state
redistricting data bases and process many scores of alternative redistricting plans using the
resulting 260-plus data cells for each of tens of thousands of census blocks in a state (7-8 million
nationally). Also, the Census Bureau and some of its advisors had concerns about
confidentiality issues surrounding presenting such detailed information for such small geographic
areas.

Responding to this concern, Census Bureau staff met with members of the Voting Rights Section
of the Civil Rights Division, U.S. Department ofJustice, in June 1998, to review the census data
state and local officials would need to comply with the Section 2 and Section 5 ("pre-clearance")
provisions of the Voting Rights Act as they redistrict after the 2000 census. As a result of those
discussions, the Census Bureau developed -- as an alternative to the "PL 63 Matrix" -- a smaller
tabulation containing only 20 racial categories, called the "PL 20 Matrix" (copy attached).

This PL 20 Matrix provides flexibility to allow redistricting officials and others to use "single-
race" totals or the "all-inclusive" totals of those persons who report one or more racial categories
(i.e., alone or in combination with one or more other races) in redistricting. The Voting Rights
Section reviewed this smaller PL 20 Matrix, and in late July, the Census Bureau consulted with
the Justice officials to confirm they had no suggested changes to the census information needs
presented the PL 20 Matrix to the NCSL Redistricting Task Force and provided it to the Census
2000 Redistricting Data Program Liaisons, appointed by each state. The Task Force and the
Liaisons have indicated that this smaller matrix is appropriate for their needs and avoids the
extensive processing requirements associated with the PL 63 Matrix.

To meet the processing deadlines for the Dress Rehearsal, the Census Bureau proceeded with the
programming so that it could produce the Census Dress Rehearsal Redistricting Data no later
than April 1, 1999. Please note that if the analysis of the Dress Rehearsal results would so
indicate, the design of the PL 94-171 data could be modified for the 2000 census. The Census
Bureau expects that the Dress Rehearsal PL 94-171 Redistricting Datawill be available (on CD-
ROM and the Internet) in early 1999 and no later than April 1, 1999. The Census Bureau will
provide copies of the CD-ROM to state officials and other users, asking that users work with
these actual redistricting data and provide comments to the Census Bureau for its use in
finalizing the design of the 2000 census PL Redistricting Data products.
                      Public Law 94-171 SUMMARY FILE MATRICES
                                           (As of 11119/98)


PI.           PERSONS [I]
              Universe:        Persons
              Total

P2.           PERSONS [I]
              Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
              Total

P3.           RACE [7]
              Universe:        Persons
              White alone
              Black or African American alone
              American Indian and Alaska Native alone
              Asian alone
              Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
              Some other race alone
              Two or more races

P4.           RACE [7]
              Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
              White alone
              Black or African American alone
              American Indian and Alaska Native alone
              Asian alone
              Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
              Some other race alone
              Two or more races

P5.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [8]
            Universe:        Persons
            Hispanic or Latino
            Not Hispanic or Latino:
                    White alone
                    Black or African American alone
                    American Indian and Alaska Native alone
                    Asian alone
                    Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
                    Some other race alone
                    Two or more races

P6.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND .RACE [8]
            Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
            Hispanic or Latino
            Not Hispanic or Latino:
                    White alone
                    Black or African American alone


                                                    3
              Asian alone
              Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone
              Some other race alone
              Two or more races

P7.   RACE [2]
      Universe:         Persons
      White alone or in combination with one or more other races
      Not White alone or in combination with one or more other races




                                            4
                Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
                White alone or in combination with one or more other races
                Not White alone or in combination with one or more other races

P9.             HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
                Universe:         Persons
                Hispanic or Latino
                Not Hispanic or Latino:
                        White alone or in combination with one or more other races
                        Not White alone or in combination with one or more other races

PIO.    HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      White alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not White alone or in combination with one or more other races

P II.   RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons
               Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races

P12.    RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
               Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races

P13.    HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:        Persons
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races

P14.    HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not Black or African American alone or in combination with one or more other races

P15.    RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons
               American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in cumbination with one or more other races

P16.    RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
               American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other races


                                                      5

Pl7.    HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:         Persons
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other
              races

P 18.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination with one or more other
                      races

P19.    RACE [2J
               Universe:         Persolls
               Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races

P20.    RACE [2]
               Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
               Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races

P21.    HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:         Persons
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races

P22.    HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
              Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
              Hispanic or Latino
              Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races
                      Not Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races

P23.    RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons
               Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more other
        races

P24.    RACE [2]
               Universe:        Persons 18 years and over
               Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more other races
               Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more other


                                                      6

P25.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more
             other races
                      Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or
             more other races

P26.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persolls J8 years and over
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                      Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or more
             other races
                      Not Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone or in combination with one or
             more other races

P27.   RACE [2]
              Universe:        Persons
              Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races
              Not Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races

P28.   RACE [2]
              Universe:        Persons J8 years and over
              Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races
              Not Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races

P29.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:                                                .
                     Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races
                     Not Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races

P30.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons J8 years and over
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                     Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races
                     Not Some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races

P31.   RACE [2]
              Universe:       Persons
              One race
              Two or more races

P32.   RACE [2]
              Universe:         Persons J8 years and over
              One race


                                                     7

P33.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                     One race
                     Two or more races

P34.   HISPANIC OR LATINO AND RACE [3]
             Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino:
                     One race
                     Two or more races

P35.   HISPANIC OR LATINO [2]
             Universe:         Persons
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino

P36.   HISPANIC OR LATINO [2]
             Universe:         Persons 18 years and over
             Hispanic or Latino
             Not Hispanic or Latino




                                                   8

                     The Bridge Report: Tabulation Options for Trend Analysis

1. Introduction

A. Scope and Focus

To permit meaningful comparisons of data collected under the previous standards with data that
will be collected under the 1997 standards, some agencies may need procedures for bridging to
the past. Because Federal data are used to measure change over time, these kinds of data
comparisons are critical to disentangle real changes in economic, social, and health conditions
from changes resulting from the new data collection methods. The purpose of this report is to
discuss different options fo,r tabulating racial data in order to create bridges from data collected
under the new standards, which have five racial categories and pemlit the reporting of more than
one race, back to the previous four racial categories. An "Other" category appears in much of
the analysis, because it is included in the decennial census.

The contents of this report represent the work of a group of statistical and policy analysts drawn
from Federal statistical agencies that use and produce data on race and ethnicity. They have spent
the past year considering these tabulation issues and conducting research to develop tabulation
guidelines for constructing "bridges" between racial data collected under the new standards and
racial data collected under the old standards. This report sets forth criteria by which different
bridging methods should be evaluated and describes the different methods that have been
considered thus far. The results of the research conducted on several methods for creating
bridges are also presented. All of these methods (and the research on them reported here)
involve the use of individual-level records, because altering aggregate data would not allow for
the c~oss-tabulation of race with variables measuring social, economic, and health outcomes.
Analysis is limited to data collected using separate questions for race and Hispanic origin. Under
the new standards, when reporting is based on self-identification, the two-question format is to be
used; even in the case of observer identification, this is the preferred format. However, it is
expected that some users will bridge to a distribution created using a combined race and ethnicity
question. Thus, bridging both to the old racial distribution resulting from the use of two
questions and one based on a combined question are analyzed. At this time, the analysis of
bridging to the combined distribution has not been completed, but those results will be included
in the report when they become available. Based on the research, the strengths and weaknesses
of each tabulation method are discussed. Until all the analysis has been completed, however,
recommendations will not be made.

B. Organization of the Report


                                                 1
procedures considered for possible use in bridging to racial data collected under the old
standards. The third section is a description of the different bridge methods considered. The
fourth section provides an overview of the methodologies used in data analysis. The fifth section
details the results of previous research on this topic. The sixth section presents results from new
statistical analyses conducted on actual and simulated data to evaluate the different methods. The
seventh section evaluates the different tabulation procedures based on using the criteria, in
conjunction with the results from both old and new research.

II. Criteria for Evaluation

The interagency expert group on tabulations generated criteria that could be used both to evaluate
the technical merits of different bridging procedures (See Part V and Appendix D) and to display
data under the new standards. The relative importance of each criterion will depend on the
purpose for which the data are intended to be used. For example, in the case of bridging to the
past, the most important criterion is "measuring change over time," while "congruence with
respect to respondent's choice" will be more critical for presenting data under the new standards.


The criteria set forth below are designed only to assess the technical adequacy of the various
statistical procedures. The first two criteria listed below are central to consideration of bridging
methods. The next six criteria apply both to bridging and long-term tabulation decisions. The
last criterion is of primary importance for future tabulations of data collected under the new
standards.

Bridging:

       Measure change over time. This is the most important criterion for bridging, because
       the major purpose of any historical bridge will be to measure true change over time as
       distinct from methodologically induced change. The ideal bridging method, under this
       criterion, would be one that matches how the respondent would have responded under the
       old standards had that been possible. In this ideal situation, differences between the new
       distribution and the old distribution would reflect true change in the distribution itself.

       Minimize disruptions to the single race distribution. This criterion applies only to
       methods for bridging. Its purpose is to consider how different the resulting bridge
       distribution is from the single-race distribution for detailed race under the new standards.
        To the extent that a bridging method can meet the other criteria and still not differ
       substantially from the single-race proportion in the ongoing distribution, it will facilitate
       looking both forward and backward in time.

Bridging and future tabulations:


                                                  2
        across agencies in tabulating racial and ethnic data, tabulation procedures that can be used
        in a wide range of programs and varied contexts are usually preferable to those that have
        more limited applicability.

        Meet confidentiality and reliability standards: It is essential that the tabulations
        maintain the confidentiality standards of the statistical organization while producing
        reliable estimates.

        Statistically defensible. Because tabulations may be published by statistical agencies
        and/or provided in public use data, the recommended tabulation procedures should follow
        recognized statistical practices.

       Ease of use. Because the tabulation procedures are likely to be used in a wide variety of
       situations by many different people, it is important that they can be implemented with a
       minimum of operational difficulty. Thus, the tabulation procedures must be capable of
       being easily replicated by others.

       Skill required. Similarly, it is important that the tabulation procedures can be
       implemented by individuals with relatively little statistical knowledge.

       Understandability and communicability. Again, because the tabulation procedures
       will likely be used, as well as presented, in a wide variety of situations by many different
       people, it is important that they be easily explainable to the public.

Future tabulations:

       Congruence with respondent's choice. Because of changes in the categories and the
       respondent instructions accompanying the question on race (allowing more than one
       category to be selected), the underlying logic of the tabulation procedures must reflect to
       the greatest extent possible the full detail of race reporting. The bridging methods are
       meant to simulate how respondents would have identified under the old standards using
       as much of the new information as possible.

III Methods for Bridging

The goal of developing bridging methodology for data on race is to identify a statistical model
that will take individuals' responses to the new questions on race and classify those responses as
closely as possible to the responses we hypothesize they would have given using the old single
race categories. Such a task will be relatively easy or be more difficult depending on how an
individual identifies himself or herself under the new standards. For bridging purposes,
individuals with only a single racial background are likely to identify as they did before, and no
statistical model is needed for bridging. However, those with a mixed racial heritage who were

                                                 3
choose to identify all of their racial heritages. When a person identifies with more than one racial
group, some model will be necessary to translate those multiple responses into the one, single
response that we hypothesize that the individual most likely would have reported under the old
standards.

A. Framework

Several different methods have been identified for creating a single race distribution from data
including multiple race responses. These methods vary in both the assumptions that are made
and the procedures that are followed. Before describing the particular methods examined in this
report, it is 'useful to describe some of their major underlying characteristics.

One major distinction among the methods is whether an individual's responses are assigned to a
single racial category (termed whole assignment in Table 1) or to multiple categories (termed
fractional assignment). Whole assignment can be based on a set of deterministic rules or based
on some probabilistic distribution. For example, a deterministic rule might assign all White and
American Indian responses into the American Indian category, while a probabilistic rule might
randomly assign 60 percent White and American Indian responses into the American Indian
category, and 40 percent into the White category. In the above example, it is unlikely that all
individuals identifying as White and American Indian under the new standards would have
previously identified as American Indian, so the deterministic rule will result in misclassifications
for all those people who had previously identified as White. With a probabilistic rule, an
individual's responses are randomly assigned to either the American Indian category or the White
category (such as with 60 percent and 40 percent probabilities, respectively, based on previously
collected data). However, even if the overall probabilities matched exactly the aggregate
distribution under the old standards, there is no guarantee that the 40 percent who were
categorized as White would have classified themselves that way. In fact, in the worst case, all 40
percent who were classified as White would actually have identified as American Indian under the
old standards, and a corresponding percentage of those categorized as American Indian would
have identified as White.

When fractional assignment is used, multiple race responses are categorized into more than one
category where each category receives a fraction of a count, and the sum of the fractions equals
one. In the above examples of whole assignment, a person's responses were placed into one and
only one category, in an attempt to mimic the past. An alternative is to use a deterministic rule
to assign some fraction of the multiple race response to each of the racial categories identified.
For example, a multiple response of White and American Indian might count as "one-half" in the
tabulations for American Indians and "one-half" in the tabulations for Whites. These fractions,
like the probabilities in the earlier example, could be varied for different combinations of multiple
races to attempt to reflect how often people might identify with one group compared to another.

                                                 4
multiple race responses are assigned wholly to one category or fractionally to all the categories
identified. Table 1 provides an overview of this framework. Specific methods will be considered
within each of the cells except the Probabilistic/Fractional Assignment method because the
alternatives are unnecessarily complex and do not improve upon the alternatives in the other cells.

There are inherent strengths and weaknesses in each of these tabulation approaches.
Furthermore, it is important to note that all of these methods are simplistic compared with the
human behavior they are seeking to emulate, and at best, any method will only be able to reflect
roughly what is sought in an historical bridge ..

B. Bridge Tabulation Methods

All of the bridge tabulation methods focus on the assignment of the responses from individuals
who identify with more than one racial group. Responses from individuals who identify with
only a single racial group under the new standards are assumed to have been the same under the
old standards. The response ''Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander" is assigned to the old racial
category of "Asian or Pacific Islander." The specific methods for assigning multiple race
responses into single race categories are Deterministic Whole Assignment, Deterministic
Fractional Assignment, and Probabilistic Whole Assignment.

Two sets of results from each of the following tabulation methods are produced. The first set
ignores the use of any auxiliary inforn1ation other than that needed to carry out the particular
tabulation method. The other set of results for each method uses the one piece of information
that is certain to be common to all data collections done following the new standards, that is,
ethnicity. Thus, whether or not an individual is Hispanic is taken into account when a tabulation
method is used.

Deterministic whole assignment. These methods use fixed, deterministic rules for assigning
multiple responses back to one and only one of the racial categories from the old standards.
Four alternatives are examined. The first (Smallest Group) assigns responses that include White
and another group to the other group, but responses with two or more racial groups other than
White are assigned into the group with the fewest number of individuals identifying that group as
a single race. The second alternative (Largest Group Other Than White) assigns responses that
include White with some other racial group, to the other group, but responses with two or more
racial groups other than White are assigned into the group with the highest single-race count.
The third alternative (Largest Group) assigns responses with two or more racial groups into the
group with the largest number of individuals as a single race. In this latter case, any combination
with White is assigned to the White category, and combinations that do not include White are

                                                5
responses based on data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). The NHIS has
permitted respondents to select more than one race for a number of years, with only the first two
responses captured. However, respondents reporting more than one race were given follow-up
question asking them for the one race with which they most closely identify (see section VI.A.l
for a detailed description of the NHIS data). For these respondents, the proportion choosing
each of the two possibilities as their main race was calculated. All responses in a particular
multiple-race category using the Plurality method are assigned to the race group with the highest
proportion of responses on the follow-up question about main race.

Deterministic fractional assignment. These methods use fixed, deterministic rules for fractional
weighting of multiple-race responses, that is, assigning a fraction to each one of the individual
racial categories that are identified. These fractions must sum to 1. Two alternatives are
examined. The first (Deterministic Equal Fractions) assigns each of the multiple responses in
equal fractions to each racial group identified. Thus, responses with two racial groups are
assigned half to each group; those with three groups are assigned one-third to each, etc. The
second alternative (Deterministic NHIS Fractions) assigns responses by fractions to each racial
group identified, with the fractions drawn from empirical results from the NHIS (as described
above).                                          .

Probabilistic whole assignment. These methods use probabilistic rules for assigning multiple race
responses back to one and only one of the previous racial categories. Two alternatives are
examined. These parallel the two alternatives discussed under Deterministic Fractional
Assignment, except that, for a given set of fractions, the response is assigned to only one racial
category. The fractions specify the probabilities used to select a particular category. The first
alternative uses equal selection probabilities. The second uses the NHIS fractions where possible,
and equal fractions when no information is available from NHIS. Probabilistic Whole
Assignment will yield nearly, on average, the same population counts as Deterministic Fractional
Assignment. Only the results from Deterministic Fractional Assignment are presented in this report.
In practice, there would be a difference between Deterministic Fractional Assignment and
Probabilistic Whole Assignment when computing variances for tabulated estimates, and the two
methods will yield relatively small differences in distributions for respondent characteristics. In
general, Probabilistic Whole Assignment would yield a higher estimated variance than the
Deterministic Fractional approach, with the variances for both methods uncjerestimating the true
variance. Probabilistic methods which incorporate a "Multiple Imputation" statistical technique
would result in an unbiased estimate of variance, but at the price of being more difficult to
implement (See Rubin 1987.).

Another probabilistic whole assignment method that is not examined but could be considered is a
hot deck imputation method. This procedure is often used in surveys to provide data on
responses to survey items where responses are missing. For purposes of bridging, a hot deck

                                                 6
person who identified more than one racial group. The person would then be assigned into one
of the racial categories that he or she had reported based on the single racial group reported by
the nearest neighbor.

C. Detailed Race Distributions

In addition to the results from applying the historical bridge tabulation methods, the "detailed"
race distributions are presented. This information gives the percentage of individuals identifying
with a single race or with specific multiple-race combinations. Excluding the "other" category,
there are 31 categories in the detailed distribution, including 5 single race groups, 10 two-race
combinations, 10 three-race combinations, 5 four-race combinations, and 1 five-race combination.
 The percentage of respondents identifying with a single race represents the lower bound for the
counts in the separate race categories.

The percentages of the total number of respondents who identified with each racial group also
are presented regardless of whether they also identified with any other group. Thus, those who
selected more than one race group are included in each group they selected, and each percentage
represents the percent of the population who marked that given racial group. The sum of these
percentages, in the presence of multiple race reporting, totals more than 100 percent. This
distribution serves both as a point of comparison to the bridge methods and as an alternative to
the complete distribution described above, and it gives an upper bound on the percentage of
individuals who might have identified with anyone of the racial groups under the old standards.
 This distribution is referred to as the "All Inclusive" distril:mtion.

IV. Methods of Evaluation

A. Review of Previous Research

A significant amount of research was completed during 1995 and 1996 to inform decisions
concerning proposed changes to the standards for data on race and ethnicity. The May 1995
Current Population Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity provided detailed
information concerning alternative ways of collecting data about racial and ethnic background.
The results from the National Content Survey (NCS) conducted by the Bureau of the Census in
1996 yielded similar infortnation. The CPS, however, also included racial infortnation from the
same respondents gathered in a previous data collection using the racial categories from the old
standards. In addition, data available from the Racial and Ethnic Targeted Test (RAETT)
reported by the Census Bureau in 1997 provides distributions from the reporting of race and
ethnicity under the new standards for selected population groups. The National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS) also contains information about multiple race reporting. As described above, the
NHIS asks respondents to select all racial groups with which they identify, and those individuals

                                                7
data sets will provide a good background for the additional research needed on bridging. See
OMB (1997) for a description of these surveys and their results.

B. Data Sources for Additional Research.

Only a limited number of data sources are available for evaluating the methods of creating
bridges. None of the currently available, nationally-representative data sets mimic exactly the way
the question on race will be asked under the new standards. Yet, some of the current data can
offer insights into the relationship between how individuals will actually respond to the new
question on race and how they responded to the question under the old standards.

Both the NHIS and the CPS Supplement data sets are useful for this purpose. Actually, the CPS
Supplement can be used to evaluate the effects of the different tabulation methods for both the
two-question format and a combined race and ethnicity question (to be presented in a later
version). Data recently collected by the state of Washington will serve as an example for
evaluating the tabulation methods at the sub-national level, and its race question most closely
resembles that which will be used under the new standards. Simulations using 1990 census data
also were conducted, but the results differed little from those for the other data sets. At this
point, it is believed that an analysis of data from the 1998 census dress rehearsal would be of
greater utility. Furthermore, the dress rehearsal data will provide other examples of the effects of
the new standards at the local level. Thus, this analysis will be included in a later version of this
paper.

C. Description of New Analysis

The analyses concentrated on the bridge tabulation methods. These analyses can be divided into
three broad areas: (I) descriptions of racial distributions under the tabulation methods; (2) rates
of racial misclassification for the tabulation methods; and, (3) sensitivity of outcome measures to
tabulation alternatives.

Distribution of Race. For the first part of the analysis (using the NHIS, the CPS Supplement,
and the data from Washington State), the distributions of race under the allocation alternatives
described previously were calculated: All Inclusive, Deterministic Whole Allocation (Smallest
Group, Largest Group Other Than White, Largest Group, and Plurality) and Fractional
Allocation (Equal Fractions and NHIS Fractions). At this time, it is unknown what percentage
of people in the United States will identify with more than one racial group when given the
opportunity to do so in Census 2000 census and in subsequent surveys. For purposes of
illustrating the effects of a greater proportion of individuals identifying multiple racial
backgrounds, analyses were conducted increasing the proportion of multiple race responses two-,
four-, six- and eight-fold using th~ NHIS, the CPS Supplement, and the Washington State micro

                                                 8
effects with increasing levels of multiple race reporting. Of necessity, these tabulations assume
that the increases are the same across the different combinations of more than one race. The
accuracy of this assumption cannot be tested. The purpose of these analyses is not to attempt to
make accurate predictions about the extent of multiple race reporting or its composition, but
rather to see more clearly possible differences among tabulation methods that may only become
apparent with a greater percentage of multiple race reporting.


In all three data sets, overall goodness-of-fit statistics were calculated to compare the match
between the distribution from each bridge tabulation method and the appropriate reference
distribution in each data set (representing the distribution under the old standards). The
goodness-of-fit measure was a multiple of the standard Likelihood Ratio G 2 statistic used in
categorical analysis (Agresti 1990), with the "true" or reference distribution playing the role of the
"Expected" and the distribution of each of the tabulation methods playing the role. of the
"Observed." Small values of the goodness-of-fit measure indicate that the distributions are close,
and large values indicate that the distributions are not close. Significance tests at the .10 level also
were calculated for all pair-wise comparisons of the percentage in a particular racial category from
the reference distribution to the percentage falling in the same category under each of the
tabulation methods. These tests take into account both the fact that multiple comparisons are
being made and the effects of complex sampling designs ..


Misclassification of Race. Besides evaluating the overall racial distributions produced by the
tabulation methods, the misclassification of individuals also needs to be examined. For the
NHIS, the CPS Supplement, and the Washington State survey, these misclassification rates were
formed by comparing an individual's answer to the race question under the old standards to the
assigned category of the individual's response(s) to the race question under the new standards
using each of the tabulation methods. For the purpose of estimating these rates for the whole
population, those selecting a single race with the new question were included. The
misclassification rate and its standard error for each race by tabulation method were produced.


Preliminary Outcomes Assessment. In the last part of the analysis, the impact of multiple-race
reporting on outcome measures is assessed. This is important because users in many of the
Federal agencies are not typically examining race distributions, but rather trends and indicators for
the Nation (e.g.,health outcomes, economic well-being, educational attainment) across racial
groups. This is where the majority of work will need to be done within individual agencies as
the new standards are implemented. An initial examination of how common statistics could be
affected by multiple race reporting is presented here. Five outcome measures were examined,
three from the NHIS and two from the CPS Supplement. From the NHIS, three routine health
outcomes were calculated: percent of respondents in poor or fair health, percent of children

                                                  9
Supplement, the proportion of respondents who were unemployed and the labor force
participation rates for different racial groups were calculated. These measures are not meant to be
precise estimates of these factors, but are used to demonstrate the possible impact multiple-race
reporting, and the tabulation methods, may have on these and similar estimates.


V. Findings from Previous Research


In order to evaluate tabulation methodologies for bridging to the past, the magnitude of the
problem first must be considered. Currently the proportion of the population reporting more
than one race is quite small. Between 1 and 2 percent of the total population identified with
multiple races in both the CPS Supplement and the NCS. These numbers coincide with recent
data from the longitudinal series collected in the NHIS. These estimates, however, may not
match the results from the new standards for two reasons. In light of the greater publicity this
issue has received in recent months, a heightened awareness of multiple heritages could lead a
higher proportion of the population to select more than one race. Moreover, some of the
estimates were based on question formats that differ from what the new standards require. Both
in the CPS Supplement and in the NCS, respondents were asked to select only one category
from a list including a "multiracial" category and did not have the option of choosing one or
more races from a list of single races. The results from the RAETI, in which the multiple
response option was compared to the use of a multiracial category in targeted populations,
indicated that the "multiracial" category (when "select one or more" was the instruction) had a
greater effect among Asians and Pacific Islanders than did the multiple response option.
Unfortunately, the multiple response option was not tested with the Alaska Native targeted
sample, where the proportion selecting the "multiracial" category was the largest compared to the
other samples.
Even if the portion of the total population marking more than one race is small, the proportions
of some population groups doing so can be quite large and variable. Table 2 shows the racial
distribution and the percentage of respondents who selected more than one race for each of the
targeted samples in the RAETT. The percentages for the groups other than Whites and Blacks
are fairly large, especially in the Asian and Pacific Islander targeted sample. Those classified as
American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN) under the old standards were the respondents most
likely to choose the multiracial category when it was offered in the CPS Supplement. However,
even those in the AlAN category selecting a single race varied from one time to the next (in
both the CPS Supplement and the NCS reinterview) in their choice of the particular single race.
 This inconsistency in the reporting of racial group by American Indians and Alaska Natives has
been noted elsewhere (Passel and Berman 1986; Snipp 1986; McKenney and Cresce 1992;
McKenney et ai. 1993). Thus, the difficulty of forming a bridge to the past will differ depending
on the particular racial group as reported under the old standards. Other racial groups also may

                                                10
population reporting more than one race no doubt will differ by state, size of place, and also by
some individual demographic characteristics such as the levels of income, education, and,
especially, age. The various methods for creating the bridge could have different effects on the
statistics for groups defined by these and other variables.


VI Results of Statistical Analysis Comparing Different Methods


A. Comparison of distributions from different methods using the reported proportions of
multiple race responses


1. National Health Interview Survey
The NHIS is a continuing nationwide sample survey designed to measure the health status of
residents of the United States (Benson and Marano, 1995; Massey et al., 1989). Information on
demographic and health characteristics for an entire household is collected through a personal
interview with a single respondent. All information for children under 18 years of age is obtained
by proxy. The sample design follows a multistage probability design that allows a continuous
sampling of the civilian noninstitutionalized population of the United States. The survey is
designed so that the samples for each week are nationally representative and can be combined
over time. The response rate of the ongoing portion (the core) of the questionnaire is between
94 and 98 percent. To obtain population estimates from the NHIS, survey weights are assigned
to each observation. These weights are derived from census estimates of the U.S. population,
household non-response, and the sampling frame.


The analysis for this report uses data from an analytic file that contains three years of NHIS data
(1993, 1994, and 1995). For each of these years there were about 45,000 households
interviewed, resulting in a little over 100,000 individuals per year. The total sample for the
bridge analysis is 323,080 (5237 respondents are missing racial data).


Racial Variables from the NHIS. Since 1976, the NHIS has allowed respondents to choose more
than one racial category. As the respondent is handed a card with numbered racial categories,
the interviewer asks, "What is the number of the group or groups that represent your race". If a
respondent selects more than one category, the interviewer then asks, "Which of those groups
would you say best describes your race?"


Although the listed racial groups have changed over time, for 1993 to 1995, the card shown to


                                                 11
Chinese, Filipino, Hawaiian, Korean, Vietnamese, Japanese, Asian Indian, Samoan, Guamanian,
and other Asian and Pacific Islander). Although not on the flashcard, respondents were allowed
to give an "other race" response. To be consistent, the 16 groups were collapsed to the four
previous racial categories: White, Black, American Indian or Alaskan Native (AlAN), and Asian
or Pacific Islander (API), plus Other.


For this analysis, a variable called Detailed Race was created from responses to the first question,
which allowed identification with more than one racial group. This information is not included
on public use data files of the NHIS. However, on internal files, the first two race groups
mentioned are recorded for each observation. Even if a respondent selected more than two
groups, only two were recorded on the intermediate file. From the two recorded racial
responses, Detailed Race was coded into five single race groups (White, Black, AlAN, API,
Other) and 11 multiple race groups (White/Black, White/AlAN, White/API, White/Other,
Black/AlAN, Black/API, Black/Other, AlAN/API, AlAN/Other, and API/Other). For most
analyses, multiple racial groups that had insufficient numbers were combined into the category
"Other Combinations." Individuals who had two racial groups recorded for Detailed Race but a
third group recorded for the "group that best describes race" were coded into "Other
Combinations. "


The Main Race variable, used as a reference point representing the racial distribution under the
old standards, is primarily derived from Detailed Race and the responses to the second question,
which asks the respondent for the group that best describes his/her race (Benson and Marano,
1995). For respondents who selected one Detailed Race group, Main Race is the same as
Detailed Race. For respondents who selected more than one racial group, Main Race is the one
group reported as best describing their race. Some respondents who had chosen more than one
race for the Detailed Race question responded as "Multiple race" or "Other" for the Main Race
question. For this analysis, these responses were combined into the "Other" category.
Categories for Main Race were White, Black, AlAN, API, and Other.


Several tabulations of the NHIS were done for this report. Unless otherwise stated, the survey
weights are used to provide national estimates.


NHIS AnaJysis. Information about how respondents who selected two racial groups might
identify if there was only the option to select a single racial group can be obtained from the
NHIS by looking at a comparison of Detailed Race and Main Race classifications. For
individuals in multiple-race combinations that had sufficient sample size, the Main Race
designation was compared to the Detailed Race response. As can be seen in Table 3, there is

                                                 12
describes their race. For example, 12 percent or less of those who reported as Black and AlAN
or White and AlAN choose AlAN as their Main Race group, whereas about 35 percent of
individuals identifying as White and API identify as API and about 50 percent of respondents
identifying as Black and White identify as Black. However, 27 percent of White and Black and
nearly 20 percent of White and API respondents do not select a Main Race, compared with
about 7 percent of those who are White and AlAN or Black and AlAN. Because the NHIS is
the only nationally representative data set available with large enough numbers of individuals with
specific combinations of racial groups, it is the best source for estimating how respondents who
selected multiple racial groups would identify a single race group.


The distribution of race was calculated using the Detailed Race variable, the Main Race variable,
and the different tabulation alternatives where responses from individuals of more than one race
are allocated to a single racial group (described above in detail). For the most part, the
distribution from the Main Race variable was used as a reference in comparisons with the
distributions produced by the different tabulation methods.


As Table 4A shows, less than 2 percent of the respondents reported more than one race during
1993, 1994, and 1995 in the NHIS. With less than 2 percent reporting more than one race, the
race distributions appeared very similar under different tabulation methods (Table 4B). The
estimated distribution from the NHIS Fractional Assignment method was closest to the reference
distribution for all race groups. Largest Group Whole Assignment and the Plurality method also
led to distributions close to the reference distribution. Smallest Group Whole Allocation and
Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation produced distributions similar to one
another. These two Whole Allocation methods greatly overestimated the number of AlAN
respondents, relative to the reference distribution. Equal Fractional Assignment overestimated the
numbers in the AlAN group, but not nearly as much as the Smallest Group and Largest Group
Other Than White Whole Allocation methods. The All Inclusive Allocation method, by
definition, leads to a higher proportion of respondents in each racial group, relative to the
reference distribution. However, the increase for the AlAN group is considerably larger than for
the other racial groups. The sum total for the All Inclusive method is greater than 100 percent,
reflecting the duplicate assignment of the multiple race respondents. The same conclusions hold
when looking at the distributions from the tabulation methods controlling for ethnicity (Table
4C).


The goodness of fit measures lead to similar conclusions; the NHIS Fractional Allocation method
had the smallest (i.e., the best) goodness-of-fit value, followed by the Largest Group Whole
Allocation method. Smallest Group Whole Allocation and Largest Group Other Than White
Whole Allocation had the largest goodness-of-fit values, indicating a poorer overall fit than the

                                                13


 Because of their larger population size, the White and Black categories were less affected by the
 choice of allocation method than were the API and the AlAN categories. Compared to the
 reference distribution, the various allocation methods led to estimates approximately 10 percent
 lower to 200 percent higher for the AlAN group, 3 percent lower to 6 percent higher for the
 API group, and estimates within 1.5 percent for both the Black and White groups.


 2. May 1995 Supplement on Race and Ethnicity to the Current Population Survey (CPS)


 The May 1995 CPS Supplement was one in a series of studies conducted for the Federal
 agencies' review of the standards for data on race and ethnicity. The Supplement was designed
 to address the following issues: (1) the effect of having a "multiracial" race category among the
 list of races; (2) the effect of adding "Hispanic" to the list of racial categories; and (3) the
 preferences for alternative names for racial and ethnic categories (e.g., African-American for
 Black, and Latino for Hispanic). The Supplement was organized into four panels representing a
 two-by-two experimental design for studying the first and second issues outlined above. Each
 panel was given to one-fourth of the sample, or about 15,000 households (30,000 individuals).
 All respondents in a household received the same set of questions; household members 15 years
 and older were asked to respond for themselves, and parents answered for children under 15.
 The panels were defined as:
         Panel 1:   Separate race and Hispanic origin questions, no multiracial category;
         Panel 2:   Separate race and Hispanic origin questions, with a multiracial category;
         Panel 3:   A combined race and Hispanic origin question, no multiracial category;
         Panel 4:   A combined race and Hispanic origin question, with a multiracial category.
 In panels 1 and 2, the Hispanic origin question preceded the race question. Detailed information
 concerning the results of the CPS Supplement can be found in Tucker et aI., (1996).


 Data from the May 1995 CPS Supplement. Only two of the panels in the CPS Supplement
 allowed respondents to report in a multiracial category (panels 2 and 4), and only panel 2 had
 separate race and Hispanic origin questions as ultimately recommended in the new standards.
 Therefore, panel 2 data were used to analyze the effects of the different tabulation methods.
 The smaller sample (about 30,000 observations) hampers analysis and generalizations when the
 focus is on the small portion of the sample (about 1 percent) who identified as "multiracial."


. There are additional limitations to these data for evaluating the bridging methods. The option

                                                 14
 category with a follow-up question asking respondents to identify all of the racial groups the
 person would identify with. The new standards allow people to identify directly with all the
 racial groups they choose and do not include a "multiracial" category. Furthermore, a large
 percentage of individuals who chose the multiracial category in panel 2 of the Supplement did
 not specify more than one racial group (see Tucker et aL, 1996). For purposes of this evaluation,
 individuals were classified as belonging to the specific racial categories they identified. Those
 who identified as being multiracial but then did not give two or more specific racial groups were
 reclassified as single race respondents in the one racial category they gave. Thus, the distribution
 of the CPS Supplement data reported here differs from that which was published in earlier
 reports, which classified as multiracial any person who identified with the multiracial category
 even if they only specified one racial group. This new distribution is referred to here as the
 "Edited Distribution."


  The edited distribution was used with the various tabulation methods. As in the NHIS, the
  resulting distributions were compared to a reference distribution, in this case based on the
  respondents' original answers (in the first CPS interview) to the race question that followed the
. old standards.


Several tabulations of the CPS Supplement were done for this report. Because weighting to the
race controls developed under the old standards would confound analysis, the survey weights that
are used for tabulations are not designed to provide national estimates. The weights reflect the
probability of selection and an adjustment for nonresponse, but do not reflect post-stratification to
known population totals by age, race, and sex groups. Thus, these results cannot be directly
compared to other sources.


 CPS Supplement Analysis. Table SA provides the detailed distribution for the racial categories
reported in the CPS Supplement. A smaller proportion reported more than one race in this
survey compared to the NHIS. This is largely the result of recoding, in the Supplement, two
race responses involving "Other" to the single race category of the other race mentioned. As can
be seen in Table SB, the All Inclusive Allocation method, the Smallest Group Whole Allocation
method, and the Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation method have the poorest
fits to the reference distribution, based on the race question in the initial CPS questionnaire. The
NHIS fractional method provides a relatively close fit. The Largest Group Whole Allocation
method and the Plurality method give the closest fits. These observations are largely confirmed
by the goodness-of-fit measures. Table SC shows essentially the same results when controlling
for ethnicity.




                                                  15
assigned to these same categories using the different bridging methods along with answers to the
race question in the CPS Supplement in Panel 2, including respondents who simply switched
single-race categories from one time to the other. Over 96 percent of Whites and 95 percent of
Blacks in the original survey were assigned back to this same category for all methods. Well over
90 percent of those in the API category originally ended up in that category using each bridge
method. On the other hand, far fewer respondents in the original AlAN category (only a little
more than 60 percent) were assigned to that category with every bridging method. The same
was true for those in the "Other" category. Using ethnicity does not alter these results (Table
6B).


3. 1998 Washington State Population Survey


The 1998 Washington State Population Survey (WSPS) was designed to provide information on
Washington residents between decennial censuses. The survey collected data on employment,
income, education, health, along with basic demographic information. The WSPS was done by
telephone and included 7,279 households with telephones. Blacks, Asians, Hispanics and
American Indians were oversampled. The designated respondent was the individual with the
greatest knowledge about the household. The respondent weights reflect this oversampling and,
thus, results are representative of the Washington population as a whole. The response rate for
the entire sample was between 50 and 60 percent.


Data from the WSps. Infomlation about the race of the respondent was collected twice during
the course of the interview. At the beginning of the survey, the respondent was asked, "Are you
of Hispanic origin?" Following that question, the respondent was asked, "What is your race?"
The categories were the ones appearing under the old standards, but the order was as follows:
Black; American Indian, Aleut, or Eskimo; Asian or Pacific Islander; and White. An "Other"
category also was allowed, and the interviewer recorded the verbatim response on a "specify"
line. Near the end of the survey, the respondent was asked race questions conforming to the
new standards. Besides the same Hispanic origin question, the respondent was asked to specify
                   o
country of origin. For race, the respondent was asked to select one or more categories. This
time the ordering of the categories was White; Black or African American (Or Haitian or
Negro); American Indian or Alaska Native; Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander; Asian.
Again, an "Other" category was provided. There also was a follow-up question for Asian
respondents to specify country of origin.


The results from the race question at the end of the survey were used with the tabulation
methods. The reference distribution came from the answers to the original race question.

                                               16
children are not likely to be represented. Because the racial characteristics of the population in
Washington differ substantially from those of the nation as a whole, the results of the analysis of
the Washington data offer a contrast to those for both the NHIS and the CPS Supplement
(Table 7A). Only 2 to 3 percent of the state's population is Black. Although Whites reporting a
single race make up more than S6 percent of the population, API is still about 3 percent of the
population (as in the nation as a whole) and AlAN (alone or in combination with White) is
about 3 percent of the population. In the reference distribution (Table 7B), AlAN is 1.3 percent
of the population. Those reporting more than one race comprise more than 4 percent of the
state's population.


When the WSPS responses were assigned to the old categories using the various tabulation
methods, the national racial distributions used in CPS were applied. Table 7B shows that the All
Inclusive method, the Smallest Group method, and the Largest Group Other Than White
method provide the poorest fits to the reference distribution, especially for the AlAN category.
The Largest Group method and the Plurality method understate the proportion in the AlAN
category, and the Equal Fraction method overstates it. Their goodness-of-fit measures, however,
are approximately equivalent. The NHIS Fractions method clearly provides the closest fit.
Again, the conclusions are similar when ethnicity is taken into account (Table 7C).


Table SA presents a somewhat different picture. As in the CPS Supplement, a very large
percentage of those classified as White, Black, or API using the old standards would remain in
the same category under the new standards using any of the methods. However, those originally
classified as AlAN or "Other" are more likely to remain in the same category using the All
Inclusive, Smallest Group, and Largest Group Other Than White methods than when using the
other methods, The same conclusions hold when controlling for ethnicity (Table SB).


B. Misclassification Rates


1. NHIS Analysis


Tables 9A and 9B present the misclassification rates for race by ta'bulation method in the NHIS.
The two tables are essentially the same. The misclassification rates for the "Other" category are
relatively large (and significantly different from zero) no matter the tabulation method: The
Smallest Group method and the Largest Group Other Than White method perform the best for
both the AlAN and API categories. Note, however, that these two methods have the highest

                                                17
relative to the other categories. The Largest Group method, the Plurality method, and the NHIS
Fractions method produce substantial misclassification rates for the AlAN category ..


2. CPS Supplement Analysis


Tables lOA and lOB show the misclassification rates for the CPS Supplement. Again, the
conclusions are the same whether or not ethnicity is taken into account. Misclassification is much
greater in the CPS Supplement compared to the NHIS. The rates for the AlAN and "Other"
categories are extremely large, and the results differ little from one tabulation method to another.


3. Analysis of the WSPS


The results from the WSPS fall in between those for NHIS and the CPS Supplement (Tables
11A and 11B), and controlling for ethnicity has little effect. Although the Smallest Group method
and the Largest Group Other Than White method have substantial misclassification rates for both
the AlAN and "Other" categories, these rates are not nearly as large as the ones for the other
tabulation methods. Misclassification in the API category is much the same for all methods.
Given the size of the White category and the somewhat greater misclassification rates for this
category using the Smallest Group and Largest Group Other Than White methods, these two
methods again have the highest overall misclassification rates.


C. Comparisons of the Race Distributions if Multiple Race Responses Increase


This section does not include analyses controlling for ethnicity, because this control had little
effect in the previous analyses. No significance testing is done given the hypothetical nature of
these simulations. For example, increases in the numbers reporting more than one race would
not likely be uniform across all racial categories.


1. NHIS Analysis


Table 12 shows that if the percentage of multiple race responses increases for all groups at the
same rate and the distribution on the Main Race variable remains the same, the tabulated counts
for AlAN increase dramatically under several tabulation methods. The Fractional Allocation
method that uses the proportions derived from the NHIS remains close to the reference


                                                18
goodness-of-fit value, underestimates the Main Race proportions within all groups, including
AlAN, except White. Smallest Group Whole Allocation shows the greatest proportionate change
to all of the groups, increasing all the groups except White. The change is greatest for the
smaller groups, AlAN and API, and is less so for Black. As with the results from previous
comparisons, the Equal Fractions Allocation method more closely resembles the reference
distribution than does Smallest Group or Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation
methods, but does not come as close as the Largest Group Whole Allocation and NHIS
Fractions methods. Again, the Plurality method produces the results closest to the reference
distribution. The All Inclusive method increasingly deviates from the reference distribution. For
example, when the multiple responses are increased by a factor of eight, the percent AlAN under
the All Inclusive method is over five times the percent AlAN in the reference distribution. In
contrast, the percent White is only 16 percent higher than the reference distribution.


Goodness-of-fit statistics grow increasingly as the number of multiple-race respondents increases,
suggesting that the allocation methods to approximate the old standards may be of decreasing
utility over time, especially in certain areas of the country. Nonetheless, the relative ranks of the
goodness-of-fit statistics are consistent: the Plurality method has the lowest value, followed by the
NHIS Fractions and Largest Group Whole Allocation methods, while Smallest Group and
Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation have the largest values, indicating poorer
fits.


Overall, the results for the AlAN group are the most sensitive to the choice of bridge allocation
method. Results for the API group are also sensitive to the choice of allocation method; as for
the AlAN group, Smallest Group and Largest Group Other Than White Whole Allocation
overstate the percent API, Largest Group Allocation slightly understates the percent API, Equal
Fractions slightly overstates the percent API, and, the Plurality method and NHIS Fractions are
the most similar. Because of their relatively larger size, Black and White groups are less affected
than the smaller groups; however, even those estimates increasingly differ as the numbers of
multiple-race respondents increase. The methods controlling for Hispanic ethnicity were not
evaluated for the increases in the proportion of respondents reporting multiple races, because the
earlier analysis showed this control had little effect.


2. CPS Supplement Analysis


As can be seen in Table 13, the pattern of findings for the different methods in the CPS
Supplement looks very similar to that using the NHIS. Again, the greatest effects are seen on the
smaller racial groups, with the largest increases occurring when the All Inclusive method and the

                                                 19
Plurality method, followed by the Largest Group method and the NHIS Fractional method, most
closely resemble the racial distribution under the old standards. Again, the analyses controlling
for ethnicity were not done.


3. Analysis of the WSPS


Table 14 provides the results when increasing the percentage of individuals reporting more than
one race. Given that the number reporting more than one race in Washington was already
relatively large (over 4 percent), increasing that number up to a factor of 8 gives rather dramatic
results. It is unlikely that such a large portion of the state's population would report more than
one race in the foreseeable future. In any case, the proportion of responses assigned to the
AlAN category grows very large with the All Inclusive method, the Smallest Group method, and
the Largest Group Other Than White method. The proportions assigned to the White category
also become erratic. The Largest Group and Plurality methods underestimate the proportion.
The NHIS Fractional method performs the best throughout.


VII. Effects ofMethods on Outcome Measures


A. Sensitivity of Three Health Indices to Multiple-Race Reporting

As can be seen in both Table 15A and Table 15B, the health indices for single race groups did
not appear. to change much under any of the tabulation methods. In particular, the largest single
race groups (White and Black) are mostly unaffected by additions or subtractions of multiple race
respondents, primarily due to their size relative to the proportion multiple race, even when
estimates for the multiple race groups are distinctly different than their single race counterparts.
For example, Table 15A shows that the percent uninsured among the Black respondents is the
same under all the allocation methods even though the 'percent uninsured is much lower among
Black/White respondents. This difference is due to the fact that the Black/White respondents are
a very small group relative to the entire Black group. In some cases (All Inclusive, Smallest
Group, Largest Group Other Than White, and Equal Fractions), the AlAN group has a smaller
percent uninsured. These differences are due to the large difference in percent uninsured between
the single race AlAN and the multiple-race AIAN/White group, accompanied by the fact that a
relatively large proportion of AIAN/White respondents is included as AlAN under the allocation
methods.


Despite the lower percent of AIAN/White respondents compared to single-race AlAN

                                                20
the AlAN group. Once again, this indicates that both the difference in estimates between the
multiple race groups and the single race groups needs to be large and the proportion of multiple
race respondents also needs to be large to have measurable impact.


As another example, the percent of children living with a single mother is different for the single
race and the multiple race groups. Yet, the differences are not evident in the allocation methods.
 Only in the case of the AlAN group is there a possible effect.


B. Sensitivity of Economic Indicators to Multiple-Race Reporting


Tables 16A and 16B show the impact of the different bridging methods on the unemployment
rate and the labor force participation rate. On the surface, all of the methods produce a large
increase in the unemployment rate for the AlAN category, and the Largest Group, Plurality, and
NHIS Fractional methods produce the largest changes. However, these increases are not
statistically significant. Only in the case of labor force participation rates for some tabulation
methods are there statistically significant differences compared to the reference distribution.


VIII Examining the Tabulation Methods According to the Criteria

Bridging to the past will be needed for measuring change in a variety of circumstances. Besides
measuring population growth, any number of economic, social, and health outcomes must be
monitored. This work will involve different population groups at different levels of geography.
As a first step toward providing the information users will need to make informed decisions
about the methods, the strengths and weaknesses of these methods with respect to the evaluation
criteria will be discussed based on the findings in this report and other relevant information.


Measure Change Over Time. As indicated earlier, measuring change over time is the criterion that
is of greatest importance in evaluating the bridging methods. Much of this report has been
devoted to analyses that shed light on the performance of the various methods in this area. In
essence, an ideal bridging method in this case is one that not only accurately recreates the
population distribution under the old standards such that the only difference remaining is a
function of true change over time, but also assigns an individual's response to the old category
that would have been chosen. The methodology used in these studies allows users, within limits,
to see how well the bridging methods using racial data collected under the new standards can
match data from the same respondents collected (at the same time) under the old standards. To
the extent that there is a match, any change that would occur from this point forward would

                                                 21


When comparing the different methods to their reference distributions, the racial categories that
are most sensitive to which method is chosen are the numerically small ones, particularly the
AlAN category. While different data sets were used in each study and the racial questions were
not the same, the studies indicate that the Largest Group Deterministic Whole Assignment
method, the Plurality method, and the two Deterministic Fractional Assignment methods produce
distributions closer to the reference distributions than are the other Deterministic Whole
Assignment methods and the All Inclusive method. Controlling for ethnicity had no effect on
these results. One reason the Largest Group Assignment method results are so close is that it has
little effect on the smaller races, because most assignments are made to Black or White, and the
percentages for these two races are so large that the relatively small increase they receive is not
noticeable. The Plurality method produces a close fit, because it makes assignments at the level
of specific racial combinations. The performance of the NHIS Fractional Assignment method
can be discounted to a degree in the and NHIS study because the analysis is somewhat circular;
however, the results from the CPS Supplement and the Washington State Population Survey
(WSPS) show this method yields a relatively close match. The Equal Fractional Assignment
method produces a reasonable match in these studies. The primary reason that the other two
Whole Assignment methods and the All Inclusive method do not perform as well is that they
alter the White percentage to some extent and substantially increase the percentage in the AlAN
category.


In the case of misclassification rates, some contradictory results emerge. While the AlAN and
"Other" categories have high misclassification rates across all tabulation methods in the CPS
Supplement, the same is not true for the other two surveys. The Smallest Group Whole
Assignment and the I::argest Group Other Than White Whole Assignment methods produce the
most comparable results for the AlAN category in both surveys and for the "Other" category in
the WSPS; however, these methods have higher overall misclassification rates. Both the CPS
Supplement and the WSPS have large misclassification rates for these two categories when using
many of the tabulation methods.


When the distributions of the outcome variables are examined, all methods produce comparable,
and relatively close, matches for all health outcomes. For the AlAN unemployment rate, the
Largest Group Whole Assignment method and the NHIS Fractional Assignment method appear
to produce the least comparable numbers, but none of the differences are significant. There are
significant differences in the AlAN labor force participation rates for several of the tabulation
methods. It is likely that which method is best at matching a reference distribution for outcome
measures will depend on the outcome being examined. Unfortunately, the data to assess the best
tabulation method for each outcome may never be readily available.

                                                 22
these studies. It is unclear how people will respond to the new racial question in the future, and
these responses could differ by mode of data collection and with the subject of the survey.
Furthermore, most of this work on developing bridging methods relied on sample data, and
small samples at that.


Congruence with Respondent's Choice. This criterion concerns how well the full range of the
respondent's choices is represented in the racial distribution. It is more important for evaluating
ongoing tabulations under the new standards, but the bridging methods can be differentiated with
respect to this criterion, too. None of the Deterministic Whole Assignment methods take into
account the full range of the respondent's selections, but the Plurality method at least controls for
the particular racial combination chosen by the respondent under the new standards. The All
Inclusive method accurately reflects all selections by tabulating actual responses and not people.
The Equal Fraction Assignment method tabulates people, but, like the All Inclusive method,
treats all responses equally. The NHIS Fractional Assignment method takes all responses into
account, but assignment is based on attempting to estimate in which single-race category the
respondent would prefer to be counted.


Range of Applicability. This criterion refers to how well the bridging method can be applied in
different contexts. The All Inclusive method provides the same results in every context, because
assignment does not depend on the particular detailed racial distribution. This method is not
suitable for users who need a distribution that adds to 100 percent. Of the Deterministic Whole
Assignment methods, the Largest Group Assignment method is the least sensitive to context and
can be used in a wide varietY of applications. The other Deterministic Whole Assignment
methods are as easy to use as the Largest Group Whole Assignment method, but the results for
the small racial categories will vary to a greater extent with the context, particularly according to
level of geography. The Equal Fraction Assignment method is as generalizable as the All
Inclusive method, but it is not quite as easy to use. The NHIS Fractional Assignment method
and the Plurality method may be the most problematic, because they currently only represent a
national preference distribution based on data from 1993 to 1995. The use of this distribution at
the local level would be likely to produce inaccurate results in a number of cases. That is not to
say that the other methods do not face the same problem.


Meet Confidentiality and Reliability Standards. Because these methods all attempt to reproduce the
racial categories under the old standards, the same confidentiality problems that existed over the
last 20 years will continue to exist. No increase in problems is anticipated. In the case of
reliability, however, the situation is different. The All Inclusive method will not produce less


                                                 23
reliability problems as a result of only adding fractional counts to some of the smaller categories if
these categories have a high probability of being chosen as the preferred single race. The same
would be true if equal fractions were used to make whole assignments. In sample surveys, the
Deterministic Whole Assignment methods will have reliability problems to the extent that there is
a large variance on the individual race proportions. This is likely to occur when small samples
are involved. The Largest Group Whole assignment method should have the fewest problems
with respect to reliability, and the Smallest Group Whole Assignment method will likely have the
most. These methods have another problem, however, in that an individual's response may be
assigned to different categories at different levels of geography. The NHIS Fractional
Assignment method, as well as methods where fractions are used for whole assignment (i.e., the
Plurality method), is based upon a sample distribution with its own variance properties.
Reliability for the very small combinations will be quite bad unless many years of data are
combined, and this presents its own problems.


Minimize Disruptions to the Single Race Distributions. This criterion is only for evaluating the
bridging methods. Its purpose is to see how different the resulting bridge distribution is from the
single-race distribution for detailed race under the new standards. To the extent that a bridging
method can meet the other bridging criteria and still not differ substantially from the single-race
proportions in the ongoing distribution, it will have value for looking both forward and
backward in time. An evaluation of the different methods according to this criterion involves the
comparison of the bridge distributions to the detailed race distribution under the new standards in
each case.


For the CPS Supplement, the Plurality method is marginally closer than the Largest Group
Whole Assignment method and the Fractional methods. While the All Inclusive method and the
other Deterministic Whole Assignment methods match for the White category, they differ
substantially from the single-race AlAN category in the detailed distribution and are marginally
worse for the API category. The NHIS Fractional method is the closest in both the NHIS and
WSPS.


Statistically Defensible. To be statistically defensible, the bridging method must conform to
acceptable statistical conventions. The All Inclusive method makes no assumption about how
respondents would assign themselves in the single race situation. The NHIS Fractional
Assignment method and the Plurality method are based on an observed distribution, and, to that
extent, involve less judgment than the rest of the methods that assign people and not responses.
While the Equal Fractional Assignment method is based on judgment, it does not make
assumptions about the relative importance of any given race. The Largest Group Whole
Assignment method does assign greater importance to one of the races, but it also follows

                                                 24
minimize the error in assignment. The Smallest Group Whole Assignment method and the
Largest Group Other Than White Whole Assignment method do riot follow statistical practice,
but, instead, rely on the historical record of discrimination; even in these cases, however, the
assigned category is based on an observed distribution.


Ease of Use. "Ease of use" refers to how complicated it is to produce the bridge results. The
Equal Fractional Assignment method makes assignments that do not depend on the particular
detailed racial distribution at hand. It and the NHIS Fractional Assignment method do require
the duplication of individual records or the creation, on every record, of a variable for each racial
category under the old standards in order to be able to assign fractions for any combination of
categories. If the fractional methods are used to assign a respondent to a single category (whole
probabilistic methods), this cumbersome process can be avoided. The All Inclusive method, like
the Equal Fractional method, does not depend on the particular distribution, but it does produce
proportions that add to more than 100 percent unless they are raked or repercentaged to a base
of 100 percent each time. The Deterministic Whole Assignment methods and the NHIS
Fractional method would require an extra step unless only national figures are used, because the
relative size of the groups must be determined for each detailed distribution. Otherwise, they are
as easy to use as the whole probabilistic methods.


Skill Required This criterion refers to the skills required to carry out the bridge operations. The
amount of computer expertise to perform the operations associated with each of these methods is
fairly trivial. The Detei'l11inistic Whole Assignment methods require almost no statistical
knowledge. Some familiarity with the statistical adjustment literature would be useful for
understanding the Deterministic Fractional Assignment procedures. If the All Inclusive method
were used, users might need to understand statistical raking.


Understandability and Communicability. This criterion concerns how easily the methods can be
explained and understood by the average user. The Deterministic Whole Assignment methods
are both easy to explain and easy to understand. The fractional assignment of individuals to a
single category also is not difficult to follow. Assigning fractions of a person to different
categories may be easy to explain, but the average user may find it difficult to accept the idea.
The All Inclusive method also is easily explained, but, unless the percentages are raked to 100
percent, users may have a problem understanding how to use the results.




                                                 25
Agresti, A. (1990), Categorical Data Analysis, New York: Wiley.
Benson, V. and Marano, M. (1995), "Current Estimates from the National Health Interview                 Survey, 199"l
Massey,    J. T., Moore, T. F.,   Parsons, V. L., and Tadros W. (1989), "Design and Estimation for the National
McKenney, N. R. and Cresce, A. R. (1993), "Measurement of Ethnicity in the United States:
             Experience of the U.S. Census Bureau, in Challenges of Measuring an Ethnic
     World:        Science, Politics and Reality," Proceedings of the Joint Canada-United
     States Conference on the Measurement of Ethnicity, April 1-3, U.S. Government printing
     Office, Washington, DC, pp. 163-182.
McKenney, N. R., Bennett, c., Harrison, R., and del Pinal, J. (1993), "Evaluating Racial and
            Ethnic Reporting in the 1990 Census," Proceedings of the Section on Survey
     Methods        Research, pp. 66-74.
Office of Management and Budget (1997), "Recommendations from the Interagency Committee
               for the Review of the Racial and Ethnic Standards to the Office of Management
        and          Budget Concerning Changes to the Standards for the Classification of Federal
        Data on Race and Ethnicity, Notice," Federal Register, Vol. 62, No. 131, 36844-36946.
Passel,   J. F.   and Berman, P. A. (1986), "Quality of 1980 Census Data for American Indians,"
                    Social Biology, 33,163-182.
Rubin, D. R. (1987), Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys, New York: Wiley, 1987.
Snipp, M. C. (1986), "Who Are American Indians? Some Observations About the Perils and
              Pitfalls of Data for Race and Ethnicity," Population Research and Policy Review,
       5,237- 252.
Tucker,    c., McKay,   R., Kojetin, B., Harrison, R., de la Puente, M., Stinson, L., and Robison, E.
                 (1996), "Testing Methods of Collecting Racial and Ethnic Information: Results of
          the      Current Population Survey Supplement on Race and Ethnicity," Bureau of
          Labor Statistics Statistical Notes, No. 40.




                                                   26

                                        Are responses assigned to a category by a rlXed rule or by a probability method?



Are responses assigned to one or more   Deterministic: Responses are             Probabilistic: Responses are assigned

than one category?                      assigned to a category following a set   to a category based on a probability

                                        of predetermined rules.                  distribution.



Whole assignment: Responses are                    Smallest Group                            Equal Fractions
assigned completely to one category.     Largest Group Other Than White                      NHIS Fractions
                                                   Lalgest Group
                                                      Plurality


Fractional assignment: Responses are               Equal Fractions .                         Not Applicable
assigned partially to each selected               NHIS Fractions
category.


NHIS = National Health Interview Survey




                                                         27
(RAEIT).


                                                                         Targeted Sample



                                                                            American
                Race Response                    White          Black        Indian          API       Hispanic
                                               (N=2,222       (N=2,395     (N=1,634)       (N=2,982   (N=2,127)
                                                  )               )                           )

 White                                           96.04         22.63          50.67         16.90       64.55



 Black                                            1.08         72.73          4.41           4.06       13.59



 American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN)           .14          .29           37.21          .13         .80


 Asian or Pacific Islander (API)                  1.08          .58           1.47          64.76       1.60



 Other                                             .32          1.96          2.02           4.12       15.89



 Multiracial/Multiple Race                        1.35          1.80          4.22          10.03       3.57



SOURCE: Racial and Ethnic Targeted Test (RAETI), Panel C. Excerpted from Population Division Working
Paper No. 18: "Results of the 1996 Race and Ethnic Targeted Test", U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the
Census, Population Division and Decennial Statistical Studies Division, May 1997.




                                                         28
National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.

                                                                        Detailed Race

                                               White/Black     White/AlAN        White/API      Black/AlAN
                 Main Race                      N=849           N=2618            N=842           N=375

 White                                          25.2 (2.4)       80.9 (1.3)      46.9 (2.9)

 Black                                          48.2 (2.6)                                        85.4 (2.4)

 American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN)                         12.4 (l.l)                       7.0 (1.8)

 Asian or Pacific Islander (API)                                                 34.6 (3.5)

 Other'                                         26.6 (2.3)        6.7 (.8)       18.4 (2.2)       7.6 (1.7)

 Total                                            100.0            100.0           100.0            100.0


--- Not applicable.
'All percents weighted to be nationally representative.
2 Main Race = Race when asked best single race group; Detailed Race = Race when asked which group or groups

describes race,
, Includes response "Multiracial",

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics, Unpublished data from the National
Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                      29
Detailed Race 2 National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.


                                                              Standard
         Detailed Race Groups            Sample                Error         RSE
                                           Size
 White                                    250,054     79.39          .71         .89

 Black                                     45,259     12.50          .61        4.89

 American Indian or Alaska Native           2,616       .81         .07         8.64
 (AlAN)

 Asian or Pacific Islander (API)           10,042      3.42          .35       10.25

 Other                                      9,734      2.25         .27        12.10



 White/Black                                  849       .23         .02         6.83

 White/AlAN                                 2,618       .83         .07         8.22

 White/API                                    842       .28         .03        10.12

 White/Other                                  277       .08          .01       13.16

 Black/AlAN                                   375       .n           .01       10.61

 Black/API                                     88       .03         .00        16.54

 Black/Other                                  127       .03          .01       16.29

 AlAN/API                                      25       .01         .00       36.90

 AlAN/Other                                    70       .02         .00        20.81

 API/Other                                     52       .01         .00       22.05

 Other Combinations                            52       .02         .00       22.54


                                              30
    (Multiple Race Groups Total)             5,375      1.64           .09         5.22




IAll percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and
are not tabulated.
2 Detailed Race == Race when asked which group or groups describes race.

RSE ==Relative Standard Error. Estimates and standard errors calculated using SUDAAN.

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data
from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                               31


                                                                                         Detenninistic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                            Assignment
                                          Reference                                          Largest
            Race Groups                  Distribution2         All         Smallest          Group         Largest        Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                          (Standard       . Inclusive       Group          Other Than      Group                       Fradions       Fractions
                                            Error)                                           White
. White                                  80.29 (.71)             80.82          79.39            79.39         80.82           80.57       80.10           80.29

 Black                                   12.74 (.62)             12.91          12.74            12.91          12.67          12.90       12.70           12.74

 American Indian or Alaska Native          .93 (.07)              1.78            1.77            1.63           0.81           0.82         1.29             .93

 Asian or Pacific Islander                3.54 (.36)              3.76            3.73            3.72           3.44           3.44         3.58           3.54

 Other                                    2.50 (.27)              2.39            2.38            2.35           2.27           2.27         2.32           2.50

                 Total                      100.0               101.65          100.0            100.0          100.0          100.0       100.0           100.0

           Goodness of Fit3                                                 .00255           .00l94        .00025         .00022       .00062          .0000l

--- Not applicable.

JAIl percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
2Reference distribution is Main Race.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                          32
Hispanic Origin #.

                                                                                                                                        Deterministic
                                                                                       Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Fractional
                                                                                                                                        Assignment
                Race Groups                          Reference                             Largest,
                                                   Distribution 2        Smallest          Group          Largest         Plurality        NHIS
                                                 (Standard Error)         Group          Other Than       Group                           Fractions
                                                                                           White
 White                                              80.29 (.71)               79.39            79.39           80.82           80.53            80.23

 Black                                              12.74 (.62)                12.75           12.90           12.65           12.90            12.72

 American Indian or Alaska Native                    .93 (.07)                  1.77             1.63               .81           .82               .92

 Asian or Pacific Islander                           3.54 (.36)                 3.74             3.72           3.43            3.48             3.53

 Other                                              2.50 (.27)                  2.36             2.37           2.29            2.27             2.61

                      Total                            100.0                   100.0           100.0           100.0           100.0            100.0

               Goodness of fit                                            .00245            .00181         .00026         .00024           .00002


--- Not applicable.

iAlI percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
2Reference distribution is Main Race.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.




                                                          33
Current Population Survey, Race and Ethnicity Supplement.


                         Race Category                    Unweighted                   l   Standard Errors
                                                                             Weighted
                                                            Counts          Percentages

         White (W)                                                24,870      80.384            0.556
         Black (B)                                                 3,204      10.836            0.377
         American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN)                     337      0.797             0.101
         Asian or Pacific Islander (API)                             966       3.285            0.232
         Other                                                     1,088       4.021            0.261


         W&B                                                          47       0.148            0.025
         W & AlAN                                                     74       0.228            0.038
         W&API                                                        24       0.075            0.022
         W & Other                                                    12      0.040             0.010
         B & AlAN                                                      9       0.032            0.016
         B & API                                                       6       0.017            0.015
         B & Other                                                     7       0.027            0.012
         AlAN & API                                                    4       0.007            0.004
         API & Other                                                   2       0.013            0.009
         W&B & AlAN                                                   18      0.060             0.017
         W & B & API                                                   1      0.004             0.004
         W & B & Other                                                 1       0.005            0.005
         W & AlAN & API                                                2      0.009             0.007
         W & AlAN & Other                                              2      0.004             0.003
         B & AlAN & API                                                2       0.003            0.003
         B & AlAN & 텽ther                                             1      0.002             0.002
         W & B & AlAN & API                                            1      0.002             0.002
                            Total                                 30,678      100.00
                 (Multiple Race Group Total)                         213       0.677            0.065



                                                                     .
IAII percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally
representative.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2
only.




                                                         34
May 1995.
                                                                                            Deterministic Whole Assignment                     Deterministic Fradional
                                                                                                                                                     Assignment
              Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive      Smallest          Largest        Largest         Plurality       Equal           NHIS
                                           Distribution                        Group         Group Other       Group                          Fractions       Fractions
                                              (SE) 2                                          than White
 White                                     82.35 (0.51)            80.96           80.42            80.42          80.96            80.74          80.68           80.72


 Black                                      lUI (0.37)             11.14            11.02            11.14          10.92            11.13         10.99            11.00

 American Indian or Alaska Native           .68 (0.10)               LI5             LI5              1.03           0.80             0.80          0.96             0.86


 Asian or Pacific Islander                  3.29 (0.23)             3.41            3.39             3.39            3.33             3.30           3.35            3.34

 Other                                      2.58 (0.22)              4.11           4.02             4.02            4.02             4.03          4.02            4.09


                Total                          100.0       100.77           100.0            100.0           100.0           100.00          100.0          100.0
            Goodness of Fir1                                 0.00451          0.00431          0.00387         0.00320         0.00323         0.00359        0.00355


--- Not applicable.
1All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.

2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.




                                                          35
May 1995. Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #
                                                                                                                            Deterministic
                                                                             Deterministic Whole Assignment                  Fractional
                                                                                                                            Assignment
              Race Groups                   Reference           Smallest         Largest        Largest       Plurality       NHIS
                                           Distribution'         Group        Group Other       Group                        Fractions
                                                                               than White
 White                                     82.35 (0.51)              80.38           80.34          80.96           80.72          80.71

 Black                                     lLll (0.37)               11.01            11.11         10.90           lLl3           n.oo
 American Indian or Alaska Native          0.68 (0.10)                1.14             1.03          0.80            0.80           0.86

 Asian or Pacific Islander                 3.29 (0.23)                3.39             3.38          3.30            3.32           3.34

 Other                                     2.58 (0.22)                4.08             4.10          4.05            4.04           4.09

                Total                      100.0                     100.0            100.0         100.0         100.00           100.0
            Goodness of Fit3                                    0.00452          0.00414       0.00327        0.00326         0.00358


--- Not applicable.
IAII percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
'Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.




                                                           36
(CPS). CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.

                               Race
                           Classification                              Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
   Race Reported in the
                            Under the                                                                                     Assignment
        Basic CPS
                             Bridging
     (Sample Counts)
                             Method
                                               All        Smallest         Largest        Largest       Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                            Inclusive      Group        Group Other       Group                      Fractions      Fractions
                                                                         than White
         White            White                   96.74        96.38           96.38          96.74          96.68        96.56           96.62
       (N= 25,401)        Black                    0.25         0.24             0.25          0.19           0.25         0.22            0.22
                          AlAN                     0.62         0.62             0.61          0.37           0.37         0.49            0.40
                          API                      0.21         0.20             0.21          0.15           0.15         0.18            0.17
                          Other                    2.59         2.55             2.55          2.55           2.56         2.55            2.59
                               Total             100.41       100.00          100.00         100.00         100.00       100.00          100.00

            Black         White                    2.17         1.32            1.32           2.15           1.36         1.69            1.59
       (N   = 3,285)      Black                   96.14        95.62           96.14          95.33          96.14        95.57           95.66
                          AlAN                     0.73         0.73            0.25           0.21           0.21         0.42            0.31
                          API                      0.12         0.10            0.06           0.06           0.06         0.08            0.08
                          Other                    2.45         2.23            2.23           2.23           2.23         2.23            2.36
                               Total             101.61       100.00          100.00         100.00         100.00       100.00          100.00

    American Indian or    White                  24.53         22.15           22.15          24.53          24.53        23.34           24.08
   Alaska Native (AlAN)   Black                  10.29         10.19           10.29          10.29          10.29        10.24           10.28
         (N = 292)        AlAN                   62.89         62.89           62.80          60.42          60.42        61.66           60.72
                          API                     1.95          1.95            1.95           1.95           1.95         1.95            1.95
                          Other                   2.81          2.81            2.81           2.81           2.81         2.81            2.98
                               Total            102.47        100.00          100.00         100.00         100.00       100.00          100.00




                                                   37

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                             38

                                    Race
                                Classification                                   Deterministic Whole Assignment                      Deterministic Fractional
    Race Reported in the
                                 Under the                                                                                                Assignment
         Basic CPS
                                  Bridging
      (Sample Counts)
                                  Method
                                                      All           Smallest         Largest         Largest          Plurality       Equal          NHIS
                                                   Inclusive         Group        Group Other        Group                           Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                   than White
   Asian or Pacific Islander   White                      1.98            1.22             1.22            1.98               1.98         1.60            1.63
            (API)              Black                      0.40            0.08            0.40             0.40               0.40         0.22            0.29
         (N = 984)             AlAN                       0.97            0.97             0.52            0.40               0.55         0.67            0.54
                               API                       94.35           94.10           94.22            93.59              93.44        93.88           93.79
                               Other                      3.87            3.63             3.63            3.63               3.63         3.63            3.76
                                    Total               101.57          100.00          100.00           100.00             100.00       100.00          100.00

            Other              White                     31.88           27.96            27.96           31.88              28.81        29.74           29.38
          (N =716)             Black                      6.56            4.88             6.56            3.50               6.56         4.51            4.52
                               AlAN                       3.52            3.52             2.30            1.85               1.93         2.51            2.37
                               API                        4.45            4.29             3.82            3.42               3.34         3.88            3.83
                               Other                     60.47           59.36            59.36           59.36              59.36        59.36           59.91
                                    Total               106.88          100.00           100.00          100.00             100.00       100.00          100.00


'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and no"nresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                          39
(CPS). CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity. Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #

                                 Race
                             Classification                      Deterministic Whole Assignment                  Deterministic
  Race Reported in the
                              Under the                                                                           Fractional
       Basic CPS
                               Bridging                                                                          Assignment
   (Sample Counts)
                               Method
                                                 Smallest            Largest        Largest        Plurality        NHIS
                                                  Group           Group Other       Group                          Fractions
                                                                   than White
        White               White                     96.35              96.35          96.74           96.66           96.62
      (N= 25,401)           Black                      0.24                0.25          0.19            0.25            0.22
                            AlAN                       0.62                0.61          0.37            0.37            0.40
                            API                        0.20                0.21          0.15            0.17            0.17
                            Other                      2.59                2.59          2.55            2.56            2.59
                                 Total               100.00             100.00         100.00          100.00          100.00

          Black             White                      1.32               1.32           2.17            1.36             1.58
       (N = 3,285)          Black                     95.54              96.01          95.20           96.14            95.64
                            AlAN                       0.73               0.25           0.21            0.21             0.31
                            API                        0.10               0.06           0.06            0.06             0.08
                            Other                      2.31               2.36           2.36            2.23             2.39
                                 Total               100.00             100.00         100.00          100.00           100.00

   American Indian or         White                     22.15          22.15           24.53            24.53             24.07
  Alaska Native (AlAN)        Black                     10.19          10.29           10.29            10.29             10.28
        (N = 292)             AlAN                      62.89          62.80           60.42            60.42             60.72
                              API                        1.95           1.95             1.95             1.95             1.95
                              Other                      2.81           2.81             2.81             2.81             2.98
                                    Total              100.00         100.00          100.00           100.00           100.00
I All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.




                                                            40

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                         41
                                     Race
                                 Classification                     Deterministic Whole Assignment                 Deterministic
      Race Reported in the
                                  Under the                                                                         Fractional
           Basic CPS
                                   Bridging                                                                        Assignment
        (Sample Counts)
                                   Method
                                                    Smallest            Largest        Largest       Plurality         NHIS
                                                     Group           Group Other       Group                          Fractions
                                                                      Iban Wbile
    Asian or Pacific Islander   White                     1.17                1.17          1.98            1.88            1.62
             (API)              Black                     0.08               0.40           0.40            0.30            0.29
           (N = 984)            AlAN                      0.97                0.52          0.40            0.40            0.54
                                API                      94.10              94.03          93.40           93.80           93.78
                                Other                     3.68                3.87          3.83            3.63            3.77
                                     Total              100.00             100.00         100.00          100.00          100.00

             Other              White                    27.37              27.37          31.88           28.75           29.32
           (N =716)             Black                     4.88               6.34           3.28            6.47            4.47
                                AlAN                      3.52               2.24           1.85            1.93            2.37
                                API                       4.05               3.82           3.42            3.10            3.83
                                Other                    60.19              60.23          59.57           59.75           60.01
                                     Total              100.00             100.00         100.00          100.00          100.00


I   All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non- Hispanics.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                               42
Washington State Population Survey (WSPS).

                         Race Category                    U nweighted       Weighted'       Standard Errors
                                                            Counts          Percentages

         White (W)                                                  5339           86.187             0.384
         Black (B)                                                   308            2.180             0.192
         American Indian or Alaska Native (AlAN)                     343            0.875             0.074
         Asian or Pacific Islander (API)                             258            2.937             0.196.
         Other                                                       351            3.666             0.277

         W&B                                                         20             0.256             0.080
         W & AlAN                                                   174             1.965             0.212
         W&API                                                       19             0.198             0.071
         W & Other                                                   70             1.225             0.200
         B & AlAN                                                    14             0.196             0.066
         B & API                                                      1             0.003             0.003
         B & Other                                                    7             0.062             0.019
         AlAN & API                                                   3             0.004             0.003
         AlAN & Other                                                 7             0.012             0.006
         API & Other                                                  3             0.005             0.003
         W & B & AlAN                                                 6             0.070             0.028
         W & B & API                                                  3             0.042             0.037
         W & B & Other                                                2             0.026             0.016
         W & AlAN & API                                               2             0.007             0.007
         W & AlAN & Other                                             6             0.076             0.043
         W & API & Other                                              1             0.001             0.001
         B & AlAN & API                                               1             0.001             0.001
         W & B & AlAN & API                                           2             0.005             0.004
                            Total                                  6940            100.00
                 (Multiple Race Group Total)                        341             4.155             0.334


'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally
representative.

SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey




                                                        43
                                                                                             Deterministic Whole Assignment                  Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                   Assignment
                 Race Groups                Reference       All Inclusive     Smallest           Largest        Largest       Plurality      Equal            NHIS
                                           Distribution 2                      Group          Group Other       Group                       Fractions       Fractions
                                                                                               than White
    White                                  88.97 (0.31)            90.06             86.19           86.19          90.06          89.66         88.08           88.63

    Black                                   2.27 (0.17)              2.84            2.44             2.84           2.44            2.82         2.49             2.56

    American Indian or Alaska Native        1.29 (0.08)              3.21             3.21            2.84           0.88            0.88         2.02             1.19

    Asian or Pacific Islander               3.04 (0.16)              3.20             3.19             3.15          2.94            2.94         3.06             3.03

    Other                                   4.44 (0.31)              5.07            4.98             4.99           3.68            3.71         4.35            4.59

                   Total                       100.0              104.38           100.0              100.0         100.0          100.0         100.0           100.0
               Goodness of Fit'                               0.00770         0.00833            0.00676       0.00170        0.00211       0.00167         0.00024


--- Not applicable.
IAll percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey




                                                                                44

Table 7-G. Percent Distribution'- of Race for Bridge Tabulation Methods. Washington State Population Survey (WSPS). Adjusted for
Hispanic Origin #.

                                                                                                                            Deterministic
                                                                            Deterministic Whole Assignment                   Fractional
                                                                                                                            Assignment
                                            Reference         Smallest          Largest        Largest        Plurality       NHIS
                 Race Groups               Distribution 2      Group         Group Other       Group                         Fractions
                                                                              than White
    White                                  88.97 (0.31)            86.19            86.19          90.06            89.64          88.63

    Black                                   2.27 (0.17)             2.45               2.82          2.42            2.81           2.56


    American Indian or Alaska Native        1.29 (0.08)              3.21              2.84          0.88            0.88           1.19

    Asian or Pacific Islander               3.04 (0.16)              3.19              3.15          2.94            2.95           3.03


    Other                                   4.44 (0.31)             4.96               5.00          3.70            3.73           4.59

                   Total                       100.0               100.0            100.0          100.0           100.0          100.0
               Goodness of Fit3                               0.00833          0.00674        0.00166         0.00206        0.00024


--- Not applicable.
IAll percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non- Hispanics.


                                                                                  45




                                             46
(WSPS).

   Race Reported in the        Race
       Basic WSPS          Classification                               Deterministic Whole Assignment                 Deterministic Fractional
     (Sample Counts)        Under the                                                                                       Assignment
                             Bridging
                             Method
                                               All         Smallest         Largest        Largest       Plurality      Equal           NHIS
                                            Inclusive       Group        Group Other       Group                       Fractions       Fractions
                                                                          than White
            White         White                  99.41          96.81           96.81          99.41          99.21         98.10           98.56
          (N= 5490)       Black                   0.29           0.25            0.29           0.10           0.29          0.19            0.19
                          AlAN                    1.67           1.67             1.63          0.01           0.01          0.83            0.22
                          API                     0.26           0.26             0.21          0.10           0.10          0.17            0.16
                          Other                   1.06           1.01             1.06          0.39           0.39          0.71            0.87
                               Total            102.69         100.00          100.00         100.00         100.00        100.00          100.00

            Black         White                    2.16          0.20            0.20           2.16           0.54          0.97            0.99
          (N = 326)       Black                   99.29         90.61           99.29          97.68          98.15         94.56           97.26
                          AlAN                     7.79          7.79            0.35           0.00           0.00          3.90            0.57
                          API                       0.11         0.11            0.00           0.00           0.00          0.04            0.04
                          Other                     1.41         1.30            0.17           0.17            1.31         0.55             1.15
                               Total             110.76        100.00          100.00         100.00         100.00        100.00          100.00

    American Indian or    White                  24.13           0.79            0.79          24.13          20.44         12.28            17.13
   Alaska Native (AlAN)   Black                   8.00           7.37            8.00           4.32           8.00          5.85            6.09
         (N = 422)        AlAN                   88.51          88.51           85.80          67.48          67.77         77.81           70.62
                          API                     2.12           1.80            2.12           2.01           1.72          1.92             1.90
                          Other                   3.29           1.52            3.29           2.07           2.07          2.15            4.26
                               Total            126.05         100.00          100.00         100.00         100.00        100.00          100.00



                                                                        47

SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey




                                                                                 48

                                    Race
                                Classification                                    Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Deterministic Fractional
    Race Reported in the
                                 Under the                                                                                               Assignment
        Basic WSPS
                                  Bridging
      (Sample Counts)
                                  Method
                                                      All          Smallest           Largest        Largest         Plurality       Equal          NHIS
                                                   Inclusive        Group.         Group Other       Group                          Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                    than White
   Asian or Pacific Islander   White                     5.07              1.11              1.11          5.07              3.15         3.09            303
            (API)              Black                     1.92             1.92              1.92           0.00              1.92         0.96            0.97
         (N = 273)             AlAN                      1.28             1.28              1.28           0.00              0.00         0.64            0.16
                               API                      93.83            93.83            93.75           92.99             93.07        93.41           93.30
                               Other                     1.94             1.86              1.94           1.94              1.86         1.90            2.55
                                    Total              104.04           100.00           100.00          100.00            100.00       100.00          100.00

            Other              White                     24.76            0.00             0.00           24.76             22.86        11.97           13.61
          (N = 429)            Black                      3.81            0.14             3.81            1.93              3.81         1.60            1.78
                               AlAN                       8.30            8.30             5.48            0.00              0.01         3.75            1.47
                               API                        2.23            1.94             1.86            0.01              0.07         1.04            0.79
                               Other                     90.21           89.63            88.85           73.30             73.26        81.63           82.34
                                    Total               129.31          100.00           100.00          100.00            100.00       100.00          100.00


'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.

SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey




                                                                                  49
(WSPS). Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #.

  Race Reported in the           Race
      Basic WSPS             Classification                    Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Deterministic
    (Sample Counts)           Under the                                                                           Fractional
                               Bridging                                                                          Assignment
                               Method
                                                 Smallest          Largest         Largest        Plurality        NHIS
                                                  Group         Group Other        Group                          Fractions
                                                                 than White
         White              White                     96.81            96.81            99.41          99.21            98.56
       (N= 5490)            Black                      0.25             0.29             0.10           0.29             0.19
                            AlAN                       1.67              1.63            0.01           0.01             0.22
                            API                        0.26              0.21 .          0.10           0.10             0.16
                            Other                       1.01             1.06            0.39           0.39             0.87
                                 Total               100.00           100.00           100.00         100.00           100.00

          Black             White                      0.20             0.20             2.16           0.54             0.99
        (N = 326)           Black                     90.61            99.29            97.68          98.i5            97.26
                            AlAN                       7.79             0.35             0.00           0.00             0.57
                            API                         0.11            0.00             0.00           0.00             0.04
                            Other                      1.30             0.17             0.17            1.31             1.15
                                 Total               100.00           100.00           100.00         100.00           100.00

   American Indian or        White                      0.79           0.79           24.13            20.32             17.06
  Alaska Native (AlAN)       Black                      7.37           8.00            4.32             8.00              6.09
        (N = 422)            AlAN                      88.51          85.80           67.48            67.77             70.68
                             API                        1.80           2.12            2.01              1.72             1.90
                             Other                      1.52           3.29            2.07              2.19             4.27
                                   Total              100.00         100.00          100.00           100.00           100.00
'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.


                                                                                  50
SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey




                                                                               51

                                                   Race
                                               Classification                    Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Deterministic
                    Race Reported in the
                                                Under the                                                                           Fractional
                        Basic WSPS
                                                 Bridging                                                                          Assignment
                      (Sample Counts)
                                                 Method
                                                                   Smallest          Largest        Largest         Plurality         NHIS
                                                                    Group         Group Other       Group                            Fractions
                                                                                   than White
                   Asian or Pacific Islander   White                      1.11              1.11          5.07              3.15           3.03
                            (API)              Black                     1.92              1.92           0.00              1.92           0.97
                          (N = 273)            AlAN                      1.28              1.28           0.00              0.00           0.16
                                               API                      93.83            93.75           92.99             93.07          93.30
                                               Other                     1.86              1.94           1.94              1.86           2.55
                                                    Total              100.00           100.00          100.00            100.00         100.00

                            Other              White                     0.00              0.00          24.76             22.44          13.61
                          (N = 429)            Black                     0.54              3.41           1.53              3.72           1.78
                                               AlAN                      8.30              5.48           0.00              0.01           1.47
                                               API                       1.94              1.86           0.01              0.16           0.79
                                               Other                    89.23             89.26          73.70             73.68          82.34
                                                    Total              100.00            100.00         100.00            100.00         100.00


All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
I

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.

SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey




                                                                                  52
Survey 1993-1995.

                                                             Deterministic Whole Assignment                          Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                            Assignment
                                               Smallest      Largest Group        Largest Group    Plurality         Equal             NHIS
           Main Race Reported                   Group         Other Than                                            Fractions        Fractions
                                                                 White
 White                                       . U2 (.08)        LI2 (.08)           0.00 (.00)      .07 (.01)        .56 (.04)        .32 (.02)

 Black                                         LOO (.10)       0.00 (.00)           .S9 (.08)     0.00 (.00)        .94 (.OS)        1.24 (.10)

 American Indian or Alaska Native             0.00 (.00)       2.26 (.46)          13.25 (1.26)   12.27 (1.19)     6.62 (.63)       11.39 (L09)

 Asian or Pacific Islander                     .44 (.10)        .24 (.07)           3.12 (.47)     2.95 (.44)       1.71 (.24)       2.31 (.32)

 Other                                        7.8.9 (L01)      8.25 (1.07)         9.67 (1.45)    9.67 (1.15)      5.0S (.60)        S.17 (.98)

                    Total                      1.24 (.07)       1.14 (.07)          .59 (.03)      .52 (.03)        .82 (.04)        .S1 (.04)

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                             53
Origin #. National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.                                                               .

                                                                                                                    Deterministic
                                                               Deterministic Whole Assignment                        Fractional .
                                                                                                                    Assignment
                                                 Smallest      Largest Group         Largest Group    Plurality        NHIS
           Main Race Reported                     Group         Other Than                                           Fractions
                                                                   White
 White                                          1.12 (.08)        1.12 (.08)          0.00 (.00)      .09 (.01)       .33 (.02)

 Black                                          .94 (.09)         0.06 (.01)           .95 (.08)     0.00 (.00)      1.24 (.10)

 American Indian or Alaska Native               0.00 (.00)        2.26 (.46)          13.25 (1.26)   12.27 (1.19)   11.19 (1.07)

 Asian or Pacific Islander                      .22 (.06)         .42 (.08)            3.30 (.48)     2.42 (.35)     2.31 (.32)

 Other                                         8.29 (l.06)        7.85 (l.0l)         9.27 (l.09)    9.67 (U5)       8.07 (.96)

                    Total                       1.24 (.07)        1.14 (.07)           .59 (.03)      .52 (.03)       .81 (.04)


# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data' from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                54

                                                     Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                              Assignment
         Main Race Reported            Smallest      Largest Group   Largest Group      Plurality      Equal             NHIS
                                        Group         Other than                                      Fractions        Fractions
                                                         White
 White                                3.62 (0.23)     3.62 (0.23)      3.26 (0.22)    3.32 (0.22)    3.44 (0.23)      3.38 (0.23)

 Black                                4.38 (0.70)     3.86 (0.63)      4.67 (0.65)    3.86 (0.63)    4.43 (0.66)      4.34 (0.65)

 American Indian or Alaska Native     37.11 (6.32)    37.20 (6.34)    39.58 (6.3l)    39.58 (6.31)   38.34 (6.28)    39.28 (6.30)

 Asian or Pacific Islander            5.90 (1.32)     5.78 (1.28)      6.41 (1.37)     6.56 (1.41)    6.12 (1.33)     6.21 (1.34)

 Other                               40.64 (4.06)    40.64 (4.06)     40.64 (4.06)    40.64 (4.06)   40.64 (4.06)    40.09 (4.06)

 TOTAL                                4.97 (0.26)     4.90 (0.25)      4.73 (0.25)     4.70 (0.25)    4.84 (0.25)     4.77 (0.25)



SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity




                                                                        55

Table lO-B. Percent of ALL Respondents Misclassified by Bridge Tabulation Methods. Current Population Survey. Adjusted for Hispanic
Origin #.

                                                                                                                 Deterministic
                                                          Deterministic Whole Assignment                          Fractional
                                                                                                                 Assignment
         Main Race Reported                Smallest       Largest Group                                             NHIS
                                            Group          Other than       Largest Group           Plurality     Fractions
                                                              White
 White                                    3.65 (0.23)      3.65 (0.23)        3.26 (0.22)         3.34 (0.23)     3.38 (0.23)

 Black                                    4.46 (0.70)       3.99 (0.64)       4.80 (0.66)         3.86 (0.63)    4.36 (0.65)

 American Indian or Alaska Native         37.11 (6.32)     37.20 (6.34)      39.58 (6.31)         39.58 (6.31)   39.28(6.30)

 Asian or Pacific Islander                5.90 (1.32)       5.97 (1.33)       6.60 (1.41)         6.20 (1.32)     6.22 (1.34)

 Other                                    39.82 (4.10)     39.77 (4.05)      40.43 (4.05)         40.25 (4.10)   39.99 (4.06)

  TOTAL                                   4.98 (0.25)       4.93 (0.25)       4.75 (0.25)         4.69 (0.25)     4.77 (0.25)

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.
SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity




                                                                               56

                                                    Deterministic Whole Assignment                    Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                             Assignment
                                       Smallest     Largest Group   Largest Group      Plurality      Equal             NHIS
         Main Race Reported             Group        Other than                                      Fractions        Fractions
                                                        White
 White                               3.19 (0.29)     3.19 (0.29)      0.59 (0.13)    0.79 (0.15)    1.90 (0.18)      1.44 (0.16)

 Black                               9.39 (2.84)     0.71 (0.24)      2.32 (0.74)    1.85 (0.70)    5.44 (1.48)      2.74 (0.62)

 American Indian or Alaska Native    11.49 (2.46)    14.20 (2.47)    32.52 (3.80)    32.23 (3.83)   22.19 (2.77)    29.39 (3.55)

 Asian or Pacific Islander'          6.17 (2.96)     6.26 (2.96)      7.01 (2.94)    6.93 (2.94)    6.59 (2.95)      6.70 (2.94)

 Other                               10.37 (1.77)    lLl5 (1.75)     26.70 (3.26)    26.74 (3.26)   18.37 (2.09)    17.66 (1.99)

 TOTAL                               3.84 (0.28)     3.72 (0.26)      2.40 (0.26)    2.55 (0.24)    3.12 (0.23)      2.71 (0.20)


SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey




                                                                       57
Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #

                                                          Deterministic Whole Assignment                         Deterministic
                                                                                                                  Fractional
                                                                                                                 Assignment
         Main Race Reported                Smallest       Largest Group     Largest Group           Plurality       NHIS
                                            Group          Other than                                             Fractions
                                                              White
 White                                    3.19 (0.29)      3.19 (0.29)        0.59 (0.13)         0.79 (0.15)     1.44 (0.16)

 Black                                    9.39 (2.84)       0.71 (0.24)       2.32 (0.74)         1.85 (0.70)    2.74 (0.62)

 American Indian or Alaska Native        11.49 (2.46)      14.20 (2.47)      32.52 (3.80)         32.23 (3.83)   29.32 (3.55)

 Asian or Pacific Islander                6.17 (2.96)       6.26 (2.96)       7.01 (2.94)         6.93 (2.94)    6.70 (2.94)

 Other                                    10.77 (1.78)     10.74 (1.77)      26.30 (3.22)         26.32 (3.30)   17.66 (1.99)

                                          3.86 (0.28)       3.70 (0.26)       2.38 (0.26)         2.54 (0.24)     2.71 (0.20)
 TOTAL

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.
SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey




                                                                               58
National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.

                                                                                              Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                  Assignment
              Race Groups                    Reference      All Inclusive      Smallest        Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal           NHIS
                                            Distribution2                       Group          Group          Group                        Fractions       Fractions
                                                                                            Other Than
                                                                                                White
                                                                                 (Increase Multiple Race Response by a Factor of 2)
 White                                             79.90           82.25              78.11           78.11           80.93       80.44         79.51           79.88

 Black                                             12.76            13.32             12.76            13.11          12.63        13.09        12.70           12.77

 American Indian or Alaska Native                    1.03            2.75             2.70             2.42            0.79         0.82         1.74             1.03

 Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.60             4.15              3.98            3.97            3.40         3.41         3.69            3.60

 Other                                               2.71            2.54             2.46             2.40            2.25         2.25         2.36             2.71

                  Total                            100.0          104.96            100.0             100.0           100.0        100.0        100.0           100.0

            Goodness of Fit3                                                   .00727             .00570         .00090        .00080       .00198          .00003


--- Not applicable.
lAlI percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
2Reference distribution is Main Race.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                 59

                                                                                             Deterministic Whole Assignment              Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                Assignment
              Race Groups                    Reference      All Inclusive     Smallest        Largest       Largest       Plurality       Equal          NHIS
                                            Distribution2                      Group          Group         Group                        Fractions      Fraaions
                                                                                           Other Than
                                                                                              White
                                                                               (Increase Multiple Race Response by a Factor of 4)

 White                                              79.15          85.12           75.66             75.66            8l.l3      80.19        78.39          79.10

 Black                                             12.82           14.14           12.80             13.48         12.55         13.44        12.69          12.83

 American Indian or Alaska Native                    1.22           4.69            4.46              3.92              .77       0.82         2.61           1.24

 Asian or Pacific Islander                           3.71           4.78            4.45              4.43            3.21        3.34         3.90           3.72

 Other                                               3.10           2.83              2.63             2.51           2.20        2.20         2.42            3.11

                  Total                            100.0           lll.56          100.0             100.0         100.0         100.0       100.0           100.0

            Goodness of Fit3                                                   .01843            .01499         .00320        .00287      .00557        .000045


--- Not applicable.
lAlI percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
2Reference distribution is Main Race.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                 60

                                                                                              Deterministic Whole Assignment               Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                  Assignment
                 Race Groups                 Reference      All Inclusive     Smallest        Largest       Largest       Plurality         Equal          NHIS
                                            Distribution"                      Group          Group         Group                          Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                           Other Than
                                                                                               White
                                                                               (Increase Multiple Race Response by a Factor of 6)

    White                                          78.45           87.99           73.37              73.37          81.32        79.95         77.33          78.37

    Black                                          12.86           14.97           12.84               13.78        12.48         12.86         12.68          12.88

    American Indian or Alaska Native                 1.40           6.64               6.11             5.33           .74         1.40          3.42           1.42

    Asian or Pacific Islander                        3.81           5.46            4.89               4.87           3.28          3.81         4.09           3.83

    Other                                            3.47            3.n               2.78            2.60           2.17         3.47          2.48           3.49

                     Total                          100.0          n8.16           100.0              100.0         100.0         100.0         100.0          100.0

               Goodness of Fit3                                               .030339              .02520        .00654        .00585       .00967         .00007


--- Not applicable.
1All percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
2Reference distribution is Main Race.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                  61

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
              Race Groups                   Reference       All Inclusive     Smallest        Largest       Largest       Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                           Distribution'                       Group          Group         Group                      Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                           Other Than
                                                                                               White
                                                                               (Increase Multiple Race Response by a Factor of 8)

 White                                       77.79          90.85           7l.21            7l.21           81.50        79.72       76.34         77.68

 Black                                       12.91          15.79           12.88            14.16           12.42        14.09       12.67         12.93

 American Indian or Alaska Native            1.57           8.58            7.67             6.65            .72          .82         4.18          1.60

 Asian or Pacific Islander                   3.91           6.14            5.30             5.27            3.22         3.23        4.27          3.93

 Other                                       3.42           3.40            2.93             2.70            2.14         2.14        2.53          3.84

                  Total                    100.0              124.76        100.0          100.0           100.0          100.0       100.0         100.0

            Goodness of Fit3                                                  .042400         .03570          .01068        .00950      .013932        .00009


--- Not applicable.
IAII percents weighted to be nationally representative; 5,237 observations were missing race and are not tabulated.
'Reference distribution is Main Race.
3Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48).

SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control, National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                    62
    1995 CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.


                                                                                          Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                               Assignment
                 Race Groups                Reference      All Inclusive     Smallest       Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                           Distribution                       Group          Group          Group                       Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                          Other than
                                                                                             White
                                                                              (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 2)
    White                                          82.11          80.99           79.92           79.92          80.98         80.55         80.43          80.51

    Black                                          11.17           11.36          11.12            11.36         10.93          11.35        11.07          11.09

    American Indian or Alaska Native                0.69            1.48           1.48             1.25          0.79           0.81          1.11          0.91

    Asian or Pacific Islander                       3.31            3.52           3.48            3.47           3.30           3.29         3.40           3.38

    Other                                           2.71            4.18           3.99            3.99           3.99          4.00          3.99           4.12

                     Total                       100.00          101.53         100.00           100.00         100.00        100.00       100.00          100.00

               Goodness of Fit'                              0.00562         0.00530          0.00418       0.00254        0.00261      0.00344        0.00321



--- Not applicable
IAll percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
lReference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2(Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.


                                                                                  63
1995 CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                            Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group          Group                       Fraaions       Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 4)

White                                            81.66           81.04          78.94            78.94          81.03          80.18       79.94           80.08

Black                                             11.31          11.80           11.33            11.80         10.94          11.78        11.22           11.27

American Indian or Alaska Native                   0.72            2.15           2.15             1.69          0.78           0.81         1.42            1.02

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.36           3.73            3.64            3.62           3.30           3.27         3.49            3.44

Other                                              2.96           4.30            3.94            3.94           3.94           3.96         3.94            4.19

                 Total                          100.00          103.02         100.00           100.00        100.00          100.00      100.00          100.00

           Goodness of Fit3                                 0.00866         0.00835          0.00561       0.00153         0.00168     0.00365        0.00268



--- Not applicable
'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representatiye.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.



                                                                                 64
1995 CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fradional
                                                                                                                                             Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest       Plurality       Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group          Group                       Fradions       Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Fador of 6)
White                                             81.21          81.09          77.99            77.99          81.08          79.82        79.47          79.67

Black                                             11.43          12.23           11.53           12.23          10.96          12.20        11.37          11.44

American Indian or Alaska Native                   0.74           2.79            2.79             2.12          0.77           0.81         1.71            1.13

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.41           3.93            3.81             3.78          3.29           3.25         3.57            3.51

Other                                              3.21           4.42            3.89             3.89          3.89           3.92         3.89           4.26

                 Total                          100.00          104.46         100.00           100.00        100.00          100.00       100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fitl                                 0.01221         0.01221          0.00778       0.00089         0.00113     0.00437        0.00234



--- Not applicable
'All percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.



                                                                                65
1995 CPS Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive     Smallest       Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                       Group          Group         Group                        Fractions      Fraaions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 8)
White                                            80.78           81.14          77.06            77.06          81.12          79.47        79.00          79.28

Black                                             11.56          12.64           11.72           12.64          10.97          12.60         U.51          11.60

American Indian or Alaska Native                   0.76           3.42            3.42            2.54           0.76           0.82         2.00            1.23

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.46            4.13           3.96            3.92           3.29           3.23         3.66            3.57

Other                                              3.44           4.54            3.84            3.84           3.84           3.88         3.84           4.32

                 Total                          100.00          105.87         100.00           100.00        100.00          100.00       100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit3                                 0.01599         0.01659          0.01047       0.00057         0.00090     0.00547        0.00215



--- Not applicable
tAll percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity, Data from Panel 2 only.



                                                                                66
Washington State Population Survey (WSPS).

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group         Group                        Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 2)

White                                            87.64           90.18          82.75            82.75          90.18         89.41         86.39          87.45

Black                                              2.39           3.36            2.59             3.36          2.60           3.31         2.68           2.82

American Indian or Alaska Native                   1.54            5.33           5.33             4.61          0.84           0.85         3.03           1.44

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.03            3.33           3.30            3.22           2.83           2.83         3.06           3.00

Other                                              5.40           6.22            6.04            6.05           3.55           3.60         4.84           5.29

                 Total                          100.00         108.842         100.00           100.00        100.00         100.00        100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit3



--- Not applicable
tAIl percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
"Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit =Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey



                                                                                 67
Washington State Population Survey (WSPS).


                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group         Group                        Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 4)
White                                             85.27          90.40          76.63            76.63         90.40          88.98         83.38          85.33

Black                                              2.59           4.29            2.85            4.29           2.87          4.20          3.03           3.29

American Indian or Alaska Native                   2.00           9.09            9.09            7.77           0.78           0.79         4.84           1.89

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.03           3.56            3.50             3.35          2.63           2.63         3.05           2.95

Other                                              7.11           8.27            7.93            7.95           3.32           3.40         5.70           6.54

                 Total                          100.00           115.61        100.00           100.00        100.00         100.00        100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit'


--- Not applicable
IAlI percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
'Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
'Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)

SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey


                                                                                 68
Washington State Population Survey (WSPS).

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                              Assignment
             Race Groups                   Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest        Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group          Group                       Fractions      Fractions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Factor of 6)

White                                            83.22           90.59           71.36            71.36        90.59          88.60         80.79          83.51

Black                                              2.77           5.09            3.08            5.09           3.11          4.96          3.33           3.69

American Indian or Alaska Native                   2.39          12.33           12.33           10.49           0.73           0.74         6.39           2.28

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.02           3.76            3.67             3.47          2.45          2.46          3.05           2.90

Other                                              8.59          10.03            9.56            9.59           3.12           3.23         6.45           7.62

                 Total                          100.00          121.80         100.00           100.00        100.00         100.00        100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fitl


--- Not applicable
IAll percents weighted to adjust for sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are nOl nationally representative.
2Reference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE: Washington State Population Survey



                                                                                 69
Washington State Population Survey (WSPS).

                                                                                         Deterministic Whole Assignment               Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                             Assignment
            . Race Groups                  Reference      All Inclusive    Smallest        Largest        Largest       Plurality      Equal          NHIS
                                          Distribution                      Group           Group         Group                       Fractions      Fradions
                                                                                         Other than
                                                                                            White
                                                                             (Increase Multiple race Response by a Fadar of 8)

White                                            81.44           90.76          66.77            66.77         90.76         88.28         78.53          81.93

Black                                              2.93           5.79            3.28            5.79           3.32          5.63         3.59           4.04

American Indian or Alaska Native                   2.74           15.15          15.15           12.86           0.68          0.70         7.75           2.62

Asian or Pacific Islander                          3.02           3.93            3.82             3.57          2.30          2.31         3.04           2.86

Other                                              9.88           11.57          10.98            11.02          2.95          3.08         7.10           8.56

                 Total                          100.00          127.20         100.00           100.00        100.00        100.00        100.00         100.00

           Goodness of Fit'



--- Not applicable
IAlI percents weighted to adjust far sample design and nonresponse, however estimates are not nationally representative.
lReference distribution is from the original CPS race question conforming to the old standard.
3 Goodness of Fit = Multiple of Likelihood-Ratio Chi-Squared Statistic, G2 (Agresti A. 1990, page 48)


SOURCE:. Washington State Population Survey



                                                                                70

                                                                                              Deterministic Whole Allocation                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                  Allocation
                                                                                                  Largest
Race Group                        Detailed         Main            All          Smallest          Group        .Largest        Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                 Race2 (SE)        Race2        Inclusive        Group            Other         Group
                                                                                                   Than
                                                                                                  White
 . No Health Insurance (N =251,196)'
        White                    13.4 (.3)             13.5           13.5             13.4            13.4          13.5            13.5         13.5           13.5
        Black                    18.1 (.5)             18.0           18.0             18.0            18.0          18.0            18.0         18.0           18.0
        AlAN                    32.2 (2.1)             32.3           26.7             26.7            27.5          32.2            32.1         27.9           31.0
        API                     18.9 (1.3)             18.5           18.2             18.2            18.3          18.9            18.9         18.6           18.7
        Other                   32.5 (Ll)              31.1 3         32.0             32.1            32.1          32.5            32.5         32.3           30.9
        White/Black             15.6 (2.3)
        White/AlAN              22.9 (1.4)
        White/API               11.2 (1.9)
        Other Combinations      19.0 (2.1)

   Poor or Fair Health'
           White                      9.5 (.1)            9.6             9.6           9.6             9.6           9.6             9.6          9.6            9.6
           Black                    14.5 (.4)            14.6            14.6          14.5            14.5          14.7            14.6         14.6           14.6
           AlAN                      14.1 (.9)           14.3            13.8          13.8            13.4          14.1            14.2         14.0           14.2
           API                       8.0 (.4)             8.0             7.8           7.8             7.8           8.0             8.0          7.9            7.9
           Other                     11.7 (.5)           11.83           11.7          11.8            11.7          11.7            11.8         11.8           11.7
           White/Black               6.4 (1.0)
           White/AlAN                12.5 (.7)
           White/API                 5.5 (1.0)
           Other Combinations       14.1 (1.7)
--- Not applicable.
, All percents weighted to be nationally representative. 5,237 observations missing   data on race and are not tabulated. Health insurance only obtained for half of 1993.
           Percent living with single mother only relevant for children.

                                                                                  71
3 Includes Multiracial.NHIS = National Health Interview Survey; AlAN = American Indian or Alaskan Native; API= Asian or Pacific Islander.

SOURCE: Centers for Disease ControlfNarional Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                             72

                                                                                            Deterministic Whole Allocation                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                Allocation
                                                                                                Largest
Race Group                        Detailed        Main            All        Smallest            Group        Largest        Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                   Race1          Race1        Inclusive      Group            . Other        Group
                                                                                                 Than
                                                                                                 White
    Children Living with Single Mothers (N=86,941) I
           White                   14.6 (.3)            14.7        14.9             14.6            14.6          14.9            14.7         14.7           14.7
           Black                  54.7 (l.l)            54.4        54.1             54.2            54.1          54.5            54.1         54.3           54.3
           AlAN                   32.1 (3.6)            31.6        28.0             28.0            26.6          31.2            32.2         30.1           32.2
           API                    11.7 (1.0)            12.2        12.4             12.4            12.5          11.7            n.7          12.3           11.9
           Other                  26.3 (1.9)           26.0'        26.4             26.3            26.1          26.3            26.3         26.5           27.0
           White/Black            40.9 (3.1)
           White/AlAN             21.1 (2.3)
           White/API              16.7 (2.9)
           Other Combinations 34.3 (3.6)

--- Not applicable.
IAll percents weighted to be nationally representative. 1.6 missing data on race and are not tabulated. Health insurance only obtained for half of 1993. Percent
          living with single mother only relevant for children.
1 Main Race = Race when asked best single race group; Detailed Race = Race when asked which group or groups describes race.

, Includes Multiracial.
NHIS = National Health Interview Survey; AlAN = American Indian or Alaskan Native; API= Asian or Pacific Islander.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control/National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                73
        Origin #.

                                                                                                     Deterministic Whole Allocation                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                                         Allocation
                                                                                                         Largest
        Race Group                         Detailed        Main            All        Smallest           Group         Largest        Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                                            Race2          Race 2       Inclusive      Group             Other         Group
                                                                                                          Than
                                                                                                         White
          No Health Insurance (N =251,196)1
               White                    13.4 (.3)              13.5           13.5            13.4            13.4          13.5            13.5         13.5           13.5
               Black                    18.1 (.5)              IS.0           18.0            18.0            18.0          18.0            18.0         18.0           lS.0
               AlAN                    32.2 (2.1)              32.3           26.7            26.7            27.5          32.2            32.1         27.9           31.0
               API                     18.9 (1.3)              lS.5           18.2            18.2            18.3          18.9            18.9         18.6           18.7
               Other                   32.5 (l.l)              31.1 3         32.0            32.1            32.0          32.4            32.5         32.3           30.7
               White/Black             15.6 (2.3)
               White/AlAN              22.9 (1.4)
               White/API               11.2 (1.9)
               Other Combinations      19.0 (2.1)

            Poor or Fair Health l
                   White                     9.6 (.1)            9.6            9.6           9.6            9.6          9.6            9.6            9.6            9.6
                   Black                    14.7 (.4)           14.6          14.6           14.5           14.5         14.7           14.6           14.6           14.6
                   AlAN                     14.1 (.9)           14.3           13.8          13.8           13.4         14.2           14.2           14.0            14.
                   API                       8.0 (.4)            S.O            7.8            7.S           7.S           8.0            8.0           7.9            7.9
                   Other                     11.8 (.5)          U.S 3          11.7           11.7          11.7          11.8           11.S          11.8           11.6
                   White/Black              6.5 (1.0)
                   White/AlAN               12.7 (.7)
                   White/API                5.8 (l.0)
                   Other Combinations       14.2 (1.7)
--- Not applicable. NHIS = National Health Interview Survey; AlAN = American Indian or Alaskan Native; API= Asian or Pacific Islander.
1All percents weighted to be nationally representative. 5,237 observations missing data on race and are not tabulated. Health insurance only obtained for half of 1993. Percent
         living with single mother only relevant for children.
2 Main Race = Race when asked best single race group; Detailed Race = Race when asked which group or groups describes race. 3 Includes Multiracial.


# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control/National Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.


                                                                                         74

                                                                                      Deterministic Whole Allocation                Deterministic Fractional
                                                                                                                                          Allocation
                                                                                            Largest
e Group                      Detailed        Main            All         Smallest           Group       Largest        Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                              Race2          Race2        Inclusive       Group             Other       Group
                                                                                             Than
                                                                                            White

hildren Living with Single Mothers (N =86941) I
      White                  14.6 (.3)           14.7           14.9           14.6             14.6         14.9            14.7         14.7          14.7
      Black                  54.7 (1.1)          54.4           54.1           54.3             54.0         54.5            54.1         54.3          54.4
      AlAN                   32.1 (3.6)          31.6           28.0         . 28.0             26.6         32.1            32.2         30.1          32.2
      API                    11.7 (1.0)          12.2           12.4           12.4             12.5         11.7            12.1         12.3          11.9
      Other                  26.3 (1.9)         26.0'           26.4           26.2             26.3         26.5            26.3         26.5          26.6
      White/Black            40.9 (3.1)
      White/AlAN             21.1 (2.3)
      White/API              16.7 (2.9)
      Other Combinations 34.3 (3.6)

    .-- Not applicable.
    I All percents weighted to be nationally representative. 5,237 observations missing data on race and are not tabulated. Health insurance only obtained for half of 1993. Percent

               living with single mother only relevant for children.
    2 Main Race = Race when asked best single race group; Detailed Race = Race when asked which group or groups describes race.

     3 Includes Multiracial.

    NHIS = National Health Interview Survey; AlAN = American Indian or Alaskan Native; API = Asian or Pacific Islander.
     # Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.
    SOURCE: Centers for Disease ControljNational Center for Health Statistics. Unpublished data from the National Health Interview Survey 1993-1995.




                                                                                       75
Computed from the Race and Ethnicity Supplement to CPS.

                                                                                  Deterministic Whole Assignment                Deterministic Fraaional
                                                                                                                                      Assignment
         Labor Measure and Race          Basic CPS          All        Smallest         Largest       Largest      Plurality     Equal          NHIS
                Category                                 Inclusive      Group           Group         Group                     Fractions      Fraaions
                                                                                       Other than
                                                                                         White
       Unemployment Rate
              White                     4.82 (0.24)         . 4.73           4.71            4.71          4.73          4.71        4.72          4.72
              Black                     9.29 (0.90)           9.39           9.22            9.39          9.28          9.31         9.31          9.31
              AlAN                      9.76 (3.66)          1l.84          11.84           10.67         12.51         12.71        11.87         12.71
              API                       4.85 (1.12)           4.39           4.41            4.39         4.40          4.40         4.40          4.40
              Other                     6.74 (1.62)           7.73           7.88            7.88          7.88          7.83         7.88          7.83


       Labor Force Participation
       Rate
               White                    66.30 (0.42)         66.25          66.23           66.23         66.25         66.25       66.24          66.24
               Black                    62.53 (l.0l)         62.78          62.70           62.78         62.68         62.78       62.72          62.72
               AlAN                     57.66 (3.75)         65.75          65.75           64.49         63.47         63.60       64.57          64.19
               API                      66.53 (2.22)         65.60          65.45           65.66         65.41         65.38       65.46          65.46
               Other                    68.73 (2.46)         68.45          68.38           68.38         68.38         68.38       68.39          68.39



I Estimates weighted 10 adjust for nonresponse and survey design but are nOl nationally representative.

ALAN = American Indian or Alaska Native; API = Asian or Pacific Islander.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                                                  76
from the Race and Ethnicity Supplement to CPS. Adjusted for Hispanic Origin #
                                                                                                                                       Deterministic
                                                                                     Deterministic Whole Assignment                     Fractional
                                                                                                                                       Assignment

               Labor Measure and Race            Basic CPS             Smallest           Largest          Largest      Plurality         NHIS
                      Category                   Distribution           Group          Group Other         Group                         Fractions
                                                                                        than White
           Unemployment Rate
                  White                         4.82 (0.24)                   4.71             4.71              4.73          4.71-            4.72
                  Black                         9.29 (0.90)                   9.22             9.39              9.28          9.39             9.31
                  AlAN                          9.76 (3.66)                  11.90            10.67             12.51         12.44            12.79
                  API                           4.85 (Ll2)                    4.43             4.41              4.41          4.40             4.40
                  Other                         6.74 (1.62)                   7.77             7.77              7.84          7.86             7.82


           Labor Force Participation Rate
                   White                        66.30 (0.42)                 66.23           66.23             66.25         66.26             66.24
                   Black                        62.53 (1.01)                 62.75           62.79             62.70         62.78             62.72
                  AlAN                          57.66 (3.75)                 65.64           64.64             63.47         63.60             64.17
                  API                           66.53 (2.22)                 65.37           65.58             65.32         65.15             65.45
                  Other                         68.73 (2.46)                 68.47           68.49             68.40         68.40             68.39



I Estimates weighted to adjust for nonresponsl! and survey design but are not nationally representative.

AlAN = American Indian or Alaska Native; API = Asian or Pacific Islander.

# Allocation methods applied using separate race distributions for Hispanics and Non-Hispanics.

SOURCE: May 1995 Current Populations Survey (CPS) Supplement on Race and Ethnicity.




                                                                                  77
EMAILS CREATED
ARMS - BOX 015 - FOLDER 001


[2/18/1999 - 3/9/1999]
