RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I      )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1999 18:29:25.00

SUBJECT:   1999-3-5 Sperling briefing

TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I don't get it. What's "this"?
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 03/05/99 06:31
PM ---------------------------




Michael Waldman
03/05/99 06:13:25 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc:      Richard L. Siewert/WHO/EOP
Subject:         1999-3-5 Sperling briefing

is this different from the thing you were suggesting we take our time to
think about?
---------------------- Forwarded by Michael Waldman/WHO/EOP on 03/05/99
06:14 PM ---------------------------



        SUNTUM M @ Al
        03/05/99 01:16:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject: 1999-3-5 Sperling briefing




                              THE WHITE HOUSE

                    Office of the Press Secretary

For Immediate Release                           March 5, 1999


                         PRESS BRIEFING BY
         DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL GENE SPERLING
       AND CHAIR, COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISORS, JANET YELLEN

                            The Briefing Room


11:50 A.M. EST


             MR. SIEWERT:    As you know, the Labor Department had some
new figures on the unemployment rate and job numbers today.  Briefing
for you on that today will be Janet Yellen, Chair of the President's
Council on Economic Advisors; and Mr. Gene Sperling, my former boss,
Director of the National Economic Council.

             MS. YELLEN: Thank you.   Today's employment report
indicates that the economy remains on a path of strong,
non-inflationary growth.  Non-farm payroll employment rose a robust
275,000 in February; and, now, since January 1993, the economy has
created 18.1 million jobs and 16.8 million of those jobs are in the
private sector.

             The unemployment rate in February remained essentially
unchanged, edging up slightly to 4.4 percent, from 4.3 percent in
January. The unemployment rate has now been below 5 percent for 20
months without any sign of inflationary pressure. And our nation's
continued and long-lasting strong labor market is benefitting all
Americans, and that includes historically disadvantaged groups.

              Even with this strong labor market, inflation remains in
check. Average hourly earnings rose a tenth of a percent in
February, and over the past 12 months average hourly earnings have
increased 3.6 percent over a period when consumer prices rose about
1.75 percent.   What that means is that Americ'an workers are
experiencing strong, real wage gains while inflation remains tame.

             In February, employment was up sharply in construction
and retail trade, while manufacturing employment fell.   Most other
major sectors posted moderate gains.   Reflecting the weakness in the
world economy, manufacturing employment fell 1.8 percent during the
past year, but job losses in this sector have been offset by strong
gains elsewhere. Over the past 12 months, for example, employment in
computer services rose 13 percent, and employment in engineering and
managements services are up 7 percent.

             Recent indicators suggest that the United States economy
remains on a healthy course.  Despite the challenges that face the
U.S. economy, with the recent international financial turmoil, the
United States economy is likely to continue, during the first part of
1999, on a path of solid growth with low
unemployment, low inflation, solid job gains and improved living
standards for American workers.  Thanks.

          MR. SPERLING:  I'd just like to make a couple of
comments concerning some of the initial information that was
given out yesterday by Chairman Domenici and Chairman Kasich on
D,

the Republican budget framework.  I'd like to note what appears
to be favorable about their budget outline, and what appears to
provoke very serious questions.

          What appears to be favorable is that over the last two
years, this President, in both State of the Unions, has made a
major call to the United States people that in this era of
surpluses we focus on saving surpluses to meet our Social
Security and Medicare challenges, and in particular, in this last
State of the Union, focusing on paying down our national debt in
a way that would help us strengthen the solvency of Medicare and
Social Security.

          To the extent that the Republicans are joining the
President's call for setting aside a significant amount of the


surplus for debt reduction, we welcome their joining the
President on this focus on debt reduction.  We find that to be
welcome news.  However, there are serious questions that remain.

          First, as of this moment, there has been no commitment
that we have seen that any of the benefits of this debt reduction
would actually flow to strengthening the solvency of Social
Security. The President's plan has been scored by the
independent actuary of Social Security as extending solvency to
2055, even if it relied solely on debt reduction until 2049. As
of this moment, we have not heard really any word from the
Republicans that any of the benefits of debt reduction would go
to strengthening the solvency of Social Security. And that is a
serious question that needs to be examined and discussed.

          Certainly, debt reduction is very good for our economy,
increasing savings, increasing growth, giving us greater cushion
to handle what may come down the road.  But to the degree that it
makes room -- greater room for us to handle challenges in the
future, we want to lock in that some of those benefits from debt
reduction would go to Social Security and Medicare.  So far, the
Republicans remain silent on giving any assurances in this area.

           Secondly is the issue of Medicare.  The framework that
is being outlined says that all of the so-called off-budget
surpluses, the surplus is coming from Social Security, should be
set aside.   They suggest that for over 10 years.  We for over 15
years lock in an amount that is actually equal to more than that
off-budget surplus for Social Security. So ours is a guarantee
over 15 years for an amount that is more than is -- about $60
billion more than the off-budget surplus.

          In addition to that, however, the President allocates
$686 billion for strengthening the solvency of Medicare until the
year 2020. As we said, our preference is to use those surplus
funds in combination with real Medicare reforms that would make
the program more modern and competitive and allow for
prescription drug benefit.  But we are adamant that we need to
have 15 percent of the surplus set aside for Medicare.

          Right now, with the Republican framework of having the
so-called on-budget surpluses, the surpluses that do not involve
any of the Social Security payroll taxes -- with all of that
going to tax cuts, that leaves nothing so far for Medicar.e, even
though we know that the Medicare trust fund will go -- become
insolvent in 2008, just nine years from now.

           Now, clearly, we need to have reforms in Medicare, but
no one should be allowed to believe that we could extend the
solvency of Medicare until 2020 without any of the surplus being
set aside.   It would require virtually 20 years in a row of
Medicare growth per person at 2.8 percent, less than half of the
growth in the private sector, almost below the inflation growth.
It would require almost 40 percent less than projections.
Clearly, this is not plausible, and it's hard to think of
something that would be more irresponsible, fiscal policy, than
for us to look at an over $4.5 trillion surplus over the next 15
years and allow all of that to be committed to other things when
we know Medicare is running out of money by the year 2008.

          So, again, the cupboard remains bare for Medicare in
the Republican budget and the silence on setting aside the
surplus for Medicare needs to end.



            Related to that is the question about their tax cuts.
 If you look at the Congressional Budget Office numbers, there is
'not any significant on-budget funds until 2002. That provides
 concerns that if the Republicans are calling for significant tax
 cuts in the year 2000, we would be very concerned if they would
 be resorting to gimmicky tax cuts that would be designed simply
 to bring in funds simply to meet a gap.   We don't need that kind
 of gimmick. And so this is one of the things that I think
 everyone should be looking out for.   It is clear under their
 framework that they cannot afford any significant real tax cut
 until 2002. And so anything that comes before that should get
 the clo'sest scrutiny from all policymakers.

          But perhaps more concern is that if the commitment to
having all of the on-budget surpluses, if that is their
commitment, as has been expressed at times, goes to tax cuts of
some form, that would lead to draining away funds of as much as
$250 billion to $300 billion a year in the 10th through 15th year
of the budget.   That .is money of which significant amounts need
to be allocated toward Medicare. We, right now, allocate $686
billion towards Medicare.    That comes out to about $350 billion
in the first 10 years and $335 billion in the last five years.
Again, if all of the additional funds are going to the tax cuts,
where is there any resources to insure that the solvency of
Medicare can remain strong, and that there's a possibility of
having real reforms that include prescription drugs?

          Finally, the fourth serious concern goes to the
discretionary budget.  If again, the commitment is that all the
on-budget surpluses go simply to tax cuts, one has to struggle to
imagine how they can put together a discretionary budget over the
next five years.  It seems that already there's commitments to
having an additional $15 to $20 to $25 billion for defense.  That
would have to be made up, then, in the out-years with that
equivalent amount of cuts, and -- on the discretionary side.

          And Senator Domenici has talked about even having
special education increases.  If this is the case, it's going to
be very hard to imagine how they are going to put together a
budget over the next five years tha't deals with health care,
research, crime, environment, other areas of education, without
significant reductions.                     .

          So, summing up, we applaud the degree that they have
joined the President's call for saving a significant amount of
the surplus. I think this shows how much the President has
defined the fiscal agenda over the next two years, for the need
for saving, for debt reduction, for putting our country in a
position to meet the retirement challenge of Social Security and
Medicare in the future.   But we have serious questions as to
whether any of the debt reduction benefits will be allocated to
Social Security, whether there's any funds for Medicare or not,
whether the tax cuts in the out-year will compete and drain away
the funds needed for Medicare, and how they can put together
discretionary budget under their outline that does not lead to
serious reductions in key areas -- in health care, education,
environment and fighting crime.

          Q    So where do you go from here?     Is there room for
compromise or is this a no-win situation?

          MR. SPERLING:   Oh, there's no question that we should


be able to work in a bipartisan way to meet these challenges.
Again, many of the Republican leaders have joined the President
calling for 62 percent of the surplus to be reserved in some form
for Social Security -- we just haven't actually seen a commitment
on how that would be done.

          We've seen now some suggesting that it would go to debt
reduction, as the President suggests, but, again, their silence
as to how any of the benefits of debt reduction would actually go
to strengthening Social Security.

          Q    More specifically, if the Republicans meet the
administration's proposal on Social Security, and are dedicating
enough to paying down the debt, are you saying that there's no
room -- are you ruling out negotiation over Medicare so that they
can try to make good on their pledged proposals of tax cuts?

          MR. SPERLING:   No, what we've been calling for is to
reserve 77 percent of the surplus for Social Security and
Medicare. That clearly allows for substantial funds to be
available and to be. discussed as to how they should be allocated
among tax cuts -- whether it's our USA account or other tax cuts
they're proposing -- military readiness, and key issues like
education, discretionary spending.
 )


          It just seems to us, as a basic test of fiscal
responsibility, that you first need to set aside enough to meet
your existing gap in Medicare and Social Security, which we
believe is 77 percent of the surplus, before one goes on to doing
whatever spending or tax initiatives anyone might prefer.   First
you do what you have to do before what you want to do.   First
things first.  And when you have a foreseeable, clear Social
Security and Medicare challenge coming down the road, we're
saying you should be allocating 77 percent of the surplus over
the next 15 years for Medicare and Social Security.

          It's amazing that we have not heard a single word of
agreement from the Republicans that they want to set aside any of
the surplus for Medicare.  I would remind you that Chairman
Domenici last year spoke of Medicare first, and suggested that
tobacco revenues should go first to Medicare.  Chairman Domenici
is one of the great fiscal leaders over the last 15 years, and I
think that, to be consistent with that commitment, he and others
should join us in calling for both setting aside 15 percent of
the surplus for Medicare, and doing that in the context of
important reforms that would modernize Medicare and allow room
for prescription drugs.

          Q    Gene, Republicans and even some Democrats have
said that they don't trust the President on the issue of Social
Security, and they've demanded that he come forth with a plan for
the reforms that will include the tough choices that will need to
be made.  I'm wondering what is the rationale for the President
not coming forward with a plan?
0,


          MR. SPERLING:  Well, as you recall, many people
suggested that the President come forward, we just would like you
to come forward.  So the President came forward at the State of
the Union -- to the surprise of some, not to us -- with a bold
framework for allocating the surplus for Medicare and Social
Security. And so far we have not seen anyone come forward with


the type of commitment he has.

          The President has a plan that has been scored at
getting to 2055, to extending Social Security solvency to 2055.
The President was very clear in the State of the Union that to
get to the 75-year solvency there would need to be a bipartisan
process that would require both sides get together and make some
tough-minded choices.

           Now, let me be clear.    I am not necessarily
recommending that either side should go out alone on some of the
more tougher controversial choices that could end up politicizing
the debate.   I think in the past things have worked better when
there's .been a process wher<;, people could agree together in a
bipartisan way on some of the tougher choices.

          However, a threshold matter should be that we should be
at least setting aside enough of our surpluses to make reform
viable in both Social Security and Medicare. And I do think that
we are still waiting to hear from the Republicans that some of
the $4.5 trillion in surpluses over the next 15 years should be
set aside for one of the nation's most important programs that we
know is running out of funds by the year 2008.

          Q    Aren't you at some point, if you've set aside 77.
percent, shifting some money from general revenues to trust funds
that are supposed to be paid for by the payroll tax? And are you
allowed to do that?

          MR. SPERLING:  First of all, by paying down our
national debt to the degree the President is, the President will
be dramatically reducing the net interest cost that our
government pays out.  That will be freeing up additional general
revenues for decades that can be used.

          What we're arguing is that we are one nation, we have a
large expected surplus over the next 15 years, and yet, we have a
large Medicare and Social Security gap over the next 50 or 75
years.  It just is basic common fiscal sense that we should seek
to set aside, at least for a one-time measure, some of those
surpluses so that we can meet a future challenge.

          And I think that that basic notion of saving these
surpluses, as opposed to consuming them, so that there is less
burden the next generation to meet the retirement challenge is
very consistent with the goal of not simply draining existing
funds for Social Security. We are paying down the debt in a way
that will free up interest costs and increase revenues through
higher growth by increasing savings and debt reduction.

           Q    Following up on that, the Republicans seem to be
saying that Medicare right now -- I mean, to put more money into
Medicare without reforms is to throw good money after bad, and
that. if you use your plan, that you're going to be decreasing the
pressure on the government to come up with these reform plans.
What's wrong with that argument?

          MR. SPERLING:  Well, I would turn it around.  I do not
think that there will be an opportunity for viable Medicare
reform if we have not allocated any of the surpluses to going
forward.

          Let's remember that we had,   in the 1997 balanced budget


agreement, nearly $400 billion in Medicare savings over 10 years
-- fairly significant savings. One of the reasons those were
difficult was because, truthfully, we all waited until it got
rather close.  Having the additional surpluses allows one to
strengthen the solvency and be able to do reforms in a reasonable
and prudent way.

          I think it's just -- you know, when somebody says money
doesn't matter for dealing with the solvency of Medicare, that's
just not plausible. This doesn't need to be an either/or choice.
The President's very clear we should have Medicare reform, we
should have bipartisan Medicare reform, but first let's set aside
-- let's make a commitment to set aside.  We haven't even heard a
commitment that they would set aside funds for Medicare in any
form.  In fact, we've heard repeatedly that all of the on-budget
surpluses would go to tax cuts. That comes directly at the
expense of putting aside any money for Medicare.

          Again, how can you imagine a Congress in the year 2003,
2004, dealing with very difficult measures, and wondering why a
previous Congress allocated $4.5 trillion of the surplus and
didn't leave anything for a foreseeable Medicare shortfall coming
in 2008?

          Q    On your comments from before about neither side
should stand alone in making these tough choices -- does that
open up, once again, the possibility of a Medicare commission?

          MR. SPERLING:  Well, the Medicare Commission is
finishing their work right now, and I do not know what the exact
outcome will be.  What I will say is the following:  Whether or
not the Medicare Commission    comes to a -- whatever report they
come to, this President will read the report, he will work with
his advisors and he will come up with his own view of how to go
forward on Medicare reform. And he is committed to wanting to
have bipartisan Medicare reform, with the assistance of 15
percent of the surplus that will modernize Medicare, but will
assure that there is a defined benefit that people can count on
in Medicare, even as we are doing things to make it more -- to
have more competition and to reduce cost pressures.

          Q    Gene, the plan last year on Social Security was
that you'd have a'year of discussion and then you'd follow that
up with a summit early in this year between the White House and
congressional leaders on Social Security.  You had the meeting in
December to discuss social Security. What happened to the summit
and where are you going now --

          MR. SPERLING:  No, I think what we said was that we
were going to reserve 100 percent, that we were going to have
bipartisan forums and that we would end those with a White House
conference. We also said that during that time period the
President would encourage people to come out with ideas, and to
the degree that people had different reform options of any form
during that time, we would try to encourage an atmosphere that
derailed the third rail mentality and let people put forward
their ideas.

          I think we carried through with that clearly, both
reserving 100 percent to the surplus. We stuck with that, even
the highway bill, even pressure on the tax cut.  We did
bipartisan forums, regional, as we said, where we had full
participation. And then we had a fairly -- a significant White


House conference with 48 members of Congress evenly divided from
both Democrats and Republicans. And then the President came
forward in the State of the Union and started the debate by
putting down a fairly significant framework on Social Security.

          We now are -- I think all sides are now engaged in
studying what the President has done, studying different options
and looking for where a consensus could possibly be reached to
move forward.

          Q    It was repeatedly said last year that at the end
of that discussion period you would all get together and meet and
try to come up with some kind of a plan.

          MR. SPERLING:  I don't think that that's correct, that
there was like -- that there was a kind of summit where everybody
got together and cut a deal type of agreement.  I think what we
referred to is there would be a White House conference; then we
wanted to get going earlier in the year.  And the President did
that by announcing a serious framework on his own in January --
19th -- and as we expected, by stepping up forward, we have taken
enormous scrutiny on everything we've put forward.

          Many of the people who encouraged us to put programs
forward and said that they would just want to analyze it and
discuss it have been very critical.  That's fine.  We wanted to
start this debate.  Clearly, the President has defined the
agenda; clearly, we've seen from the Republican proposal that
they are joining the core notion of the President's call for
saving the surplus for debt reduction -- we hope.  But we want to
see more on how we actually would extend the solvency of Social
Security and Medicare, and so far the details are few on that
side.

          Clearly, in order to have this kind of bipartisan
process, there needs to be give-and-take.  The President has put
out a framework; we need to see how Republicans and Democrats are
shaping upon their ideas, and then what the possibilities for
moving forward are -- either through the normal committee
structure or through a process that could emerge over time.

          Q    Gene, you talk about fiscal respo~sibility in
saving the surplus, and yet the President's plan for relief to
Central America would actually tap the surplus. And on the other
hand, the Republicans are busy finding offsets for the package.
Aren't they being more consistent with the President's ideas on
Social Security than the President?

          MR. SPERLING: The Central American emergency is about
as classic and undisputed an emergency as there is.   It is one of
the worst natural disasters in this part of the world.   It has
cost nearly 10,000 people their lives.  The infrastructure in
some countries, 40-50 percent has been destroyed.   This is a
classic emergency in which we felt we were working in good faith
to put together funds.  I think it's very unfortunate that now
there has been some effort to relitigate some old battles from
last year, instead of being able to move forward on what is
uncontroversial and clearly the classic type of emergency
spending.

          Clearly, there are times when you hit a gray line on
what's an emergency and not.   I don't think -- I think this is
clearly an emergency and it should be the type of thing that we


                                                                                                  ',1
can come together for in a bipartisan way, and we hope that's
what will still happen.

          Q    will the President veto the Republican version of
Central American relief?
          MR. SPERLING:  You know I'm not going to get into
hypothetical veto threats.  We think this is a classic emergency
with strong -- very strong humanitarian concerns.  It's important
to all Americans.  It's important to many of the
Hispanic-Americans with relatives in these countries.  But I
think to all Americans with humanitarian concerns, they recognize
this is a classic emergency in which we should put politics
aside. We're hoping that's what will take place.

          Q     Thank you.

          Q    Gene, a couple questions on the USA savings
account? When do you expect to have more details on the
universal savings accounts?

          MR. SPERLING:      Sometime this month.

          Q    Is the Wall Street Journal piece accurate today,
on how they characterize that?

          MR. SPERLING:  I'll wait until we put it out.  I think
that it was generally, generally accurate.  I don't want to vouch
for all the specifics that they had in there.

          Q    Going back to the unemployment numbers real quick,
why are the numbers for

          MR. SPERLING:      Let me have Janet take that.

          Q    Okay.  Going back to the unemployment numbers
quickly, why are the African American and Hispanic numbers
historically low right now? Is there -- are you citing any
reasons?

          MS. YELLEN: We've had an enormously strong labor
market, with unemployment falling now for a long period of time,
to levels that we haven't seen in 30 years. And that has
benefitted disproportionately groups that have found it harder to
gain employment in the past.  And, to some extent, African
Americans have had high unemployment rates, and they've seen
unusual benefit from our strong labor market.

          The same holds true for Hispanics. And wage gains, as
well, which I didn't mention this morning, but over the last few
years we have seen really spectacular gains in wages for blacks,
for less-educated workers, for Hispanics, for recent immigrants.
This is -- you're seeing the great benefit of a strong economy
and continued strength in the labor market.

          Q    Quickly, following up on that, where does the
homeless population fit into these unemployment numbers? Do you
cut them off at a certain point where they're not calculated in,
the homeless?

          MS. YELLEN: This is the civilian, non-institutional
population.  In principle, they should -- I think in principle
they should be --



          MR. BRAUN:           The survey addresses -- people
without addresses won't be in the survey.

           Q    So that means that the numbers are kind of off,
then.   I mean, the homeless

           MS. YELLEN:  They may not be counted fully in these
numbers.   They'd have to be surveyed.
0,

          Q    I guess you noted that the unemployment rate has
now been below 5 percent for 20 months.  What does that do to
your current thinking of NAIRU and how long will this go on --

          MS. YELLEN:  Keep revising down our estimate of NAIRU,
we like to stick with the notion that at some point a labor
market can become so tight and the demand can so outstrip supply
that wages and compensation can be driven up to the point of
putting cost pressures on firms which are inflationary.

          So that's a general principle that I think applies and
we've seen it in the past.  But we sure keep revising downward
our estimate of where that point is where we hit it, because
                              we certainly haven't seen.any
evidence of inflationary pressures and it's right -- in view of
that, we don't see cost pressures increasing on firms, we've seen
real wage gains along with productivity. And that suggests that
each year we revisit this we're likely to be thinking about
revising it down further.

          Q    How can the economy accommodate this type -- can
you just go over those reasons again, why inflation isn't
cropping up from this tight labor market?

          MS. YELLEN:  Well, I think the issue of why NAIRU has
declined is one that is stumping economists.  And I can't pretend
to give you a full answer here, but there are workers, clearly,
who want to work, who have found it difficult in the past to gain
jobs. And they, clearly, are being drawn into the labor market,
gaining employment in record numbers.  And firms are managing,
we've seen very impressive gains recently in productivity.

          And when you think about inflation, what matters is
whether or not wage increases or compensation increases are in
line with productivity. And productivity has been doing
extraordinarily well; it's been rising at 2 percent a year for
the last three years, leading at least some people to ask the
question, is trend productivity now higher.

          We've had extremely strong investment as a consequence
of the President's deficit reduction plan.  Capacity is ample and
I think when you see we don't have pressures on capacity
utilization, that's also working to hold inflation down.

           Q     Thanks.

               END                      12:21 P.M. EST




Message Sent
To: ___________________________________________________________


Lori E. Abrams
Jeannetta P. Allen
Ralph Alswang
Brenda M. Anders
Eli G. Attie @ OVP@EOP
Robin J. Bachman
Kyle M. Baker
Karen L. Barbuschak
Beverly J. Barnes
Brian A. Barreto
Mark H. Bartholomew
Mark J. Bernstein
Marsha E. Berry
Todd A. Bledsoe
antony j. blinken
Lanny A. Breuer
Patrick E. Briggs
Katharine Button
Robin J. Bachman
Barbara D. Woolley
Bradley M. Campbell
Alejandro G. Cabrera @ ovp@eop
Mary E. Cahill
Dominique L. Cano
Nanda Chitre
Delia A. Cohen
Justin Coleman
Julianne B. Corbett
Gregory B. Craig
Philip J. Crowley
Elliot J. Diringer
Jackson T. Dunn
Daniel W. Burkhardt
Debra D. Bird
Diane Ikemiyashiro
Dorian V. Weaver
Dorinda A. Salcido
Douglas Matties
Anne M. Edwards
Patricia M. Ewing @ OVP@EOP
Joseph C. Fanaroff
Sharon Farmer
Jennifer Ferguson
Martha Foley
Carmen B. Fowler
Jessica L. Gibson
Paul D. Glastris
Julie B. Goldberg
Dario J. Gomez
David R. Goodfriend
Joshua S. Gottheimer
Toby C. Graff
John A. Gribben
Michael A. Hammer
William C. Haymes
Marty J. Hoffmann
Maureen A. Hudson
Sheyda Jahanbani
Thomas D. Janenda
david t. johnson
Wayne C. Johnson
Michele Jolin
James M. Teague

Jon P. Jennings
Julie E. Mason
David E. Kalbaugh.
Jonathan A. Kaplan
Sally Katzen
Mark A. Kitchens
Catherine T. Kitchen
Sarah S. Freeman
Jim Kohlenberger @ OVP@EOP
Kris M Balderston
Sara M. Latham
Christopher S. Lehane @ OVP@EOP
Joseph P. Lockhart
Laura D. Schwartz
Lisa J. Levin
Christine N. Macy
Laura S. Marcus
Tanya E. Martin
Shannon Mason
Douglas R. Matties
Andrew J. Mayock
Anne E. McGuire
Susanna B. McGuire
Noa A. Meyer
Elisa Millsap
Cheryl D. Mills
Rajiv Y. Mody
megan moloney
Kevin Moran
Melissa M. Murray
Reuben L. Musgrave Jr
Mindy E. Myers
Sean P. Maloney
Michael V. Terrell
Steven J. Naplan
Mark D. Neschis
Elizabeth R. Newman
Nathan B. Naylor @ ovp@eop
Neera Tanden
Jonathan Orszag
Tracy Pakulniewicz
Julia M. Payne
Jonathan M. Prince
Phillip Caplan
Nicole R. Rabner
Linda Ricci
Heather M. Riley
Jade L. Riley
Renee C. Riley
Robin M. Roland
Charles F. Ruff
Peter Rundlet
Virginia N. Rustique
Evan Ryan
Robert B. Johnson
Jodi R. Sakol @ OVP@EOP
G. Timothy Saunders
Jason H. Schechter
Judithanne V. Scourfield
BROOKS SCOVILLE
Christopher K. Scully
Maya Seiden
Ruby Shamir

Neal Sharma
Jeffrey A. Shesol
June Shih
Leanne A. Shimabukuro
Dawn L. Smalls
Brian D. Smith
jonathan e. smith
Mary L. Smith
Richard Socarides
Douglas B. Sosnik
Maria E. Soto
Chandler G. Spaulding
Aviva Steinberg
Todd Stern
Dana C. Strand
Michael J. Sullivan
Sarah E. Gegenheimer
Jonathan H. Schnur
Tracy F. Sisser
Sylvia M. Mathews
Jordan Tamagni
Barry J. Toiv
Serena C. Torrey
Karen Tramontano
June G. Turner
Thomas M. Rosshirt @ ovp@eop
Thurgood Marshall Jr
Victoria L. valentine
Dag Vega
Virginia Apuzzo
Michael waldman
Essence P. Washington
Glen M. Weiner
Robert S. Weiner
Peter A. Weissman
Amy Weiss
Lowell A. Weiss
Alexian T. Wines
Woyneab M. Wondwossen
Debra S. Wood
William H. White Jr.
SUNTUM M @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
meglynn @ usia.gov@INET@LNGTWY
backup @ wilson.ai.mit.edu@INET@LNGTWY
wh-outbox-distr @ pub.pub.whitehouse.gov@INET@LNGTWY
BARTHOLOW T @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
BUDIG N @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
CUTLER L @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
DICKEY L @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
FORDE R @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
GRAY W @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
John_S,ee @ ed.gov@INET@LNGTWY
KTORPEY @ AOL.COM@INET@LNGTWY
MOFFETT J @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
OLCOTT E @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
PR U=TDIXON@PR_L=AVUOEOB@MRP@LNGTWY
RUBIN E @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
NAPLAN S @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
SMITH BD @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
TCSmith @ dol.gov@INET@LNGTWY
WOZNIAK N @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
cmbeach @ msn.com@INET@LNGTWY
dmilbank @ tnr.com@INET@LNGTWY

john.longbrake @ mSOl.do.treas.sprint.com@INET@LNGTWY
john_see @ ed.gov@INET@LNGTWY
julie_green @ ed.gov@INET@LNGTWY
klasky_helaine @ ustr.gov@INET@LNGTWY
meg lynn @ ibb.gov@INET@LNGTWY
skgmd @ umich.edu@INET@LNGTWY
tingen-terri @ dol.gov@INET@LNGTWY
usia01 @ access.digex.com@INET@LNGTWY
1=US@2=WESTERN UNION@3=@5=ATT.COM@*ELN\62955104@MRX@LNGTWY
62955104 @ eln.attmail.com@INET@LNGTWY
INFOMGT @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
newsdesk @ usnewswire.com@INET@LNGTWY
usnwire @ access.digex.com@INET@LNGTWY
pub_Arch @ oa.eop.gov@INET@LNGTWY
Releases @ pub.pub.whitehouse.gov@INET@LNGTWY
Releases @ www3.whitehouse.gov@INET@LNGTWY




