RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-MAR-1999 12:17:32.00

SUBJECT:   LRM CJB20 - - EDUCATION Draft Bill on Public Choice and Innovation (Magnet Schoo

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
please print
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 03/10/99 12:19
PM ---------------------------



Constance J. Bowers

03/10/99 10:56:32 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject:         LRM CJB20 - - EDUCATION Draft Bill on Public Choice and
Innovation (Magnet Schools, Charter Schools, and Choice Schools
provisions) parts of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act
Reauthorization (Parts qf Title v, ESEA)

To follow is ED's draft language on equity provisions of the ESEA
Reauthoziation.  please provide comments by:
                        12:00 noon, Monday, March 15, 1999

Note:  If you are unable to access these files, please let me know.   This
material is not being faxed to you.

click here for draft bill text:




click here for draft sectional analysis text:




---------------------- Forwarded by Constance J. Bowers/OMB/EOP on
03/10/99 10:38 AM ---------------------------
LRM ID: CJB20
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

Wednesday, March 10, 1999

LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

TO:                      Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

FROM:           Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for Legislative
Reference
OMB CONTACT:    Constance J. Bowers
                                PHONE: (202) 395 -3 803 FAX: (202) 395 -6148
SUBJECT:        EDUCATION Draft Bill on Public Choice and Innovation
(Magnet Schools, Charter Schools, and Choice Schools provisions) parts of
the Elementary and Secondary Education Act Reauthorization (Parts of Title
V, ESEA)

DEADLINE:               12:00 noon Monday, March 15, 1999
In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
program of the President.  please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

COMMENTS: Because of the magnitude of ED's draft bill to reauthorize the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act, circulation and interagency review
will be handled in separate pieces.

DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:
61-JUSTICE - Dennis Burke -   (202) 514-2141

EOP:
Barbara Chow
Sandra Yamin
Barry White
Wayne Upshaw
Leslie S. Mustain
Wei-Min C. wang
Jonathan H. Schnur
Tanya E. Martin
Elena Kagan
Broderick Johnson
William H. White Jr.
Lynn G. Cutler
Janet Murguia
Daniel J. Chenok
Daniel I. Werfel
Robert G. Damus
Rosalyn J. Rettman
Peter Rundlet
Pamula L. Simms
Howard Dendurent
Shelly A. McAllister
Jeffrey L. Farrow
Janet R. Forsgren
James J. Jukes
LRM ID: CJB20    SUBJECT:  EDUCATION Draft Bill on Public Choice and
Innovation (Magnet Schools, Charter Schools, and Choice Schools
provisions) parts of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act
Reauthorization (Parts of Title V, ESEA)

RESPONSE TO
LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
MEMORANDUM

If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's line) to leave a
message with a legislative assistant.

You may also respond by:

         (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
         (2) sending us a memo or letter
Please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


TO:               Constance J. Bowers Phone:   395-3803   Fax:  395-6148
                  Office of Management and Budget
                  Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant): 395-7362

FROM:                                                          (Date)

                                                               (Name)

                                                               (Agency)

                                                               (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:

                 Concur

                 No Objection

                 No Comment

                 See proposed edits on pages

                 Other:

                 FAX RETURN of _____ pages, attached to this response sheet



Message Sent
TO:~    __~______~~________~____________________________________
justice.lrm @ usdoj.gov @ inet
Barbara Chow/OMB/EOP
Sandra Yamin/OMB/EOP
Barry White/OMB/EOP
Wayne Upshaw/OMB/EOP
Wei-Min C. Wang/OMB/EOP
Jonathan H. Schnur/OPD/EOP
Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP
Elena Kagan/9PD/EOP
William H. White Jr./WHO/EOP
Lynn G. Cutler/WHO/EOP
Janet Murguia/WHO/EOP
Daniel J. Chenok/OMB/EOP
Daniel I. Werfel/OMB/EOP
Robert G. Damus/OMB/EOP
Rosalyn J. Rettman/OMB/EOP
Peter Rundlet/WHO/EOP
Pamula L. Simms/OMB/EOP
Howard Dendurent/OMB/EOP
Shelly A. McAllister/OMB/EOP
Jeffrey L. Farrow/WHO/EOP
Janet R. Forsgren/OMB/EOP
James J. Jukes/OMB/EOP
Constance J. Bowers/OMB/EOP
Nancy J. Duykers/OMB/EOP




 Draft 3/9/99
TITLE V B PROMOTING EQUITY, EXCELLENCE, AND PUBLIC SCHOOL CHOICE
RENAMING THE TITLE
        SEC. 501. The heading for Title V of the ESEA is amended to read as follows:
ATITLE V -- PUBLIC SCHOOL CHOICE AND INNOVATION@.
 [THE NUMBER AND ORDER OF PROGRAMS UNDER THIS TITLE HAS NOT YET
BEEN DETERMINED]
AMENDMENTS TO THE MAGNET SCHOOLS ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
        SEC. 502. (a) FINDINGS. Section 5101 of the ESEA is amended to read as follows:
AFINDINGS
        ASEC. 51Ol. The Congress finds as follows:
                A(1) Magnet schools are a significant part of our Nation's effort to achieve voluntary
desegregation in our Nation's schools.
                A(2) It is in the national interest to desegregate and diversify those schools in our
Nation that are racially, economically, linguistically, or ethnically segregated. Such segregation
exists between minority and non-minority students as well as among students of different minority
groups.
                A(3) Desegregation can help increase rates of high school graduation and college
attendance, and can promote better occupational prospects for students who have attended
integrated schools.
                A(4) Desegregation can provide students with valuable experience that prepares
them to function in a diverse society and can help break down longstanding patterns of racial
isolation in adult social relationships.
        A(5) Despite ongoing desegregation efforts in the Nation --
                A(A) almost one-third of our elementary and secondary schools continue to be
        schools with 50 percent or more minority students;
                A(B) more than two-thirds of minority students attend schools with 50 percent or
        more minority students, and almost half of minority students attend schools with 75 percent
        or more minority students;
                A(C) almost one-third of non-minority students attend schools with less than 10
        percent minority students;
                A(D) almost one-quarter of Black students attend schools with 90 percent or more
        Black students; and
                A(E) almost one-third of Hispanic students attend schools with 75 percent or more
        Hispanic students.
                A(6) Local educational agencies= use of magnet schools has increased dramatically
since the of enactment of the Magnet Schools Assistance program, thus increasing public school
options for the approximately two million students nationwide now attending such schools, of
which more than 65 percent of the students are minority.
                A(7) Magnet schools offer a wide range of distinctive programs that have served as
models for school improvement efforts.
                A(8) In administering the Magnet Schools Assistance program, the Federal
Government has leamed that--

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
school's student body, special efforts must be made to discourage the isolation of--
                                   A(i) magnet school students from other students in the school; and
                                   A(ii) students by racial characteristics;
                          A(B) local educational agencies can maximize their effectiveness in
achieving the purposes of the Magnet Schools Assistance program if they have more flexibility in
the administration of the program in order to serve students attending a school who are not enrolled
in the magnet program;
                          A(C) local educational agencies must be creative in designing magnet
schools for students at all academic levels, so that those school do not serve only the highest-
achieving students;
                          A(D) consistent with desegregation guidelines, local educational agencies
must seek to enable participation in magnet school programs by students who reside in the
neighborhoods where the programs operate;
                          A(E) in order to ensure that magnet schools are sustained after Federal
funding ends, the Federal Government must assist school districts to improve their capacity to
continue operating magnet schools at a high level of performance; and
                         A(F) magnet schools and interdistrict magnet programs have provided poor
and minority students opportunities to succeed academically and continue with college or
productive employment.
                 A(9) It is in the best interest of the Federal Government to--
                         A(A) continue Federal support of school districts implementing court-
ordered desegregation plans and school districts seeking to foster meaningful interaction among
students of different racial and etlmic backgrounds, beginning at the earliest stage of their
education;
                         A(B) help ensure that all students have equitable access to high-quality
education that will prepare them to function well in a culturally diverse, technologically oriented,
and highly competitive global community; and
                         A(C) help maximize the ability of local educational agencies to plan,
develop, implement and continue effective and innovative magnet schools that contribute to State
and local systemic reform.@.
        (b) PURPOSE. Section 5102(3) of the ESEA is amended to read as follows:
        A(3) the development and design of innovative educational methods and practices that
        promote diversity and increase choices in public elementary and secondary schools and
        educational programs; and@.
         (c) APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. Section 5106(b)(1)(D) of the ESEA is amended
by--
        (1) striking out Aunder this Act, the Goals 2000: Educate America Act,@ and inserting in
        lieu thereof Aunder this Act,@; and
        (2) striking out Asection 14306@ and inserting in lieu thereof Asection 14307@.
        (d) PRIORITY. Section 5107 ofthe ESEA is amendedC
        (1) by striking out paragraphs (1) and (5);
        (2) by redesignating paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) as paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), respectively;
        and
        (3) by adding a new paragraph (4) to read as follows:
        A(4) propose activities, which may include professional development, that will build local

       2
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
         (e) USES OF FUNDS. Section 5108(a) of the ESEA is amendedC
                  (l)by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows:
         "(3) for the payment, or subsidization of the compensation, of--
                  "(A) elementary and secondary school teachers who are certified or licensed by the
         State; and
                  "(B) instructional staff who have--
                          "(i) expertise and professional skills necessary for the conduct of programs
         in magnet schools; or                                                                 .
                          "(ii) a baccalaureate degree, an equivalent degree, or who demonstrate
        knowledge, experience, or skills in the relevant field of expertise;";
        (2) in paragraph (4), by striking out the period and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon and
        Aand@;and
                 (3) by adding a new paragraph (5) to read as follows:
          A(5) for activities, which may include professional development, that will build the
        applicant=s capacity to operate the magnet program once Federal assistance has ended.@ .
        (1) REPEAL. Section 5111 of the ESEA is repealed.
        (g) EVALUATION, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, AND DISSEMINATION. Section
5112 of the ESEA isC
                 (l) redesignated as section 5111; and
        (2) amended, as redesignated, to read as follows:
AEV ALUA TION, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, AND DISSEMINATION
        ASEC. 5111. The Secretary may reserve not more than five percent of the funds
appropriated under section 5112(a) for any fiscal yearC
        A(l) for evaluations of magnet school programs assisted under this part, which, at a
        minimum, shall addressC
                 A(A) how, and the extent to which, magnet school programs lead to high
        educational quality and improvement;
                 A(B) the extent to which magnet school programs enhance student access to high-
        quality education;
                 A(C) the extent to which magnet school programs lead to the elimination, reduction,
        or prevention of minority group isolation in elementary and secondary schools with
        substantial proportions of minority students;
                 A(D) the extent to which magnet school programs differ from other school
        programs in terms of organizational characteristics and resource allocations; and
                 A(E) the extent to which magnet school programs continue once grant assistance
        under this part ends;
        A(2) to provide technical assistance to applicants and grantees; and
        A(3) to collect and disseminate information on successful magnet school programs.@.
        (h) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.--(l) Section 5113(a) of the ESEA is
amended to read as followsC
         A(a) AUTHORIZATION.--(l) For the purpose of carrying out this part, there are
authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2001 and for each of
the four succeeding fiscal years.@.
                 (2) Section 5113 of the ESEA, as amended by paragraph (1), is redesignated as
section 5112.

       3
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
 [CROSS REFERENCES DUE TO CHANGES WILL HAVE TO BE ADDED LATER]
         SEC. 503 (a) REPEAL. Part C of Title V ofthe ESEA is repealed.
         (b) REDESIGNATION OF THE WOMAN=S EDUCATIONAL EOUITY PROGRAM.
         (1) Part B of Title V of the ESEA is redesignated as Part D.
                  (2) Sections 5201 through 5208 of the ESEA are redesignated as sections 5401
through 5408, respectively.
                 (3) Section 5408, so redesignated, is amended to read as follows:
AAUTHORlZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
          ASEC. 5408. For the purpose of carrying out this part, there are authorized to be
appropriated such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 200 I and for each of the four
succeeding fiscal years, of which not less than two-thirds of the amount appropriated under this
section for each fiscal year shall be available to carry out the activities described in section
5403(b)(1).@. [WE A UNFINISHED, UPDATES AND MINOR PROGRAM CHANGES
ARE ANTICIPATED.]
         (c) REDESIGNATION OF THE PUBLIC CHARTER SCHOOLS PROGRAM.
         (1) Part C of Title X of the ESEA is redesignated as Part B oftitle V of the ESEA.
        (2) The heading for Part C of Title X of the ESEA is amended to read as follows:
APART B -- PUBLIC CHARTER SCHOOLS@.
                 (2) Sections 10301 through 10311 of the ESEA are redesignated as sections 5201
through 5211 of title V of the ESEA, respectively.
PUBLIC SCHOOL CHOICE PROGRAM
        SEC. 504 Title V of the ESEA is further amended by adding a new Part C to read as
follows:
APART C-- PUBLIC SCHOOL CHOICE PROGRAM
AFINDINGS; PURPOSE
        ASEC. 530l. (a) FINDINGS. The Congress finds that--
                 A(I) a wide variety of educational opportunities and options in public school system
is needed to help all children achieve to high standards;
                 A(2) high-quality public school choice programs that are genuinely open and
accessible to all students (including poor, minority, limited English proficient, and disabled'
students) broaden educational opportunities and promote excellence in education;
                 A(3) current research shows that--
                         A(A) students learn in different ways, benefiting from different teaching
methods and instructional settings; and
                         A(B) family involvement in a child=s education (such as helping choose
what courses to take) is a key factor supporting student achievement;
                 A(4) public school systems have begun to develop a variety of innovative programs
that offer expanded choices to parents and students; and
                 A(5) the Federal Government should support and expand on these efforts to give
students and parents the high-quality public school choices they seek, to help eliminate barriers to
effective public school choice, and to disseminate the lessons learned from high-quality choice
programs so that all public schools can benefit from these efforts.
        A(b) PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this part to identify and support innovative approaches
to high-quality public school choice by providing financial assistance for the demonstration,
development, implementation, evaluation of, and dissemination of information about, public school

       4
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
standards-based school reform efforts.

AGRANTS
        ASEC. 5302. (a) IN GENERAL. From funds appropriated under section 5305(a) and not
reserved under section 5305(b), the Secretary shall make grants to State and local educational
agencies to support programs that promote innovative approaches to high-quality public school
choice.
              A(b ) DURATION. Grants under this part shall not exceed three years.

AUSES OF FUNDS
        ASEC. 5303. (a) USES OF FUNDS. (1) Funds under this part may be used to demonstrate,
develop, implement, evaluate, and disseminate information on innovative approaches to broaden
public school choice, including the design and development of new public school choice options,
the development of new strategies for overcoming barriers to effective public school choice, and the
design and development of public school choice systems that promote high standards for all
students and the continuous improvement of all public schools.
                A(2) Examples of such approaches at the school, district, and State levels areC
                        A(A) inter-district approaches to public school choice, including approaches
that increase equal access to high-quality educational programs and diversity in schools;
                        A(B) public elementary and secondary programs that involve partnerships
with institutions of higher education and that are located on the campuses of those institutions; and
                        A(C) programs that allow students in public secondary schools to emoll in
postsecondary courses and to receive both secondary and postsecondary academic credit;
                        A(D) worksite satellite schools, in which State or local educational agencies
form partnerships with public or private employers, to create public schools at parents= place of
employment; and
                        A(E) approaches to school desegregation that provide students and parents
choice through strategies other than magnet schools.
        A(b) LIMITATIONS. Funds under this part shall--
                A(1) supplement, and not supplant, non-federal funds expended for existing
programs;
                A(2) not be used for transportation; and
                A(3) not be used to fund projects that are specifically authorized under Parts A and
B ofthis title.

AGRANT APPLICATION; PREFERENCES
        "SEC. 5304. (a) APPLICATION REOUIRED. A State or local educational agency desiring
to receive a grant under this part shall submit an application to the Secretary, in such form and
containing such information, as the Secretary may require.
        "(b) APPLICATION CONTENTS. Each application shall includeC
               "(1) a description of the program for which funds are sought and the goals for such
program;
               "(2) a description of how the program funded under this part will be coordinated
with, and will complement and enhance, programs under other related Federal and non-federal
projects;

       5
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
its responsibilities;
                 A(4) a description of the policies and procedures the applicant will use to ensure--
                 A(A) its accountability for results, including its goals and performance indicators;
         and
                 A(B) that the program is open and accessible to, and will promote high-academic
         standards for, all students.
         A(c) SPECIAL CONSIDERATION.                 The Secretary is authorized to give special
consideration to applications demonstrating that the applicant will carry out its project in
partnership with one or more public and private agencies, organizations, and institutions, including·
institutions of higher education and public and private employers.

"AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
        "SEC. 5305. (a) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATION. For the purpose of carrying
out this part, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the
fiscal years 2001 through 2005.
         "(b) RESERVATION FOR EVALUATION, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, AND
DISSEMINATION. From the amount appropriated under subsection (a) for any fiscal year, the
Secretary may reserve not more than five percent to carry out evaluations under subsection (c), to
provide technical assistance, and to disseminate information.
        A(c) EVALUATIONS. The Secretary may use funds reserved under subsection (b) to carry
out one or more evaluations of programs assisted under this part, which shall, at a minimum,
addressC
        A(I) how and the extent to which the programs supported with funds under this part
        promote educational equity and excellence; and
        A(2) the extent to which public sc~ools of choice supported with funds under this part areC
                 A(A) held accountable to the public;
                 A(B) effective in improving public education; and
                 A(C) open and accessible to all students.@.
###




       6

                                                                         Automated Reoords Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
   TITLE V B PROMOTING EQUITY, EXCELLENCE, AND PUBLIC SCHOOL
                            CHOICE

                               Section-by-Section Analysis

        Among other things, new title V of [NAME OF BILL] would: (1) improve the
Magnet Schools Assistance program by adding emphasis on projects that consider the
diversity of the student populations and that have the capacity to continue after the
Federal grant has run out; (2) move Charter Schools, from Part C of Title X of the ESEA,
to Part B of Title V of the ESEA; (3) add a new initiative, Public Choice School, that
would provide a flexible authority to support State and local educational agencies in
experimenting with different kinds of public elementary and secondary schools, such as
worksite and College-based schools; (4) reauthorize the Woman=s Educational Equity
program, but move it to Part [-] of the Title V of the ESEA; and (5) repeal the Assistance
to Address School Dropout Problems program, currently in Part C of Title V of the
ESEA. Each of the new title V programs would be reauthorized for five years. [THERE
ARE LIKELY TO BE OTHER PROGRAMS REAUTHORIZED, LIKE FIE,
THAT WILL GO INTO THIS TITLE.]

       Magnet School Assistance:

Section 501. Section 501 of the bill, ARenaming the Title,@ would change the name of
title V of the ESEA to APromoting Equity, Excellence, and Public School Choice@.

        Section 502. Section 502 of the bill would amend Part A , the AMagnet School
Assistance Program,@ of Title V of the ESEA. Section 502 (a) of the bill would make
editorial changes to, and update, section 5101 of the ESEA, the findings for the Magnet
School Assistance Program.

        Section 502(b) ofthe bill would amend section 5102(3) of the ESEA, AStatement
ofPurpose,@ to clarify that the purpose of providing financial assistance to develop and
design innovative educational methods and practices is to promote diversity and increase
choices in public elementary and secondary schools and educational programs.

        Section 502(c) of the bill would amend section 5106(b)(1 )(D) of the ESEA,
Alnformation and Assurances@ (a part of the application requirements), to eliminate
reference to the Goals 2000: Educate America Act and to correct a section number.

        Section 502(d) of the bill would amend section 5107 of the ESEA, APriority,@ to
eliminate the current priorities for greatest need and new, or significantly revised,
projects. These priorities are not well defined and have not helped to determine which
grant applications are most deserving. Section 502(d) would also add a new priority for
projects that propose activities, which may include professional development, that will
build local capacity to operate the magnet program once Federal assistance has ended.


                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Funds,@ to: (1) revise paragraph (3) to allow for the payment, or subsidization of the
compensation, of elementary and secondary school teachers who are certified or licensed
by the State, and instructional staff who have expertise and professional skills necessary
for the conduct of programs in magnet schools or a baccalaureate degree, an equi\(alent
degree, or who demonstrate knowledge, experience, or skills in the relevant field of
expertise; and (2) allow grantees to use funds for activities, including professional
development, that will build the applicant=s capacity to operate the magnet program once
Federal assistance has ended.

       Section S02(f) of the bill would repeal section SIll of the ESEA, AInnovative
Programs@. This program is limited by the requirements of Part A; its activities are
subsumed under the new Public School Choice program.

        Section S02(g) of the bill would redesignate current section S112 of the ESEA,
AEvaluation, Technical Assistance, and Dissemination@, as section SIll, and incorporate
its requirements into a new section, ANational Activities@, that would authorize the
Secretary to reserve not more than five percent (rather than two percent) of appropriated
funds in any fiscal year to evaluate the program, as well as provide technical assistance to
applicants and grantees and collect and disseminate information on successful magnet
school programs. Section S02(g) of the bill would also require each evaluation, in
addition to current items, to address the extent to which magnet school programs continue
once grant assistance under this part ends.

       Section S02(h) of the bill would amend section SI13(a) of the ESEA,
AAuthorization@, to authorize such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2001 and for
each of the four succeeding fiscal years to be appropriated to carry out the part. Section
SOl(h) of the bill would also redesignate section SI13 as section S112.

     Assistance to Address School Dropout Problems: [FINAL SPEClFICAnONS
FOR SECTION S03(a) HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED; REPEAL IS ANTICIP ATED.J

     Woman=s Educational Equity Act of 1994: [FINAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR
SECTION S03(b) HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED; REAUTHORIZATION AND
MINOR UPDATING OF THE PROGRAM IS ANTICIPATED.J

       Redesignation of the Public Charter Schools Program:

       Section S03(c) of the bill would redesignate the Public Charter Schools Program,
which is currently Part C of TitIe X of the ESEA, as Part B of title V of the ESEA.
Section S02( c) would also make 'necessary conforming changes to carry out the
redesignation.                                                .

       Public School Choice Program:


                                                                               Management system
                                                             Automated Records
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
APublic School Choice Program@, that would authorize a flexible, competitive grant
program to help State and local agencies provide innovative, high-quality public school
choice programs.

        New section 5301 of the ESEA would set forth the findings of the new part and
state that its purpose is to identify and support innovative approaches to high-quality
public school choice by providing financial assistance for the demonstration,
development, implementation, evaluation of, and dissemination of information about
public school choice projects that stimulate educational innovation for all public schools
and contribute to standards-based school reform efforts.

        New section 5302(a) of the ESEA would authorize the Secretary, from funds
appropriated under section 5305(a) and not reserved under section 5305(b), to make
grants to State and local educational agencies to support programs that promote
innovative approaches to high-quality public school choice. New section 5301(b) of the
ESEA would prohibit grants under this part from exceeding three years.

         New section 5303(a) of the ESEA would authorize funds under the part to be used
to demonstrate, develop, implement, evaluate, and disseminate information on innovative
approaches to broaden public school choice. Examples of such approaches at the school,
district, and State levels would be: (1) inter-district approaches to public school choice,
including approaches that increase equal access to high-quality educational programs and
diversity in schools; (2) public elementary and secondary programs that involve
partnerships with institutions of higher education and that are located on the campuses of
those institutions; (3) programs that allow students in public secondary schools to enroll
in postsecondary courses and to receive both secondary and postsecondary academic
credit; (4) worksite satellite schools, in which State or local educational agencies form
partnerships with public or private employers, to create public schools at parents= place
of employment; and (5) approaches to school desegregation that provide students and
parents choice through strategies other than magnet schools.

       New section 5303(b) of the ESEA would require that funds under this part: (I)
supplement, and not supplant, non-federal funds expended for existing programs; (2) not
be used for transportation; and (3) not be used to fund projects that are specifically
authorized under Parts A and B of this title.

        New section 5304(a) of the ESEA would require a State or local educational
agency desiring to receive a grant under this part to submit an application to the
Secretary,. in such form and containing such information, as the Secretary may require.
Each application would be required to include: (1) a description of the program for which
funds are sought and the goals for such program; (2) a description of how the program
funded under this part will be coordinated with, and will complement and enhance,
programs under other related Federal and non-federal projects; (3) if the program includes
partners, the name of each partner and a description of its responsibilities; (4) a
description of the policies and procedures the applicant will use to ensure its



                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

     accountability for results, including its goals and performance indicators, and that the
     program is open and accessible to, and will promote high-academic standards for, all
     students. The Secretary would be authorized to give special consideration to applications
     demonstrating that the applicant will carry out its project in partnership with one or more
     public and private agencies, organizations, and institutions, including institutions of
     higher education and public and private employers.

             New section 5305(a) of the ESEA would authorize such sums as may be
     necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2001 to be appropriated to carry out
     the part. Section 5305(b) of the ESEA would, from amounts appropriated for any fiscal
     year, authorize the Secretary to reserve not more than five percent to carry out
     evaluations, provide technical assistance, and disseminate information. Section 5305(c)
     would authorize the Secretary to use funds reserved under subsection (b) to carry out one
     or more evaluations of programs assisted under this part. Those evaluations would, at a
     minimum, address: (1) how and the extent to which the programs supported with funds
     under the part promote educational equity and excellence; and (2) the extent to which
     public schools of choice supported with funds under the part are held accountable to the
     public, effective in improving public education, and open and accessible to all students.
                                                ###




                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
