RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP      [ OPD ]       )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-MAR-1997 19:43:19.00

SUBJECT:   attached

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Stephen C. Warnath ( CN=Stephen C. Warnath/OU=OPD/O;EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN;Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD ]         )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: DRYE_E ( DRYE E @ Al @ CD @ LNGTWY [ EOP ] )     (OPD)
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Dennis K. Burke ( CN;Dennis K. Burke/OU;OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: WEINSTEIN P     WEINSTEIN P @ Al @ CD @ LNGTWY [ EOP ]            (OPD)
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Diane C. Regas ( CN;Diane C. Regas/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP         [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Lyn A. Hogan ( CN;Lyn A. Hogan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Pauline M. Abernathy ( CN=Pauline M. Abernathy/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP     [ OPD]      )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
It mayor may not surprise you to learn that we are working on (among
other things) the projects described in this memo.  Please let me know of
any omissions or errors.
====;;;;;;;;;;=;;;=; ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;==;;=;====;;;=
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D14] MAIL44·201707A. 016 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504307050000010A02010000000205000000C75B0000000200009010BD4D32A419CB27DF12
828E7456E99AB41D56590EFAEC5CF2B154A2BD57EF44681510EEID82AB2A5A4A959EEC85AB2AE3
EEE9663E1229EB7EIB64ED4D39E3805BFCA534A00286EIBIDA613508DID201EDDD03A2E99CIID9
63F30F33EFI094F4B2B287139D64BAF640AB3B142FA093836F9A58100845FDAD444AEDB816EA85
8Fl1576DEC13871E6B87B358BOF45673FB764EB3F7FB33EAE189AD4FEA958B08BOCB8238599631






MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

FROM:                   BRUCE REED
                        ELENA KAGAN

SUBJECT:                IDEAS


Health and Safety

1. Patients' BiII of Rights/Quality Commission: The counsel's office is almost done vetting
our nominations for the Quality Commission, which will be charged with developing a Patients'
Bill of Rights. Announcement of the Commission can be combined with the release of a HHS
regulation that would guarantee an expedited appeal whenever a plan proposes to deny care that a
Medicare patient believes is urgently needed.

2. Medicare fraud legislation: We have finalized and are ready to announce a new and very
good package of Medicare fraud and abuse initiatives. We can unveil this package in Saturday's
radio address -- or if it doesn't fit there, we can look for another opportunity to make the
announcement. At the same time, we can underscore our recent successes in prosecuting
fraudulent health care providers.

3. Medical records privacy: We are working with HHS to develop legislation to ensure
appropriate privacy protections for medical records. The subject is complex, but we have the
discussions on a fast track. We are aiming to have legislation ready within a month.

4. Business endorsement of kids' coverage: We are working on an event at which important
representatives of the business community endorse our proposal to extend health care coverage
for children. We think we can have this event ready sometime in April.

5. Executive order on unemployed workers: We are exploring whether we have legal
authority to issue an executive order granting six months of health care coverage to unemployed
federal workers (thus mirroring our budget proposal). We should know within a week or so
whether this action is doable.



                                               1

                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

6. Classified research with human subjects: In response to recommendations of the
President's Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, we have prepared (1) an
Executive Order strengthening protections for human subjects of secret research; and (2)
legislation expanding compensation for Cold War-era uranium miners. We can announce these
policies and release a summary report detailing the Administration's full response to the
Committee's 18 recommendations. This is tentatively scheduled for release March 25, to provide
news during the President's day off.

7. Tobacco Advertising: We are reviewing a proposal for the President to take action
responding to tobacco companies' use of the internet and other fora to get around our tobacco
regulation. We could use "Kick Butts" day to announce this proposal, but we should first get
DO] assurance that this proposal does not comproinise our efforts to defend our tobacco
regulation in court. We are also working on a response in case the federal judge in North
Carolina rules against us. That ruling is expected in the next 5 weeks.

8. Seat Belt Study: The Department of Transportation will give the President a report in a week
or so on ways to increase seat belt use. DOT's report is likely to include ideas for presidential
challenges to states and business groups, as well as a proposal (consistent with our budget) to
offer financial incentives to states to improve and enforce seat belt laws. We can release the
report when the President meets with Big 3 auto executives. (It is possible that we could
announce at the same event a bigger safety initiative: the addition of language to our NEXTEA
proposal sanctioning states that don't have tough seatbelt laws .. Secretary Slater is currently
considering whether to support sending this language to Congress.)

9. Aggressive drivers/driver emergency number: DOT is working on a package of proposals
to deal with aggressive drivers; we expect to get the package within 10 days. But DOT thinks the
package will seem skimpy and that it may provoke safety advocates to say that the real problem .
is the speed limit. DOT has suggested as an alternative action creating a uniform emergency
number for cellular phones. DOT thinks such an action can be ready by May.

10. Children's Health EO: The DPC, NEC, CEQ, and OSTP are working on an executive
order designed to ensure that the federal government considers the special needs of children
when taking regulatory action. The executive order requires every agency to determine whether a
regulation may impose disproportionate risks on children and, if so, to evaluate the specific
effects of the regulation on children. Several agencies have raised serious last-minute objections,
but we are hoping that we can work these out in the next few weeks.

11. AIDS Vaccine / Emerging Infections / Wiping Out Polio Worldwide: Our scientists are
confident there will be an AIDS vaccine, but are very reluctant to promise one by a time certain.
(Margaret Heckler made such a promise in the early '80s, and was ridiculed for it.) We are
meeting with them again this week to press the question one more time. We have asked them to
recommend steps the President could take to advance the search for an AIDS vaccine. OMB




                                                       Automated R ds M
                                                       H          ecor anagement System
                                                         ex-Dump Conversion

offered to find them more money, but they said that wouldn't make much difference. We are
also working with them on the possibility of an initiative to combat emerging infections like
ebola and malaria around the world. No one knows it, but our budget includes $20 million for
the World Health Organization and other groups like Rotary International to wipe out smallpox
worldwide.


Education

1. Testing in military schools: Announcement scheduled for tomorrow.

2. School construction event. Announcement scheduled for this Friday.

3. State School Officer Endorsements: The Chief State Schools Officers organization will
endorse the President's testing proposal when he meets with them on Monday. We are also
lining up endorsement letters from individual members.

4. California Endorsement of Testing Plan: California's superintendent, Delaine Eastin, is
prepared to endorse our testing proposal, and a group of Silicon Valley high-tech executives are
prepared to do so as well. This is scheduled for the President's visit March 24. California's
endorsement is very important, since the state has 10-15% of the country's schoolchildren.

5. Advisory Panel for Education Tests: The Education Department is thinking about the
appropriate structure and composition of a panel of teachers and other trusted educators to advise
on the development of our 4th and 8th grade tests. (The Department may decide to use an
existing, non-governmental group to perform this function.) We expect a decision in a few
weeks.

6. Teacher of the Year: The President will meet with the Teacher of the Year and other
outstanding teachers at the White House on April 18. He may be able to announce that the
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards has selected additional master teachers.

7. Roundtable/Town Hall on Standards: The President could participate in a session with
teachers, students, parents, and others to explain the standards associated with his 4th and 8th
grade tests. The roundtable would demonstrate with concrete examples the kind of student work
-- and the kind of teaching -- that reflects high standards.

8. Agency sponsorship of charter schools: We can set a process in motion for federal agencies
-- for example, NASA or the NSF -- to sponsor charter schools in partnership with teams of
teachers. We should keep this project small at the start and focus it on DC. It will probably take
us three or four months to be ready to announce the first sponsorship.




                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

9. Incentives for engineering: We are currently exploring whether we can take executive
action (or should propose legislation) providing monetary incentives for students to take
engineering courses. We will know more within a week.


Welfare

1. Welfare-to-Work Transportation Plan: We announced today our Access to Jobs proposal,
which would allocate $600 million ofNEXTEA funding to improve transportation systems so
that welfare recipients and other low-income workers could get to work more easily. We are
currently exploring whether we can take an executive action that would call further attention to
these efforts. We should know in a week or two.

2. Child Support: We can announce new child support enforcement numbers, along with the
submission of a new HHS report on chi Id support enforcement and our submission of legislation
(previously announced) to make it a felony to cross state lines to evade child support obligations.
 This is another possible radio address for this Saturday or the next.

3. Statutory Rape/Teen Pregnancy Prevention: DOJ should be ready sometime in April to
release a report on statutory rape and its relation to teen pregnancy rates. We could do a radio
address timed to coincide with the release ofthis report, discussing strategies to enforce statutory
rape laws and decrease teen pregnancies.

4. Internet in welfare offices: We are currently exploring ways to increase the access of
welfare offices around the country to internet, with its wide range of job databanks. Eli Segal's
organization may play some role in this effort. Gingrich is also interested. We will have a
proposal within a week or two.

5. Welfare business group announcement: Eli Segal is planning a formal announcement of
his organization in early April, preferably in Milwaukee -- where he would line up the support of
a few hundred businesses, Mayor Norquist, Governor Thompson, and Mitch Fromstein, head of
Manpower. This is tentatively scheduled for April 7.


Crime and Drugs

1. Hard Liquor Advertising: For years, the hard liquor industry has voluntarily agreed not to
show liquor ads on TV. Some companies have now broken that agreement. In furtherance of his
National Drug Control Strategy roll-out, the President could send a letter to the FCC requesting
that they consider restrictions on hard liquor advertising on television during certain time
periods.




                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

2. Sex Offender Registry: The President could visit the National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children in Arlington, Virginia where he would take a tour of facility and announce
that the interim National Sex Offender Registration system -- which he directed the Attorney
General to develop in the June 21, 1996 Radio Address -- is now up and running. He also would
announce that he is signing an Executive Order instructing the Attorney General and the
Secretary of Defense to ensure that sex offenders released from Federal and Military prisons are
listed in the national registry. This is 'ready to go.

3. National Anti-Drug Media Campaign: The President's FY 98 Budget Submission includes
$175 million for a national anti-drug !lledia campaign directed towards our youth. We will not be
able to expend any funds on this initiative until we enact the appropriation bill, but ONDCP can
expend discretionary funds in its FY 97 budget to begin producing anti-drug ads. At a Rose
Garden event, the President could kick off his Administration's anti-drug media campaign with
one of the celebrities who has committed to appear in an ad. The President could also release a .
letter that he is sending to every network issuing his challenge that they match our contribution
and begin dedicating more air time to anti-drug ads. ONDCP is currently reaching out to
celebrities and sports figures such as Michael Jordan, Grant Hill, and Tiger Woods to tape anti-
drug ads. This event should be ready sometime in April, and could coincide with the Chicago
Bulls visit April 3.

4. Anti-Gang Prosecutor Event: The cornerstone of the President's Anti-Gang and Youth
Violence Strategy is a $200 million anti-gang prosecution grant program. The President could
meet with prosecutors from across the country in the Oval Office where they would thank him
for his strong support in fighting gangs. The prosecutors -- Republican and Democrat -- would
urge Congress to move quickly to pass the President's bill. We recommend April for this event.

5. After-school initiative event: To highlight his new after-schools initiatives in the Anti-Gang
Bill, the President could visit a successful after-school program and meet with the kids helped by
the program. That day, he also would announce that HHS is providing several million dollars in
grants from its FY 97 appropriation for new after-school programs across the country. This event
should occur after the anti-gang event described above.

6. Victims Constitutional Amendment: In June 1996, the President announced his support for
a constitutional amendment for victims rights -- to guarantee victims the right to be notified, to
receive restitution, receive reasonable protection measures, and to be heard at sentencing and
parole hearings. At a White House event, the President could: (1) urge Congress to pass the
Amendment quickly; (2) receive a report from the Attorney General-- in response to his June
25, 1996 Directive -- outlining measures taken by the Justice Department to increase and
improve Federal services and protections for victims of crime; (3) announce the creation of a
Federal victim notification system; and (4) announce additional funding from the Victims Crime
Fund -- which is larger than ever before -- that will be provided to victims services and shelters




                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

throughout the country. This could be a radio address for April 19, the third anniversary of the
Oklahoma City bombing or during April 14-18, which is National Crime Victims Week.
7. Nanny checks: We could introduce legislation prepared by the Justice Department that
would facilitate criminal checks for non-criminal purposes -- for example, a check on a potential
nanny or schoolbus driver. But we oversold the Oprah bill a couple of years ago as a solution to
this problem; if we do another big event, we will have to admit that our purported solution didn't
do much of anything.

8. Ban on importation of gun clips: We are looking into the possibility of endorsing Sen.
Feinstein's bill to close a loophole in the assault weapons ban by prohibiting the importation of
IS-round magazines. We will have a recommendation later this week.


Family

1. Family leave executive order: We think we have legal authority to issue an executive order
granting federal employees the additional family leave provided in our legislative proposal. We
will have a final answer on this proposal within the week.

2. Child care centers: Ideas proposed to us last week on child care would be either ineffectual
or prohibitively expensive. We are continuing to look for sensible policy initiatives.


Service Summit

1. Scholars' Program: We announced last year a $1,000 scholarship for high school students
who have performed outstanding service, with the federal government putting up $500 and a
community or service organization (e.g., Lions, Elks, Kiwanis, Moose) putting up the rest. We
can be ready any time to do an event inviting high schools that have obtained matching funds to
submit names of candidates for the scholarship (perhaps in conjunction with a letter from the
President to every high school principal).

2. Commitments/Adopt-a-School: We could announce "commitments" from the federal
government to the service summit -- proposals for how the federal government can support
service and voluntarism to help youth. We could be ready to make such announcements in 2-3
weeks if necessary. One possible commitment would involve agencies adopting schools --
offering literacy services, donating computers, doing career days, etc.


Environment




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               HeX-Dump Conversion




                                                                                                         7

         1. Brownfields: The EPA wants to roll out an expansion of the existing Brownfields pilot
         program in about two months. The Administration will also resubmit legislation creating a new
         tax incentive and grant program to encourage the redevelopment of Brownfields.

         2. Right-to-know law: EPA should be ready in about two months to issue a rule extending
         disclosure obligations under the right-to-know law to a number of additional industries --
         probably including mining, hazardous waste handlers, and utilities.

         3. Safe water regulations: EPA will propose regulations to require water utilities to provide
         information to consumers about what is in tap water. The proposal will not be ready until
         September or so.




                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
