   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

   CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

   CREATION DATE/TIME: 12-MAR-1997 16:09:13.00

   SUBJECT:     CHICAGO MAYOR'S GAY BENEFITS PROPOSAL FOR CITY WORKERS ...

   TO: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO
   READ:UNKNOWN

   TEXT:
   see the attched.
   ---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 03/12/97 04:10
   PM ---------------------------



           REED B @ A1
           03/12/97 03:29:00 PM
   Record Type: Record

   To: Elena Kagan
   cc:
   Subject: CHICAGO MAYOR'S GAY BENEFITS PROPOSAL FOR CITY WORKERS ...

   Date: 03/12/97 Time: 14:48
   Chicago Mayor's Gay Benefits Proposal for City Workers Faces Test

       By John Kass and Jacquelyn Heard, Chicago Tribune
       Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News

        CHICAGO--Mar. 12--Chicago's Roman Catholic Archdiocese is bowing out
   of
   Wednesday's City Hall debate over Mayor Richard Daley's plan to extend
   health
   insurance and other benefits to partners in homosexual relationships.
        The mayor's policy does not directly address the issue of gay
   marriage
   for city workers but provides the same financial and health benefits
   received
   by married couples.
        Daley maintains he is promoting the plan only for unmarried gays
   because
   unmarried heterosexual couples retain the option of marriage.
        Instead of testimony from the Catholic Church leaders, there will be
   a
   press release read at Wednesday's Finance Committee meeting.
      . Senior Daley administration officials predicted Tuesday that
   pro-Daley                                               .
   aldermen, after heated testimony, will vote 13-8 to recommend full City
   Council passage, allowing some allies to walk away from the controversy.
         "We're not sending anyone," said the Rev. Michael Place, senior
   policy
   adviser for the arChdiocese, which has been without a leader since the
   death
   of Cardinal Joseph Bernardin in November. The late cardinal opposed the
   gay
   benefits policy.
         Place said the church will not ask the Finance Committee to read the
   written statement into the record on Wednesday.
         "Our position is well known. We don't see a need to send a
   representative. I think everyone is very aware of what our position is,"


   http://l 72.28.127.30:80821 ARMS/servletigetEmaiIArchive?URL] ATH=/nIcp-21Arms404/opd/O...   411512009
    he
    said.
          The archdiocese's criticism was laid out in the third paragraph of a
    four-paragraph statement that was issued Feb. 28.
           "The archdiocese is concerned that the proposal to extend benefits to
    domestic partners will equate the status of gay or lesbian partnerships
    with
    that of a marriage between a man and a woman, and erode the institution of
    marriage and family," it said.
          place said that any member of the clergy who appears at the Finance
    committee meeting to protest the policy will do so "on their own" and that
    their opposition would not be endorsed by the archdiocese.
          Some Protestant church leaders are expected to publicly condemn the
    measure, along with anti-abortion activist Joseph Scheidler.
          Other churches support equal benefits for gay workers, and some
    endorse
    holy unions.
          Gay groups are expected to attend the meeting. City officials from
    the
    Law and Budget Departments are expected to testify in favor of the plan,
    which would extend benefits beyond the bereavement leaves that were given
    to
    partners in gay relationships three years ago.
          City officials are expected to argue that the benefits package will
    cost
    taxpayers less than $1 million a year. And city lawyers will argue that
    the
    government can fight expected legal challenges from heterosexuals who
    argue
    for the same benefits for unmarried partners.
          Taxpayers in New York and San Francisco, however, where similar
    measures
    have passed, are now paying benefits for unmarried heterosexual couples as
    well.
          While the measure is debated in City Hall on Wednesday, another gay
    rights issue is set for debate in the Illinois House, where Democrats are
    trying to add sexual orientation to a list of protected classes that
    include
    race, gender and disability.
          Among those expected to testify on behalf of Daley's plan is Chicago
    police officer Lori Cooper, a liaison to the gay community for the Town Ha
    11
    Police District.
          "For myself, it's extremely important. I've been in a domestic
    partnership for three years, and I'm committed to that for life, just as
    if I
    were married. It's very important to me.
          "My job is to serve and protect. My partner in the squad car, he can
    rest assured that his family is protected by the city. He has peace of
    mind
    knowing if he receives injury, his family is covered by his benefits."
         That point of view will be challenged by the Rev. Hiram Crawford,
    pastor
    of the Israel Methodist Community Church, 7620 S. Cottage'Grove Ave.
          "This is blasphemous to Christianity," l).e said. "Two men can't have a
    baby. If we keep promoting this kind of insanity, we will give superiority
    to
    sodomites and lesbians, and heterosexuals will be pushed to the side."
         As the Daley administration rehearsed the order of testimony on
    Tuesday,
    some normally staunch Daley allies were saying that in this case, at
    least,
    they would have to split with the mayor to respond to the opinions of


     their
     ward constituents.
           "I am surprised that the archdiocese is not sending anyone," said
     Alderman Virginia Rugai, who opposes the plan and said she will vote
     against
     it at the full council meeting on March 19.
          Aldermen Sam Burrell, Ricardo Munoz and Billy Ocasio said they would
     support the measure as a fairness issue, but conceded that it could be
     used
     against them in re-election campaigns.
          Alderman Michael Chandler said he hadn't made a decision and would
     ask
     West Side block clubs to help him decide his vote.
           But Alderman Ray Suarez said such a vote would amount to political
     suicide in his heavily Catholic and Pentecostal North Side ward.
           "My neighbors won't go for it and I'm not going for it," Suarez said.
     "I
     just won't. I'm Roman Catholic and I'm against it. I don't know what the
     church is doing though."

          Tribune staff writer Terry Wilson contributed to this article.


          FOR ONLINE SERVICES:
          Visit the Chicago Tribune on America Online (keyword: TRIBUNE) or the
     Internet Tribune on the World Wide Web at http://www.chicago.tribune.com/

                                                                   ,
           (c) 1997, Chicago Tribune. Distributed by Knight-Ridder/Tribune
     Business
     News.

      KBviaNewsEDGE




