RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL          (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:18-MAR-1997 12:41:30.00

SUBJECT:     Labor Law and Welfare

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP on 03/18/97 12:42
PM ---------------------------


From:   Kenneth S. Apfel on 03/18/97 12:32:51 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         Labor Law and Welfare

fyi
---------------------- Forwarded by Kenneth S. Apfel/OMB/EOP on 03/18/97
12:34 PM ---------------------------



Janet Himler
03/18/97 12:05:53 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Kenneth S. Apfel/OMB/EOP
cc:      Cynthia M. Smith/OMB/EOP, Jill M. Pizzuto/OMB/EOP
Subject:         Labor Law and welfare

---------------------- Forwarded by Janet Himler/OMB/EOP on 03/18/97 12:06
PM ---------------------------



No. 52       Tuesday   March 18,     1997

           Main View
           DT Cases
           Economic News
           Highlights

           Print
           Search'

REGULATION, ECONOMICS AND LAW
Welfare
White House Reviews Labor Law To Determine Welfare Recipients' Coverage
The Clinton administration contends that welfare recipients who must
participate in local workfare programs to receive benefits should be
covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act, the federal law that sets out
mlnlmum wage and overtime requirements, presidential advisor Gene
Sperling said March 17.
Sperling, a special assistant to the president for economic policy and
chair of the National Economic Council, told a group of workfare
participants and grass roots activists that the White House is continuing





,~~ review federal   labor law to determine whether welfare recipients who
must work for their benefits are covered by the law and whether they are
permitted to organize.
 , 'We are trying to find out right now what the best legal course to take
is, " Sperling said during a noon event sponsored by the Association of
Community Organizations for Reform Now. ACORN invited Sperling to discuss
the president's welfare reform initiative, while it pressed its case that
workfare recipients should have the right to organize for the purpose of
collective bargaining .
. Haven't Heard from the Lawyers

 , 'Our orientation and our hope is that the [FLSA] law applies as broadly
as possible so that anybody working [in workfare programs] does get the
minimum wage and .         . and has the right to organize, " he said.
, 'We are trying to find out how the law works best, " according to
Sperling. But he admitted that the White House still has not heard back
from all its lawyers on this matter. "Sorry to say, I just do not know
the' . answer,"  he· said, again stressing that the administration's
"overall orientation"        is that workfare participants are covered by
federal wage and hour provisions.
Sperling reiterated that the president is committed to pushing through
his proposal to improve the new welfare law. As laid out in the
president's fiscal 1998 budget request, the president wants Congress to
approve a $3 billion job placement and job creation program over three
years, allotting $750 million for fiscal 1998. Sperling, however, was
booed when he said that program would allow mayors to decide how to spend
the money.
  Organizing Under Way in Cities

Workfare participants from the New York's Work Experience Program were
among those participating in the event. Some participants of the WEP
program,  for example, must pick up litter in New York City parks as part
of the WEP's requirement to receive welfare benefits.
ACORN said it is working with WEP workers who want to organize' 'to win
better working conditions, training, and permanent jobs."  Since December
1996, more than 6,000 workfare participants in New York and Los Angeles
have signed ACORN cards, the organization said.
Also attending the event were participants from Los Angeles,
Philadelphia,  Houston, Chicago, Boston, and several other cities,
according to ACORN, which describes itself as a grassroots community
organization that represents about 100,000 low- and moderate -income
families in 30 cities.
"We're here in Washington to make it clear that 'fixing' welfare reform
must include creating real jobs at living wages as well as protections
for workfare workers' rights as workers to organize," according to ACORN
National President Maude Hurd. The Rev. Jesse Jackson also was on hand to
lend his support for workfare participants' right to organize.
Following the noon discussion, held at a Capitol Hill church, the group
marched to the Capitol building and to the Department of Health and Human
Services to raise public of their public awareness of their position.


Copyright . 1997 by The Bureau of National Affairs,     Inc.




