RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-NOV-1998 12:09:12.00

SUBJECT:   scheduling memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D13]MAIL429930516.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504396050000010A02010000000205000000AE550000000200OOE67505652D52EECA37CCD9
D77FB2A70191824244D494744D8BE28CC7COA117DCDEC4A26121B24344AA37D92C3BICD05032FB
D5FACA3A3CB619907AOD39489E359876FFF5ED389EB4456C284A777FD9527717E2F03299147B1E
AFB83E8E7F9B9F542818E4873B06F3C9F18634F23FB325B4A16CAO31C20ABC2BFFEFFFOB9C1AAF


MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

        CC:              MARIA ECHAVESTE
                         ANN LEWIS
                         STEPHAN[ESTREETT

FROM:                     BRUCE REED

SUBJECT:                  POSSIBLE POLICY ANNOUNCEMENTS


Following is a list of possible DPC announcements the President could make during the months
of November and December.                                                .

CRIME:
November 22 FBI Crime Statistics
            The final 1997 FBI Unified Crime Report data will be released on Sunday,
            November 22, demonstrating further that crime has decreased dramatically under
            the President's watch. The President should issue a written statement on that
            Sunday. (Ready)

December      Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative
              The President could highlight the success of his innovative Youth Crime Gun
              Interdiction Initiative (yCGII), which has been ongoing for two years in 27 cities,
              by announcing: (1) the release of the second annual report on the YCGII, which
              will provide new data on guns used in crimes and demonstrate the success of the
              YCGII; (2) the availability of funds to hire new ATF agents to investigate gun
              trafficking in these 27 cities; and (3) a proposal to dramatically expand the YCGII
              to 20 new cities which was just provided for in the recent omnibus appropriations
              bill. (Ready in early December)

November or BradylNICS Launch
December    At the end of this week, the Attorney General will publish the final regulation
            implementing the Brady National Instant Criminal Background Check System
            (NICS). Under the NICS, which will go into effect on November 30th, the FBI
            and/or state points of contact will conduct computerized background checks of all
            prospective guns purchasers (not just handguns). The President could announce
            on November 30 -- or sometime that week -- the official implementation of the

                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
              hard for the Brady Bill's passage in 1993, but he has continued to fight against
              efforts to undermine Brady's implementation and for funds to improve state
              criminal history records. (November 30th or later)

November      "Zero Tolerance" for Drugs in Prisons
              The recently passed omnibus appropriations bill includes an important provision
              that would allow states to use up to 10% of their prison funds to drug test and, if
              necessary, treat prisoners and parolees. This policy change, which the President
              called for in a directive to the Attorney General last January, was strongly
              opposed by Republicans and represents another victory for the President in the
              recent budget battle. To highlight this accomplishment, the President could join
              the Attorney General, General McCaffrey and perhaps group of Governors in
              issuing new guidelines to ensure that the states use their funds to promote this
              new "zero tolerance" policy. (Ready)

WOMEN, CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES:
November Title IX Executive Order
         The President could sign an executive order as early as next week prohibiting
         discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, or sex in education
         programs conducted by the federal government. This includes schools operated
         by the Defense Department for military dependents, schools operated by the
         Department of the Interior for Native Americans, and numerous training and
         educational programs run by federal departments. This is a follow up to an
         Executive Memorandum the President issued last year asking the Department of
         Justice to lead an effort to identify all federally-conducted education programs and
         to recommend appropriate action to end discrimination. (Ready)

November or New Child Care Data
December    The President could announce new data on the number of children served with
            child care assistance through the Child Care and Development Block Grant
            (CCDBG). The data is expected to indicate that approximately 1.8 million
            children of the 10 million eligible for assistance have been served through the
            block grant. This is the first data to examine the block grant, which was created
            in the 1996 welfare reform bill, and it will highlight the need for increased
            investment in the block grant. (Ready)

November or Adoption Registry
December    The President could call for an internet-based national registry of children in
            foster care waiting to be adopted. Prospective adoptive parents will be able
            to visit the site and meet these waiting children. The registry, to cost
            between $1-2 million, will be funded through the Adoption Opportunities
            Grants, which are a part of the President's Adoption 2002 Initiative -- an
            effort to double the number of children adopted from the public child
            welfare system by the 2002. In addition, the President can announce new

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
           Also, the President could announce the HHS Adoption 2002 Awards, which
           he called for by executive memorandum in 1996. November is National
           Adoption Month, and is exactly one-year since the President signed the
           landmark Adoption and Safe Families Act. The First Lady is very
           interested in holding an event on adoption during November, preferably at
           the end of the month before Thanksgiving.

December   Family Report
           The President could announce the findings of a new report by the CEA detailing
           changes in the last thirty years in family life. The report will show the increased
           numbers of women in the workplace, and detail the diminished amount of time
           families have to spend with their children. (mid-December)

HEALTH:
December   Asthma Initiative
           The President could announce a concerted fight against asthma, which has
           become a national epidemic impacting the lives of 15 million Americans. The
           initial goals of this program will be to halt the increase in asthma, reduce by half
           the number of children who die or suffer activity limitations because of this
           disease, and limit the disproportionate impact of asthma on minority communities.
            The President could announce new FY2000 budget proposals to expand
           programs that have had demonstrated success on a pilot basis in preventing,
           managing, and understanding asthma. The President could also release an
           interagency report on best practices and strategies to address asthma. (Requires
           budget decision.)

December   Meeting with Presidential Task Force on People with Disabilities
           The President could meet with the Presidential Task Force on People with
           Disabilities and formally announce his endorsement of the Kennedy-Jeffords
           Work Incentives Improvement Act --the disability community's top health
           priority. The President could also possibly announce at this time new
           budget proposals effecting people with disabilities, including possibly a tax
           credit for people with disabilities returning to work or a bridge program to
           help people with disabilities go to work. (Ready -- certain components
           pending budget decisions).

WELFARE:
November    Food Stamp Fraud Directives
           The President could sign three directives to crack down on food stamp fraud:
           (1) The President would direct the Social Security Administration to share its
           death records with the Food Stamp agency to ensure that Food Stamp
           recipients who die are immediately removed from the rolls; (2) The President
           would direct USDA to develop a plan to create an interstate matching system

                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
              and (3) The President would direct Treasury to collect (through offset of
              federal payments and other means) unpaid fines owed by retailers that have
              violated Food Stamp rules, such as exchanging Food Stamps for cash. The
              first two directives will build on the Lugar legislation that passed at the end
              of the session. (Ready)

 December     Work Participation Rates
              The President could visit a welfare-to-work program and announce: (1) new state
              work participation rates, showing that almost all states are meeting the welfare
              law's single-parent requirements, but some are failing to meet the law's separate
              two-parent requirement; (2) new caseload data showing continuing declines; and
              (3) new data on the number of people who were on welfare in 1997 and working
              in March 1998. (Expected to be ready in early December.)

December      Welfare to Work Housing Vouchers
              The Congress approved in the VAIHUD appropriations bill full funding for the
              President's request for 50,000 welfare-to-work housing vouchers. The President
              could hold an event announcing the opening of the first competition for these
              vouchers. This is the first time ever that housing vouchers will be linked to
              welfare reform, and represents an improvement in the way welfare, employment,
              and housing agencies can work together. (Ready in December.)


EDUCATION:
December or Afterschool Grants
January     The Congress fully funded the President's request for $200 million for afterschool
            programs. Anytime after November 4, the President could announce the release
            of the first $40 million in 21st Century Learning Center Grants for over 100
            school districts throughout the country. (Ready)

December      Teacher Quality Report
              The National Center on Educational Statistics at the Department of Education has
              conducted a rapid response survey of teachers as well as an analysis of state
              efforts to improve the quality ofthe teaching force that will be included in the
              Department's first biennial teacher quality report. The President would announce
              the release of this report and possibly announce new budget and legislative
              proposals to improve teacher quality. (Ready late December or January.)

December      Social Promotions Report
              The President could announce a new Education Department report on best
              practices for ending social promotion. This would be an opportunity for the
              President to renew his call made this year to end social promotion. (Ready late
              December or January.)


                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
             The President could reschedule the ceremony for him to swear-in the 100,000th
             Americorps member. At this event the President would also announce: (1) new
             grants to support 500-1000 Americorps Promise Fellowships to support the goals
             set at the Presidents' Summit; (2) the recipients of the President's Service
             Awards, the nation's highest volunteer service award; and (3) the recipients of the
             President's Student Service Awards. (Ready)

EMPOWERMENT ZONES:
December Empowerment Zone Awards
         The President could announce the winners of the nationwide competition for the
         second round Empowennent Zones. Twenty communities will win designations
         as new EZs -- 15 urban and 5 rural. Like the first round, each EZ will receive a
         mixture of tax incentives and flexible grants to leverage private, non-profit, and
         state and local government resources to promote business development and job
         creation in some of our country's most distressed communities. The EZ statute
         requires that these designations be made by January 1, 1999. The EZ program is
         one of the cornerstones of the President's and Vice President's Community
         Empowennent Agenda. (Ready in December.)




                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

December      Nationwide Crackdown on Food Safety
              The President could announce a new $87 million budget proposal to
              crackdown on food safety nationally and a proposed legislative package to
              give authority to USDA to issue recalls of unsafe food and impose civil fines.
              In addition, the President would urge states to adopt his model food code for
              retailers, providing incentives and disincentives for states to adopt to the
              code.(Ready, depending on budget decisions.)

December      Long-Term Care Tax Credit Package
              The President would announce a proposal to provide a $1,000 tax credit to people
              with long-term care needs or their care givers -- which we expect will help about
              2.3 million people. At the same time, the President could call for the Federal
              Employees Health Benefit plan to offer long-term care insurance to federal
              employees, underscoring that a model employer should promote high-quality
              private long-term care insurance policies to its employees. OPM estimates that
              300,000 people would buy these policies. This long-term care tax credit does
              not currently have offsets.' However, pending budget decisions, this policy
              could be ready to go in December. (Pending budget decisions.)

December      Superbug Initiative
              Recent reports have indicated that resistance to anti-biotics is becoming a
              major public health crisis, causing prolonged illnesses and even death. For
              example, pneumonia, which impact over 500,000 Americans each year, is
              becoming resistance to most antibiotics and staph, the most common
              hospital-based infection, is now only responding to the strongest drug
              available and some people are even starting to show resistance to this drug.
              Experts believe that this critical public health problem is on track to affect
              more and more viruses. To reduce this problem, the President could: (1)
              launch a new budget initiative to enable experts to obtain critical information
              about which viruses are likely to become resistant and why; (2) launch a
              major education campaign to inform health providers and professionals
              about how to prescribe drugs more appropriately and increase the use of
              vaccines to reduce the likelihood that diseases will become resistant; and (3)
              fund community-based demonstrations to examine how best to implement
              prevention efforts. (Pending budget decision.)

December      Expansion of Values-Based Crime Prevention Initiative
              Recognizing the important role that civic, community, and faith-based
              organizations can play in reducing crime, this past July the President announced a
              $2.2 million in grants available for 16 community-based collaboratives, including
              religiously-affiliated organizations, to target youth violence, gangs, truancy, and
              other juvenile problems by promoting common-sense values and responsibility.
              To build on this effort, the President could commit to a series of new grants to

                                                                Automated ReCOfUs ;\1.... _"' ........ - J .,~"l
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
           increase federal funding for such programs. The President could also highlight
           the efforts of Rev. Eugene Rivers of Boston, who inspired the President to
           develop this initiative and has organized a National 10-Point Leadership
           Foundation to mobilize 1,000 black churches in 40 cities to help at-risk kids in the
           50 worst neighborhoods. (Pending budget decisions.)

December   Family/Child Care Package
           The President could announce a "families agenda" that will include proposals to:
           help working families pay for child care through subsidies and tax credits; give a
           tax credit to help parents who wish to stay at home to care for their children;
           provide paid parental leave for families with newborn or newly adopted children;
           provide funding for home visiting and other parenting skills programs for parents
           with very young children; and increase support for after-school programs. Also,
           the President would propose expanding family medical leave so that it would
           cover employers with 25 employees or fewer. (Pending budget decisions.)

January    No-Social-Promotions Initiative
           The President could announce a new $300 million dollar budget initiative to
           help local school systems around the country follow Chicago's example and
           end social promotions. This would be a competitive grants program
           through which the federal government would pay for the cost of mandatory
           summer school and after-school to help students meet promotion' standards,
           if the school district agrees to end social promotion. (Pending budget
           decisions.)




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


