RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-NOV-1998 15:51:59.00

SUBJECT:   chicago tribune

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
MAYOR ANNOUNCES
                    $358 MILLION LAWSUIT
                    AGAINST GUNMAKERS
                    Chicago becomes second major city
                    to take gun industry to court

                    By Ellen Almer
                    Tribune Staff Writer
                    November 12, 1998

                    Mayor Richard Daley this afternoon
                    announced a $358 million lawsuit against 40
                    gun makers and sellers, alleging they are
                    "knowingly marketing deadly weapons to
                    gang members."

                    Flanked by the city's top law enforcement
                    officials, Daley charged several Chicago
                    and suburban gun sellers, along with gun
                    makers such as Smith & Wesson, with
                    committing a "public nuisance" against the
                    City of Chicago.

                    The suit also seeks an unspecified amount in
                    punitive damages.

                    Unlike a similar suit filed last month in New
                    Orleans, Chicago's lawsuit, filed today in
                    Cook County Circuit Court, goes after the
                    gun industry's marketing strategy, as
                    opposed to the guns themselves.

                    "We hold polluters responsible for the
                    environment, and liquor stores for selling to
                    minors. Now we're holding the gun industry
                    responsible" for violent crimes, Daley said.

                    Halfway through the press conference on
                    the city'S West Side, city officials yanked
                    the covering from a large table, revealing
                    171 guns Daley said were acquired by
                    police during a 3-month undercover
                    investigation.

                    Daley said police bought most of the guns in


                    suburban gun shops, "whose personnel
                    repeatedly helped them evade gun laws."

                    Gun sellers know they are selling to people
                    who will resell them to criminals, Daley said,
                    citing the killing of police officer Michael
                    Ceriale, who was shot by a gun that was
                    resold to gang members.

                    Police Supt. Terry Hillard said gun dealers
                    know they're not selling to deer hunters and
                    mentioned an undercover buy in which a
                    gun dealer described bullets that won't "hit
                    the little girl across the street."

                    Chicago is only the second major city to
                    take the gun industry to court in a strategy
                    reminiscent of state attorneys general who
                    have sued tobacco companies.

                    Last month, New Orleans filed suit against
                    15 gun manufacturers, contending they have
                    failed to design enough safety features into
                    their weapons, thus making them
                    "unreasonably dangerous."

                    The suit seeks "millions of dollars" to
                    recover city outlays for such things as
                    emergency medical care, hiring of additional
                    police officers and starting youth programs
                    to counteract gun violence.

                    City lawyers here have been studying a legal
                    approach different than the strategy used in
                    the New Orleans case.

                    Instead of contending that firearms
                    manufacturers have failed to build
                    safeguards that somehow would prevent
                    their illegal use, Daley's suit argues that
                    manufacturers and distributors fail to take
                    steps to ensure that only those eligible to
                    buy guns obtain them.
...
,

