RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-NOV-1998 17:04:05.00

SUBJECT:   Scheduling Memo -- revised only on Adoption Registry.

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This version does not include that POTUS will announce new adoption
numbers that show adoptions have increased -- it just includes the
registry announcement.
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00,00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D11]MAIL45819361V.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504396050000010A02010000000205000000C76700000002000004A2E7647785DDC4BDA22D
OC9870EODE3A457646F37B2BC9770A5729CB6EB3E6CEF26BA267ADO79761942D2BB95F50B40C94
A2CD4A99CBBOE2990394A67AF1CCABCE49CB4BCA7E924073B9F49F6BF9CBAC104224CB53F6FD21
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                                       October 27, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

        CC:              MARIA ECHAVESTE
                         ANN LEWIS
                         STEPHANIE STREETT

FROM:                     BRUCE REED

SUBJECT:                  POSSIBLE POLICY ANNOUNCEMENTS


Following is a list of possible DPC announcements the President could make during the months
of November and December.

CRIME:
November 22 FBI Crime Statistics
            The final 1997 FBI Unified Crime Report data will be released on Sunday,
            November 22, demonstrating further that crime has decreased dramatically under
            the President's watch. The President should issue a written statement on that
            Sunday. (Ready)

December      "Zero Tolerance" for Drugs in Prisons
              The recently passed omnibus appropriations bill includes an important provision
              that would allow states to use up to 10% oftheir prison funds to drug test and, if
              necessary, treat prisoners and parolees. This policy change, which the President
              called for in a directive to the Attorney General last January, was strongly
              opposed by RepUblicans and represents another victory for the President in the
              recent budget battle. To highlight this accomplishment, the President could join
              the Attorney General, General McCaffrey and perhaps group of Governors in
              issuing new guidelines to ensure that the states use their funds to promote this
              new "zero tolerance" policy. (Ready in Mid December)

January       Expansion of Values-Based Crime Prevention Initiative
              Recognizing the important role that civic, community, and faith-based
              organizations can play in reducing crime, this past July the President announced a
              $2.2 million in grants available for 16 community-based collaboratives, including
              religiously-affiliated organizations, to target youth violence, gangs, truancy, and
              other juvenile problems by promoting common-sense values and responsibility.
              support values-based crime prevention efforts, and urge Congress to endorse and
              increase federal funding for such programs. The President could also highlight
              the efforts of Rev. Eugene Rivers of Boston, who inspired the President to
              develop this initiative and has organized a National la-Point Leadership
              Foundation to mobilize 1,000 black churches in 40 cities to help at-risk kids in the
              50 worst neighborhoods. (Pending budget decisions.)

February      Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative
              The President could highlight the success of his innovative Youth Crime Gun
              Interdiction Initiative (YCGII), which has been ongoing for two years in 27 cities,
              by announcing: (1) the release of the second annual report on the YCGII, which
              will provide new data on guns used in crimes and demonstrate the success of the
              YCGII; (2) the availability of funds to hire new ATF agents to investigate gun
              trafficking in these 27 cities; and (3) a proposal to dramatically expand the YCGII
              to 20 new cities which was just provided for in the recent omnibus appropriations
              bill. (Ready February 9, 1999)

WOMEN, CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES:
November Title IX Executive Order
         The President could sign an executive order as early as next week prohibiting
         discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, or sex in education
         programs conducted by the federal government. This includes schools operated
         by the Defense Department for military dependents, schools operated by the
         Department of the Interior for Native Americans, and numerous training and
         educational programs run by federal departments. This is a follow up to an
         Executive Memorandum the President issued last year asking the Department of
         Justice to lead an effort to identify all federally-conducted education programs and
         to recommend appropriate action to end discrimination. (Ready)

November 24 Adoption Registry
            The President could join the First Lady in calling for an internet-based
            national registry of children in foster care waiting to be adopted.
            Prospective adoptive parents will be able to visit the site and meet these
            waiting children. The registry, to cost between $1-2 million, will be funded
            through the Adoption Opportunities Grants, which are a part of the
            President's Adoption 2002 Initiative -- an effort to double the number of
            children adopted from the public child welfare system by the 2002.
            November is National Adoption Month, and is exactly one-year since the
            President signed the landmark Adoption and Safe Families Act. (The First
            Lady is planning to make this announcement on November 24.)

December      Family Report
              The President could announce the findings of a new report by the CEA detailing
              changes in the last thirty years in family life. The report will show the increased

                                                                Automated Records Managemem ~j'L ....
                                                                    ,fYIr11P Convel1ion
             families have to spend with their children. (Ready Mid-December)

December     Foster Care Emancipation Initiative
             The President could announce an executive memorandum and preview his FY
             2000 budget request to support young people who "age out" of the foster care
             system. When young people in foster care tum 18, their federal maintenance
             payments end and they begin an often difficult transition to independence. The
             President would sign an executive memorandum that would target existing
             programs to support this vulnerable population (e.g. AmeriCorps, Pell Grant
             outreach, the Gear-Up Initiative, Work Opportunities), and announce his proposed
              budget request to increase by 50 percent (to $135 million) the main federal
             support program administered by HHS and extend Medicaid coverage for this
             population. (Requires budget decision, not ready until after 12115)

December 20 Fighting Homelessness. On December 20, a number of homeless
            organizations hold events throughout the country (including in D.C.) to
            highlight the problem of homelessness. At this event, the President could
            announce $700 million in McKinney grants and the results of a VA survey
            that will show a significant portion of the veterans treated could be
            considered homeless. In addition, the President could announce any
            combination of the following budget proposals: (1) assist the approximately
            250,000 homeless veterans with a $50 million package that would provide the
            single largest investment to break the cycle of homelessness among veterans;
            (2) allow VA to sell surplus property with 10 percent of proceeds going to
            homeless veterans; and (3) a demonstration project targeted to the'
            chronically homeless that would test the most promising models for moving
            chronically homeless to self-sufficiency using a combination of permanent
            housing and links to mainstream services. Finally, the President could also
            announce the toll-free number that HUD operates every year to assist the
            homeless. (Ready in mid-December; proposal requires budget decision)

January      Ensuring Equal Pay. The President could announce a $30 million program to
             advance outreach to businesses and employees to educate them about the
             requirement to pay equal wages. The program will provide technical assistance,
             improve training for EEOC employees and resources for increases in enforcement
             capabilities.   The program also funds a Women in Non-Traditional
             Occupations Initiative, which will identify best practices, emphasize
             anti-discrimination and anti-harassment activities, and explore incentives to
             improve access to and acceptance of women into glass ceiling and nontraditional
             opportunities such as construction, "high tech," and manufacturing. (Pending
             budget decision).

December     Family/Child Care Package
             The President could announce a "families agenda" that will include proposals to:
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dwnp Conversion
           tax credit to help parents who wish to stay at home to care for their children;
           provide paid parental leave for families with newborn or newly adopted children;
           provide funding for home visiting and other parenting skills programs for parents
           with very young children; and increase support for after-school programs. Also,
           the President would propose expanding family medical leave so that it would
           cover employers with 25 employees or fewer. (Pending budget decisions.)

HEALTH:
December   Asthma Initiative
           The President could announce a concerted fight against asthma, which has
           become a national epidemic impacting the lives of 15 million Americans. The
           initial goals of this program will be to halt the increase in asthma, reduce by half
           the number of children who die or suffer activity limitations because of this
           disease, and limit the disproportionate impact of asthma on minority communities.
            The President could announce new FY2000 budget proposals to expand
           programs that have had demonstrated success on a pilot basis in preventing,
           managing, and understanding asthma. The President could also release an
           interagency report on best practices and strategies to address asthma. (Requires
           budget decision.)

December   Meeting with Presidential Task Force on People with Disabilities
           As required by the Executive Order the President signed in March, the Task
           Force has prepared a six month report which includes recommendations on
           administrative and legislative policies to improve employment opportunities
           for people with disabilities. The President could meet with the Task Force
           (Secretary Herman, chair, and Tony Coehlo, vice chair) and formally
           announce his endorsement of the Kennedy-Jeffords Work Incentives Improvement
           Act -- the disability community's top health priority. The President could also
           possibly announce at this time new budget proposals affecting people with
           disabilities, including a tax credit for people with disabilities to help them pay
           work-related expenses and/or a BRIDGE program to foster more integrated
           state and local services help people with disabilities go to work. (Ready --certain
           components pending budget decisions).

December   Long-Term Care Tax Credit Package
           The President would announce a proposal to provide a $1,000 tax credit to people
           with long:term care needs or their care givers -- which we expect will help about
           2.3 million people. At the same time, the President could call for the Federal
           Employees Health Benefit plan to offer long-term care insurance to federal
           employees, underscoring that a model employer should promote high-quality
           private long-term care insurance policies to its employees. OPM estimates that
           300,000 people would buy these policies. This long-term care tax credit does
           not currently have offsets. However, pending budget decisions, this policy
                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                             Hex-Dum;~              . agement System
                                                                      :p \,oonversion



           could be ready to go in December. (Pending budget decisions.)
December   Superbug Initiative
           Recent reports have indicated that resistance to anti-biotics is becoming a
           major public health crisis, causing prolonged illnesses and even death. For
           example, pneumonia, which impact over 500,000 Americans each year, is
           becoming resistance to most antibiotics and staph, the most common
           hospital-based infection, is now only responding to the strongest drug
           available and some people are even starting to show resistance to this drug.
           Experts believe that this critical public health problem is on track to affect
           more and more viruses. To reduce this problem, the President could: (1)
           launch a new budget initiative to enable experts to obtain critical information
           about which viruses are likely to become resistant and why; (2) launch a
           major education campaign to inform health providers and professionals
           about how to prescribe drugs more appropriately and increase the use of
           vaccines to reduce the likelihood that diseases will become resistant; and (3)
           fund community-based demonstrations to examine how best to implement
           prevention efforts. (Pending budget decision.)

December   FDA Regualtion on Over The Counter Drugs Labeling.
           In concert with or soon after Jane Henney is sworn in as the next FDA
           commissioner, we could hold an event around the release of a final regulation
           requiring all over the counter drugs to be labeled in a user friendly manner.
           HHS and OMB would have to be pushed aggressively to finalize work on this
           regulation, but it could be ready late in December. Such an announcement
           would have the support of the pharmaceutical community as well as
           consumers, and would represent an important breakthrough for those in
           need to readable, easy to understand usage and compliance information for
           important medications. (Late December.)

December   Patients Bill of Rights.
           After the Republican leadership completes its meetings on committee
           assignments in December, the President could host a bipartisan meeting with
           members of Congress committed to passing a strong, enforceable patients'
           bill of rights. At this meeting, all sides would affirm they are confident that
           they could pass this bill next year and that all issues, including those
           associated with enforcement, could be resolved. This meeting would be held
           to specifically illustrate the momentum this legislation now has and the
           inevitability of its passage. (December)

WELFARE:
November    Food Stamp Fraud Directives
           The President could sign three directives to crack down on food stamp fraud: (1)
           The President would direct the Social Security Administration to share its death
           records with the Food Stamp agency to ensure that Food Stamp recipients who die
           are immediately removed from the rolls; (2) The President would direct USDA to
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
             develop a plan to create an interstate matching system to ensure Food Stamp
             recipients are not receiving benefits in multiple states; and (3) The President
             would direct Treasury to collect (through offset of federal payments and other
             means) unpaid fines owed by retailers that have violated Food Stamp rules, such
             as exchanging Food Stamps for cash. The first two directives will build on the
             Lugar legislation that passed at the end of the session:(Ready)

December     Work Participation Rates
             The President could visit a welfare-to-work program and announce: (1) new state
             work participation rates, showing that almost all states are meeting the welfare
             law's single-parent requirements, but some are failing to meet the law's separate
             two-parent requirement; (2) new caseload data showing continuing declines; and
             (3) new data on the number of people who were on welfare in 1997 and working
             in March 1998. (Expected to be ready in mid December.)

December     Welfare to Work Honsing Vouchers
             The Congress approved in the VAIHUD appropriations bill full funding for the
             President's request for 50,000 welfare-to-work housing vouchers. The President
             could hold an event announcing the opening of the first competition for these
             vouchers. This is th~ first time ever that housing vouchers will be linked to
             welfare reform, and represents an improvement in the way welfare, employment,
             and housing agencies can work together. (Ready in December.)

EDUCATION:
December Social Promotions Report
         The President could announce a new Education Department report on best
         practices for ending social promotion. This would be an opportunity for the
         President to renew his call made this year to end social promotion. (Ready late
         December or January.)

January      No-Social-Promotions Initiative
             The President could announce a new $300 million dollar budget initiative to help
             local school systems around the country follow Chicago's example and end social
             promotions. This would be a competitive grants program through which the
             federal government would pay for the cost of mandatory summer school and
             after-school to help students meet promotion standards, if the school district
             agrees to end social promotion. This may be appropriate to announce at the
             National School Boards Association meeting on January 29-31. (Pending budget
             decisions.)

January      Teacher Quality Report
             The National Center on Educational Statistics at the Department of Education has
             conducted a rapid response survey of teachers as well as an analysis of state
             efforts to improve the quality of the teaching force that will be included in the
             Department's first biennial teacher quality report. The President would announce
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

             the release of this report and possibly announce new budget and legislative
             proposals to improve teacher quality. (January)

EMPOWERMENT ZONES:
December Empowerment Zone Awards
         The President could announce the winners of the nationwide competition for the
         second round Empowerment Zones. Twenty communities will win designations
         as new EZs -- 15 urban and 5 rural. Like the first round, each EZ will receive a
         mixture of tax incentives and flexible grants to leverage private, non-profit, and
         state and local government resources to promote business development and job
         creation in some of our country's most distressed communities. The EZ statute
         requires that these designations be made by January 1, 1999. The.EZ program is
         one of the cornerstones of the President's and Vice President's Community
         Empowerment Agenda. (Ready in December.)

FOOD SAFETY:
December  Nationwide Crackdown on Food Safety
          The President could announce a new $87 million budget proposal to
          crackdown on food safety nationally and a proposed legislative package to
          give authority to USDA to issue recalls of unsafe food and impose civil fines.
          In addition, the President would urge states to adopt his model food code for
          retailers, providing incentives and disincentives for states to adopt to the
          code. (Ready, depending on budget decisions.)


 TOBACCO
December Counter advertising
         The state tobacco settlement is expected to include significant funds for state
         tobacco Counter advertising and education. To assist states in using these
         funds most effectively, the President could direct HHS to: (1) designate a
         National Clearinghouse on Tobacco Counter advertising at the Centers for
         Disease Control (the President could release at the event a package of
         "top-10" t.v. ads); and (2) make effective anti-tobacco curriculum available
         to every school. Two of the "top-10" ads feature supermodel Christy
         Turlington and musical group "Boyz II Men" who could be invited to
         participate in the event. (Ready).

December     Second Hand Smoke
             The President could sign an Executive Order directing OSHA to issue within
             one year a standard establishing a smoke-free workplace for all private
             sector employees. ETS exposure in the workplace poses significant risks to
             employees who are non-smokers, including lung cancer, heart disease, and
             respiratory problems. This standard would be similar to the August 1997
             Executive Order banning smoking in Federal building. (Ready in early
             December)


