RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-NOV-1998 13:59:11.00

SUBJECT:   We have only just begun to pay

TO: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice    ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
                    Tobacco proposal has Patton concerned

                    Deal not expected to include growers

                    By Jack Brammer and Gail Gibson
                    HERALD-LEADER STAFF WRITERS

                    LOUISVILLE -- Gov. Paul Patton sounded a disappointed
note yesterday
                    about how Kentucky tobacco farmers are likely to fare
under a pending
                    national tobacco settlement.

                    "We have made it known that we want some kind of an extra
consideration
                    for the tobacco farmer," Patton said in an interview.
"I'm not going to
                    comment on whether we got our expectations or not, but
I'm not smiling a
                    whole lot."

                    Patton would not discuss details. But farm leaders and
public-health
                 advocates who are closely following the national
negotiations don't expect the
                 deal to include specific aid for growers.

                 Instead, the accord is likely to include a pledge that
the companies will sit
                 down with tobacco-state political leaders to talk about
implications for leaf
                 growers within 30 days of a final deal, said Scott
Ballin, senior policy analyst
                 with the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids in Washington,
D.C.

                 That would at least be a starting point to seek some
concessions from the
                 industry on farm issues, said Danny McKinney, executive


director of the
                    Lexington-based Burley Tobacco Growers Cooperative
Association.

                    "We don't expect there to be big money in there for a
buyout," McKinney
                 said, referring to earlier proposals to offer farmers
cash payments for their
                 allotments.

                 The expected settlement proposal is still in the works
and under wraps. Fred
                 Olsen, a spokesman for Washington state Attorney General
Christine
                 Gregoire, one of the lead negotiators, said yesterday
that a deal is close, but
                 not complete.

                 Health advocates tracking the talks expect a deal that
would force tobacco
                 companies to pay roughly $200 billion to as many as 46
states.

                    That would include money for the three dozen states with
suits pending
                 against the industry, as well as 10 states, including
Kentucky, Virginia and
                 North Carolina, that haven't taken Big Tobacco to court.

                    It's not clear how much money Kentucky would receive, but
the figure was
                 $3 million in a far more sweeping settlement proposal
that fell apart last
                 summer in the u.s. Senate. Disagreements over provisions
to increase taxes,
                 allow more regulation of nicotine and curb advertising
scuttled that deal.

                 The new settlement would not require congressional
approval. But state
                 leaders will have to decide whether to sign on.

                    Patton didn't say yesterday whether he thought the accord
was something
                 Kentucky should support. Attorney General Ben Chandler
declined to discuss
                 the talks.

                    "All this is fluid right now," said Chandler spokeswoman
Jennifer Schaaf.

                 Patton, who was briefed on some details by Chandler's
office, said that he
                 hopes to discuss the deal with Kentucky's legislative
leaders next week.

                    "This is a major policy decision that would need to have
the advice of the
                    General Assembly's leadership," Patton said.


                 Senate President Larry Saunders, D-Louisville, said he
knows nothing about                         '
                 the settlement and no briefing has been scheduled yet for
legislative leaders.

                   Earlier this year, the General Assembly created a special
fund to hold any
                 money the state might receive from a national tobacco
settlement or federal
                 legislation.

                   The fund is just a holding spot, though.

                   State lawmakers would decide how to spend the money.


