RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL         (NOTES MAIL)
I
    CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-NOV-1998 13:56:42.00

SUBJECT:         draft state settlement

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Josh -- note the payout explanation halfway through:  $300 million a year
from 1999-03 for public
education fund (counteradvertising), $2.4 billion a year from 1999-2003
for upfront payment,
$4.5 billion on 4/1/99, $4.5b in 2000, $5b in 2001, $6.5b in 2002-03,
$8.1-9b after that. Legal fees are
on top of that.

This is from the Arizona Daily Star, off the Internet:

Draft agreement

                     Public Health Initiatives

                     Prohibits Youth Targeting
                      Prohibits targeting youth in advertising, promotions or
marketing.
                     Barrs industry actions aimed at initiating, maintaining or
    increasing
                    youth smoking.

                     Bans Cartoon Characters
                      Bans use of cartoons in the advertising, promotion,
packaging or
                     labeling of tobacco products.

              Restricts Sponsorships By Brand Names
               Restricts sponsorships by tobacco brand names.
               Prohibits brand name sponsorship of events with a
significant youth
              audience or team sports (football, basketball, baseball,
hockey or
              soccer) .
               Prohibits sponsorship of events where the paid participants
or
              contestants are underage.
               Limits tobacco companies to one brand name sponsorship per
year
              (after current contracts expire or after three years -
whichever
              comes first) .
               Allows corporate sponsorship of athletic, musical,


cultural, artistic
              or social events as long as the corporate name does not inc
lude the
              brand name of a domestic tobacco product.
               Bans tobacco brand names for stadiums and arenas.
               Limits duration and area of advertising for sponsored
events.

               Bans Outdoor Advertising
                Bans all outdoor advertising, including: billboards, signs
and placards
               larger than a poster in arenas, stadiums,   shopping malls,
and video
               game arcades.
                Bans transit advertising of tobacco products.
                Tobacco billboards and transit ads must be removed within
150
               days after the Master Settlement Agreement Execution Date.
                Allows states to substitute, at industry expense and for
the duration
               of billboard lease periods, alternative advertising which
discourages
               yo"uth smoking.
                Bans tobacco companies from entering into agreements which
               would prohibit advertising discouraging tobacco use.
                Requires tobacco companies to designate a contact person
for sign
               removal in each state.

               Bans Placement of Topacco Products
                Bans payments to promote tobacco products in movies,
television
               shows, theater productions or live performances, videos and
video
               games.

               Bans Sale of Merchandise With Tobacco Brand Names
                Beginning July 1, 1999, bans distribution and sale of
non-tobacco
              merchandise with brand-name logos   (caps, T-shirts,
backpacks, etc.).

               Bans Youth Access To Free Samples
                After Master Settlement Agreement Execution Date, free
samples
               cannot be distributed except in a facility or enclosed area
where the
               operator ensures no underage person is present.

               Bans Proof of Purchase Gifts
                No gifts can be offered to youth in exchange for the
purchase of
               tobacco products, coupons or proofs of purchase.
                Bans distribution of gifts through the mail without proof
of age
               (legible driver's license certified to be valid by the gift
recipient) .
                Provisions effective after Master Settlement Agreement
Execution
               Date.



               Prohibits Third Parties From Using Tobacco Brand Names
                Tobacco companies are prohibited from authorizing third
parties to
               use or advertise brand names.
                Tobacco companies must designate a contact in each state
who will
               respond to Attorney General complaints of prohibited third
party
               activity.
                Exempts licensing agreements or contract in existence as of
July 1,
               1998, although contracts cannot be extended beyond current
times.

               Bans Non-Tobacco Brand Names
                Bans future cigarette brands from being named after
recognized
               non-tobacco brand or trade names     (such as Harley Davidson,
Yves
               saint   ~aurent,   Cartier) or nationally recognized sports
teams,
               entertainment groups or individual celebrities.

               Sets Minimum Pack Size At 20 Cigarettes
                Limits minimum pack size to 20 cigarettes through March 31,
2001.
               Tobacco companies prohibited from opposing state
legislation which
              bans the manufacture and sale of packs containing fewer than
20
              cigarettes.

               Changes The Corporate Culture

               Requires Corporate Commitments To Reduce Youth Access and
               Consumption
                Beginning 180 days after the Master Settlement Agreement
               Execution Date, companies must:
                Develop and regularly communicate corporate principles which
               commit to complying with the Master Settlement Agreement and
               reducing youth smoking.
                Designate executive level manager to identify ways to
reduce youth
               access and consumption of tobacco.
                Encourage employees to identify additional methods to reduce
               youth access and youth consumption.

               Disbands Tobacco Trade Associations
                Disbands the Council for Tobacco Research, the Tobacco
Institute,
               and the Council for Indoor Air Research.
                Requires all records of these organizations that relate to
any lawsuit
               to be preserved.

               Provides Regulation and Oversight of New Trade Organizations
                Requires any new trade association to adopt bylaws that
provide:
                Officers of the association will be appointed by the board,


be
                  employees of the association and will not be employed by a
member
                  tobacco company.
                   Legal counsel will be independent and not serve as counsel
to
                  member companies;
                   Minutes of board of director meetings will be prepared and
                  maintained for at least five years.
                   For the purpose of enforcing the Master Settlement
Agreement,
                  antitrust staff for any settling state may inspect and copy
all
                  non-privileged, non-work-product records and interview
association
                  directors, officer and employees.

                  Restricts Industry Lobbying

                  Stops Industry Assault On Tobacco Control Laws
                   After state specific finality, tobacco companies will be
prohibited
                  from opposing proposed state or local laws or administrative
rules
                  which are intended to limit youth access to and consumption
off
               tobacco products.
                The industry must require its lobbyists to certify in
writing they have
               reviewed and will fully comply with settlement terms
including
               disclosure of financial contributions regarding lobbying
activities and
               new corporate culture principles.
                In states without laws regarding financial disclosure of
lobbying,
               requires disclosure of lobbying costs to the state Attorney
General.
                Prohibits lobbyists from supporting or opposing state,
federal or
               local laws or actions without authorization of the
companies.
                Prohibits the industry from lobbying for the diversion of
settlement
              money to non-tobacco or non-health related uses or
legislation which
              would eliminate or diminish state rights under the
settlement.

                  Protects State And Local Youth Access Laws
                   Prohibits new challenges by the industry against the
enforceabili ty
                  of constitutionality of tobacco control laws, ordinances,
and rules
                  passed prior to June 1, 1998.

              Dismisses Lawsuits Against State Laws
               Requires the industry to dismiss, without fees,     all claims
against
              participating states.


                  Requires the industry to dismiss pending legal challenges
related to
                 underage smoking and environmental tobacco smoke laws.

                 No Criminal Liability
                  Specifies that states expressly do not waive any criminal
liability
                 based on federal stats or, local law.

                 opens Industry Records and Research

                 opens Public Access To Tobacco Documents
                  Effective on the Master Settlement Agreement Execution Date,
                 tobacco companies will release documents which are under
                 protective orders in state lawsuits and have no privilege of
                 trade-secret claim.
                  Settling states may seek court-approved public release of
any
                 documents which have been subject to an order or filing,
prior to
                 August 17, 1998, denying privilege, work product or trade
secret
                 protection. The industry can content the action.

                 Creates Website For Industry Documents
                  Requires tobacco companies to open, at their expense, a
Website
                 which includes all documents produces in state and other
smoking
                 and health related lawsuits.
                  Requires the industry to maintain the site for ten years in
a
                 user-friendly and searchable format   (requires and index and
other
                 features to improve searchable access) .
                  Requires the industry to add, at its expense, all documents
produced
                 in future civil actions involving smoking and health cases.
                  Oversized or multi-media records will not be placed on the
Website,
                 but they will be made available to the public through the
Minnesota
                 depository.
                  The industry will provide the National Association of
Attorneys
                 General with up to $100,000 for a computer consultant to
review and
                 make recommendations regarding the industry's Website plans.
                  NAAG's consultant can seek input from settling sate
officials,
                 public health officials and other users of the Website.

                 Stops Conspiracy To Hide Research Regarding Smoking and
                 Health
                  prohibits manufacturers from jointly contracting or
conspiring to:
                  Limit information about the health hazards from the use of
their
                 products:
                  Limit or suppress research into smoking and health; and


                  Limit or suppress research into the marketing or
development of
              new products.
               Prohibits the industry from making any material
misrepresentations
              regarding the health consequences of smoking.

                 Creates A Foundation And $1.45 Billion Public
                 Education Fund

                 Creates A National Foundation to Reduce Teen Smoking and
                 Substance Abuse
                  Requires the industry each year for ten years to pay $25
million to
                 fund a charitable foundation which will support the study of
programs
                 to reduce teen smoking and substance abuse and the
prevention of
                 diseases associated with tobacco use.
                  The NAAG Executive Committees will provide for creation of
the
                 foundation.
                  The foundation will governed by a seven-member board of
                 directors. NAAG, the National Governors Association and the
                 National Conference of State Legislatures each will appoint
a board
                member and the three will select the final four members with
                expertise in public health, medicine and child psychology.
                 The foundation will:
                 Carry out a nation wide, sustained advertising and education
                program to counter youth tobacco use and educate consumers
about
                 the cause and prevention of diseases associated with tobacco
use.
                  Develop, disseminate and test the effectiveness of counter
                 advertising campaigns.
                  Develop disseminate and test the effectiveness of model
classroom
                 educational programs, including programs targeting at-risk
population.

                 Develop, disseminate and test the effectiveness of criteria
for
                effective cessation programs.
                 commission studies, fund research and publish reports on
factors
                 that influence youth smoking and substance abuse.
                  Develop targeted training and information programs for
parents.
                 Maintain a library of foundation studies, reports and
publications.
                 Track and monitor youth smoking and substance abuse with a
focus
                on reasons for increases or failures to decrease tobacco and
                substance use rates.
                 The foundation is prohibited from engaging in political or
lobbying
                activities.
                 Includes a severance clause for settling states which are
prohibited


              by state law from entering into the foundation portion of the
              agreement.

              Creates A National Public education Fund
               Requires the industry to pay $1.45 billion over the next
five years
              for a National Public Education Fund.
               The agreement includes incentive to the states for continued
              funding (from non-participating manufacturers) .
               The fund is established to carry out a nation sustained
advertising
              and education program to counter youth tobacco use and
educate
              consumers about tobacco-related diseases.
                The fund may make grants to states and political
subdivisions to
              carry out the fund's purposes.
                Grants from the fund will be made by the foundation.
                Industry payments to the foundation and education fund will
be held
              in an escrow account until state-specific finality in a
required number
              of states.
                Outside contributions can be made to the foundation and
              specifically to the education fund.

              Enforcement

              Provides Court Jurisdiction For Implementation and
              Enforcement
               Settling states or tobacco companies may apply to the court
to
              enforce or interpret the terms of the agreement, although
before
              applying to the court a party must give the other parties
and NAAG
              30-days notice (unless the Attorney General determines there
is a
              public health of safety concern requiring faster action) .
               If the court issues an enforcement order enforcing the
agreement
              and party violates that order, the court may order monetary,
civil
              contempt or criminal sanctions to enforce compliance with the
              enforcement order.
               Key public health provisions of the agreement are included
in
              consent decrees to be filed in each sate.
               Settling states or tobacco companies may apply to the court
to
              enforce the terms of the consent decree.
               A settling state may not seek to enforce the consent decree
of
              another settling state.
               A state is not required to give any prior notice before
sending an
              order to enforce a consent decree from the court-except that
a
              IO-day notice is required if the claimed violation involves
targeting


                youth or making material misrepresentations about tobacco
products
                (unless the Attorney General determines there is a public
health or
                safety concern requiring faster action, or the party has
committed
                substantially similar violation previously) .
                 If the court finds the consent decree has been violated,
the court
                may award any relief available under the consent decree or
the law
                in the state.
                 Allows settling state AGs access to company documents,
records
                and personnel to enforce the agreement.

                NAAG Provides Implementation And Enforcement Coordination
                 NAAG will:
                 Receive $150,000 per year until 2007 from the industry for
                oversight costs.
                 Monitor potential conflicting court interpretations
involving the
                settlement.
                 Convene two meetings each year and one national conference
                every three years to evaluate the success of the settlement
and
                coordinate AG efforts.
                 Assist states with inspection and discovery activities
which are
                conducted to enforce the settlement.

                State Enforcement Fund Established
                 On March 31, 1999, the industry is directed to pay $50
million
                which will be used to assist settling states in enforcing and
                implementing the agreement and to investigate and litigate
potential
                violations of state tobacco laws.

                Financial Recovery

                States will Recover $---Billion
                 Total "up-front" and annual payments from tobacco companies
to
                the states over the next 25 years will total $---billion.
                 Distributions to states will be made based on formulas
agreed to by
                Attorneys General.

                Up-front Payments Total $12 Billion
                 Tobacco companies will pay $2.4 billion per year, starting
in
                October, 1998, and one January 5 in 2000, 2001, 2002 and
2003.

                Annual Payments Begin April 15, 1999
                 If all states participate in the settlement, annual
payments will
                "ramp-up" beginning with a $4.5 billion payment on April 15,
1999.


              Ensuing April 15 payments will be at the following rates:
                2000: $4.5 billion
                2001: $5 billion
                2002-2003: $6.5 billion
                2004-2017: $8.139 billion (plus $861 million to the
strategic fund)
                2018 on: $9 billion
                Payment calculations for the industry will be made by an
              independent auditor paid for by the industry and by a fund
established
              in the agreement.
                The independent auditor will be selected by the NAAG
executive
              committee and the companies.
                Both up-front and annual payments will be allocated to the
states
              based on a formula developed by Attorneys General.

                 Strategic Contribution Fund
                  On April 15, 2008 and on April 15 each year through 2017,
the
              companies will pay $861 million into a strategic
contribution fund.
               Money from the fund will be allocated to states based on a
strategic
              contribution formula developed by Attorneys General. The
allocation
              formula will reflect the contribution made by states toward
resolution
              of the state lawsuits against tobacco companies.

                 Payments Subject to Inflation Factor
                  Payments made by tobacco companies (annual payments,
strategic
                 contribution fund, up-front payments) will be adjusted
annually based
                 on an inflation factor.

              Annual Payments Subject to Adjustments
                The amount of the annual payments will be subject to "volume
              adjustments." Tobacco company payments will rise if
cigarette sales
              increase and fall if fewer cigarettes are sold.
                Annual payments also are subject on Non Settling States
              adjustment. If states fail to participate in the settlement,
the annual
              payments made by tobacco companies will be reduced by the
              settlement share amounts which have been allocated to those
non
              settling states.

                Non-Participating Manufacturers Adjustment
                 Settlement negotiations originated with the four major
tobacco
                companies, but an early goal was to ensure public health and
other
              initiatives achieved in the agreement are extended
industry-wide. To
              achieve that goal, attempts were made to involve additional
              companies in the negotiations and to develop provisions


which would
                encourage all tobacco companies to follow terms of the
settlement.
                 --- companies, which represent ---% of the market, have
signed on
                to the settlement.
                 States may pass model laws that effectively create a
reserve fund
                for non participating manufacturers to pay future claims.
                 If the aggregate market share of companies participating in
the
                agreement decline by greater than two percent, their annual
payment
                is reduced by three percent for each percent lost over the
two
                percent threshold. States which have not passed a model law
would
                have their annual payments reduced.
                 States which pass the model law would not have their annual
                payments reduced.
                 If a state's model law is struck down by the court, a state
would get
                the annual payment reduced, but in a lesser amount.

                Federal Legislation Adjustment
                 If federal legislation requires participating tobacco
companies to
                make payments to the federal government, and   ~ome   portion of
that
                money is sent to the settling states, those payments may be
offset,
                dollar for dollar, from the annual payments, under certain
enumerated
                circumstances.

                Cost Recovery and Attorney Fees

                States Recover Cost, Expenses and Market Rate For Attorney
                Fees
                 Tobacco companies will reimburse offices of state Attorneys
                General offices and other political subdivisions for all
reasonable
                costs and expenses and in-house attorney fees.
                 Establishes a $150 million aggregate cap for all amounts
paid will be
                subject to reasonable verification by any requesting
company.

                Industry will Pay Outside Attorney Fees
                 No state dollars will be used to pay outside counsel.
                 TWO payment methods are available - liquidated fee
agreement and
                arbitration.
                 Outside counsel can negotiate a liquidated fee   ~greement
with the
              industry, and if accepted, would be paid from a $1.25
billion pool of
              money from the tobacco industry.
                If outside counsel rejects the liquidated fee process or
cannot agree
 ,.

               to an offer, they can go through arbitration.
                A three-member arbitration panel will be established with
two
               permanent members and a member from the state represented by
the
               outside counsel.
                The industry will pay whatever arbiters award, but timing
of the
               payment will be subject to a $500-million-per-year cash flow
cap.

               Miscellaneous Provisions

               Release Provisions
                If an Attorney General does not have the authority to
release
               claims for political subdivisions or certain other entities
and that
               political subdivision or entity proceeds with a lawsuit and
wins a
              judgment or settlement (and the AG agrees to the
settlement), the
              amount of the recovery will be taken out of the state's
settlement
              share.

               Court Approval of Settlements and Consent Decrees Required
                within 30 days of the Master Settlement Agreement execution
               date, states must go to court to have the settlement
approved and
               their consent decrees entered and approved.
                Non-filing states which want a consent decree will have 30
days to
               file suite and enter the settlement agreement and consent
decree.

               Most Favored Nation Provisions
                If tobacco companies, before October I, 2000, enter into an
               agreement with better financial terms, settlement states
will get the
               benefit of the agreement.   (This does not apply to any
agreement
               reached after the seating of a jury or commencement of
trial. )
                There is no time limit on non-economic terms.   If more
favorable
               non-economic terms are offered in a future agreement, sett
ling states
               at their option may benefit.
                If a settling state enters into an agreement with a company
not
               participating in this settlement and the terms are more
favorable to
              the industry, settling companies can benefit, but only
within that state.

               Settlement Amendment Provisions
                The settlement can be amended only if all affected states
and all
               affected companies agree to the amendment.
·


                     Key Dates
                      There are three critical dates in the agreement: Master
    Settlement
                     Execution Date, State Specific Finality date and Final
    Approval date.
                      Master Settlement Agreement Execution: this is the starting
    date
                     and it occurs when Attorneys General and the companies sign
    the
                     agreement. Various public health provisions are triggered by
    this
                     date.
                      State Specific Finality: This date occurs when a state court
                     approves the settlement and consent decree and appeal time
    has run,
                     or, if there is an appeal, the appeal has been decided in
    favor of
                  approval. This import.ant date keys more public health
    initiatives and
                  vest the state for financial recovery.
                    Final Approval: This is the earlier of June 30, 2000, or
    the date
                  when 80 percent of the settling states reach State Specific
    Finality
                  and states with 80 percent of the financial allocation reach
    State
                  Specific Finality. No money is dispersed to the states until
    Final
                  Approval is reached.


