RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-NOV-1998 19:08:42.00

SUBJECT:   Scheduling Memo

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays   ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena, this is a scheduling memo for your review of possible December
events that Bruce asked for.   I have also attached the list of all the
other remaining scheduling ideas for you both in case you would like me to
add other events to this memo.

FYI, I'm still waiting for a little more info. on the HUD Homelessness
Grants. Also -- good news -- the car safety seat rule announcement is
available anytime in mid-December.  December 11 would probably be the
earliest, but Transportation seemed very confident that it can be ready by
then.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D92]MAIL4S4S0S02J.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FFS7S043EOOS0000010A0201000000020S000000AE800000000200008AEB8F81FB4SF6D0319EAC
DE47967SD67CC8AB88BC4272E7E79E867108CEF73F8CAOESFAFCB8191A6SFAD090ECFFF639BFAE
D38C08SD43A02S00720S4ED4SF68CF246D6912F2992F3DBFEB37FOSD74317E18F7D3C12948SA22
                                                                 Hex-DUl1lp C         . anagement System
                                                                                    '
                                                                             onverslOn



                                      November 16, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR DOUG SOSNIK AND PAUL BEGALA

       CC:                ANN LEWIS
                          STEPH~STREETT


FROM:                      BRUCE REED

SUBJECT:                   POSSIBLE POLICY ANNOUNCEMENTS


Following is a list of possible DPC announcements that reflects our discussions at the end oflast
week.

NOVEMBER:
November 22 FBI Crime Statistics
            The final 1997 FBI Unified Crime Report data will be released on Sunday,
            November 22, demonstrating further that crime has decreased dramatically under
            the President's watch. The President should issue a written statement on that
            Sunday. (Ready)

November 24 Adoption Registry
            The President could join the First Lady in calling for an Internet-based
            national registry of children in foster care waiting to be adopted.
            Prospective adoptive parents will be able to visit the site and meet these
            waiting children. The registry will cost between $1-2 million and will be
            funded through the Adoption Opportunities Grants, which are a part of the
            President's Adoption 2002 Initiative -- an effort to double the number of
            children adopted from the public child welfare system by the 2002.
            November is National Adoption Month, and it is exactly ,one-year since the
            President signed the landmark Adoption and Safe Families Act. (The First
            Lady is planning to make this announcement on November 24.)

DECEMBER:
December 1 School Modernization and Class Size Meeting with Members of Congress.
           The President could meet with democratic Members of Congress to discuss
           the importance of working together on enacting school modernization and
           expanding the effort to reduce class size. This would be an opportunity to
           highlight the united commitment among Members of Congress and the
               for the President to announce new Department of Education guidelines to
               local school districts on implementing the class size initiative that Congress
               enacted last year. In addition, this is an opportunity to highlight all of the
               funding going out to states in the coming months on class size and other
               initiatives that passed in the last budget.

December 3 Bipartisan Meeting on Patients Bill of Rights.
           After the Republican leadership completes its meetings on committee
           assignments in December, the President could host a bipartisan meeting with
           members of Congress committed to passing a strong, enforceable patients'
           bill of rights. At this meeting, all sides would affirm they are confident that
           they could pass this bill next year and that all issues, including those
           associated with enforcement, could be resolved. This meeting would be held
           to specifically illustrate the momentum this legislation now has and the
           inevitability of its passage. (December 3 or date when most Republican
           Members could attend.)

December 10 Campaign Finance Reform Event
            The President could host a White House meeting of bipartisan sponsors of
            Campaign Finance Reform Legislation, which would include Senators McCain
            and Feingold and Representatives Shays and Meehan. The purpose of the event
            would be to underscore the President's commitment to enact bipartisan campaign
            finance reform by next year. The President could highlight examples of
            excessive campaign spending throughout the country in this past election.
            (Depends on Members schedules.)

December 11 Car Seat Announcement
or 17       The President would announce the final Department of Transportation rule for
            universal child safety seats. Under the new rule, every seat would be required to
            fit in every car the same way -- eliminating the current confusion caused by the
            existence of 100 varieties of child seats and 300 different types of passenger
            vehicles. The National Highway Transportation Safety Administration estimates
            that 80 percent of the children strapped into safety seats are at risk because those
            seats are improperly connected. Approximately 600 children younger than 5
            years old are killed and more than 70,000 are injured in vehicle crashes every
            year. The new rule would make it easier for parents to use child safety seats
            properly and encourage greater use of child safety seats. (Ready
            mid-December.)

December 17 Dangerous Toys Initiative
            The President could announce the list of 15 toys and child items that have been
            officially recalled due to safety hazards they present. The President would call on
            parents to remove the toys from their homes before the holidays as part of
            Consumer Product Safety Commission's "Toy Recall Round-up."

                                                                   Automated Records ~1anagement System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
              good option for the First Lady or Vice President.)

December 21 FDA Regulation on Over The Counter Drugs Labeling.
            In concert with or soon after Jane Henney is sworn in as the next FDA
            Commissioner, we could hold an event around the release of a final
            regulation requiring all over the counter drugs to be labeled in a user
            friendly manner. HHS and OMB would have to be pushed aggressively to
            finalize work on this regulation, but it could be ready late in December. Such
            an announcement would have the support of the pharmaceutical community
            as well as consumers, and would represent an important breakthrough for
            those in need to readable, easy to understand usage and compliance
            information for important medications. (Late December.)

December 22- Drunk Driving Announcement
31           The President could meet with leaders of the highway safety community (MADD,
             SADD, etc.) and sign the Presidential Proclamation declaring December, 1988
             Drunk and Drugged Driving Prevention Month. The President may also be able
             to announce the availability of Department of Justice grants of $12 million to
             states to combat underage drinking. The President could tape a Public Service
             Announcement waming against drunk driving during the holidays that can be
             released at this event in addition to new PSAs the Department of Transportation
             about the importance of seat belts. (Anytime in December. The Department
             of Transportation is holding a press conference on Drunk and Drugged
             Driving Prevention on December 18.)

There are several smaller initiatives that we may want to consider rolling out prior to the
State of the Union that would depend on budget decisions. These options include:
             Superbug Initiative
              Recent reports have indicated that resistance to anti-biotics is becoming a
              major public health crisis, causing prolonged illnesses and even death. For
              example, pneumonia, which impact over 500,000 Americans each year, is
              becoming resistance to most antibiotics and staph, the most common
              hospital-based infection, is now only responding to the strongest drug
              available and some people are even starting to show resistance to this drug.
              Experts believe that this critical public health problem is on track to affect
              more and more viruses. To reduce this problem, the President could: (1)
              launch a new budget initiative to enable experts to obtain critical information
              about which viruses are likely to become resistant and why; (2) launch a
              major education campaign to inform health providers and professionals
              about how to prescribe drugs more appropriately and increase the use of
              vaccines to reduce the likelihood that diseases will become resistant; and (3)
              fund community-based demonstrations to examine how best to implement
              prevention efforts. (Pending budget decision.)
                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-DlII1lp Conversion
    The President could announce a concerted fight against asthma, which has
    become a national epidemic impacting the lives of 15 million Americans. The
    initial goals of this program will be to halt the increase in asthma, reduce by half
    the number of children who die or suffer activity limitations because of this
    disease, and limit the disproportionate impact of asthma on minority communities.
      The President could announce new FY2000 budget proposals to expand
    programs that have had demonstrated success on a pilot basis in preventing,
    managing, and understanding asthma. The President could also release an
    interagency report on best practices and strategies to address asthma. (Requires
    budget decision.)

   Bioterrorism Initiative.
    The President could announce a new proposal to detect and manage bioterrorism.
    Bioterrorism is becoming an increasing threat that has the potential to injure or
    kill millions of Americans through deadly diseases, such as smallpox. While
    law enforcement and intelligence agencies seek to thwart these kinds of attacks,
    when prevention fails, we need a system in place that is prepared to manage and
    minimize the public health consequences. The President's initiative would equip
    the nation's public health system to both detect and respond to this potential
    problem. This initiative would: train epidemic intelligence officers who can
    coordinate with state health departments and other intelligence officers to identify
    and respond to attacks; develop a Metropolitan Medical Response System, a mass
    casualty emergency response system, that includes primary care, emergency
    transportation, and decontamination abilities that will be critical to save lives in
    the event of an attack; create and maintain a stockpile of pharmaceuticals, that
    would be critical in the event of a bioterrorist attack that could expose hundreds of
    thousands of Americans to a disease. Current stockpiles contain many inactiye
    antibiotics and are inadequate to address a major outbreak. The President's
    initiative would improve research to develop new vaccines and antibiotics that
    will can be used in the event of an attack. (Pending budget decision.)

   Nationwide Crackdown on Food Safety
    The President could announce a new $87 million budget proposal to
    crackdown on food safety nationally and a proposed legislative package to
    give authority to USDA to issue recalls of unsafe food and impose civil fines.
    In addition, the President would urge states to .adopt his model food code for
    retailers, providing incentives and disincentives for states to adopt to the
    code. (Ready, depending on budget decisions.)

   Expansion of Values-Based Crime Prevention Initiative
    Recognizing the important role that civic, community, and faith-based
    organizations can play in reducing crime, this past July the President announced a
    $2.2 million in grants available for 16 community-based collaboratives, including


                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
             other juvenile problems by promoting common-sense values and responsibility.
             To build on this effort, the President could commit to a series of new grants to
             support values-based crime prevention efforts, and urge Congress to endorse and
             increase federal funding for such programs. The President could also highlight
             the efforts of Rev. Eugene Rivers of Boston, who inspired the President to
             develop this initiative and has organized a National 10-Point Leadership
             Foundation to mobilize 1,000 black churches in 40 cities to help at-risk kids in the
             50 worst neighborhoods. (Pending budget decisions.)

Following is a list ofDPC announcements that are under development. We are preparing to
have these announcements ready for any message openings that arise in December.

              "Zero Tolerance" for Drugs in Prisons
               The recently passed omnibus appropriations bill includes an important provision
               that would allow states to use up to 10% of their prison funds to drug test and, if
               necessary, treat prisoners and parolees. This policy change, which the President
               called for in a directive to the Attorney General last January, was strongly
               opposed by Republicans and represents another victory for the President in the
               recent budget battIe. To highlight this accomplishment, the President could join
               the Attorney General, General McCaffrey and perhaps group of Governors in
               issuing new guidelines to ensure that the states use their funds to promote this
             . new "zero tolerance" policy. (Ready in Mid December)

            Fighting Homelessness. On December 20, a number of homeless
             organizations hold events throughout the country (including in D.C.) to
             highlight the problem of homelessness. The President could attend a
             homeless event and announce $700 million in HUD McKinney grants. In
             addition, the President could announce the results of a VA survey that will
             show a significant portion of the veterans treated could be considered
             homeless. (December 20th)

            World AIDS Day
             The President would commemorate the 10th anniversary of World AIDS Day by
             meeting with youth peer educators from HIV prevention programs, HIV positive
             youth, and involved parents, and then signing the World AIDS Day Proclamation.
              The President may also be able to announce new policy initiatives at this time.
             World AIDS Day is sponsored by the World Health Organization and this year's
             theme is, "Force for Change: World AIDS Campaign with Young People." In
             recent years, there has been a significant shift in the demographics of the AIDS
             epidemic, with new infections in youth rising dramatically. Today, one out of
             every four new infections in the United States is an adolescent. Every hour
             another two teenagers are infected. To commemorate World AIDS Day, the
             President has a unique opp~rtunity to call on parents, teachers, governments,
             churches, businesses, and young people themselves to build a healthy future for


                                                              Automated Records ?\-fanagement System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion




                                            Automated Records Management System
                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
Bruce and Elena:                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

FYI, these are the items that were not included in this memo.

CRIME:
February      Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative
              The President could highlight the success of his innovative Youth Crime Gun
              Interdiction Initiative (YCGII), which has been ongoing for two years in 27 cities,
              by announcing: (1) the release of the second annual report on the YCGII, which
              will provide new data on guns used in crimes 'and demonstrate the success of the
              YCGII; (2) the availability of funds to hire new ATF agents to investigate gun
              trafficking in these 27 cities; and (3) a proposal to dramatically expand the YCGII
              to 20 new cities which was just provided for in the recent omnibus appropriations
              bill. (Ready February 9,1999)

WOMEN, CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES:
November Title IX Executive Order
         The President could sign an executive order as early as next week prohibiting
         discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, or sex in education
         programs conducted by the federal government. This includes schools operated
         by the Defense Department for military dependents, schools operated by the
         Department of the Interior for Native Americans, and numerous training and
         educational programs run by federal departments. This is a follow up to an
         Executive Memorandum the President issued last year asking the Department of
         Justice to lead an effort to identify all federally-conducted education programs and
         to recommend appropriate action to end discrimination. (Ready)

December      Family Report
              The President could announce the findings of a new report by the CEA detailing
              changes in the last thirty years in family life. The report will show the increased
              numbers of women in the workplace, and detail the diminished amount of time
              families have to spend with their children. (Ready Mid-December)

December      Foster Care Emancipation Initiative
              The President could announce an executive memorandum and preview his FY
              2000 budget request to support young people who "age out" of the foster care
              system. When young people in foster care turn 18, their federal maintenance
              payments end and they begin an often difficult transition to independence. The
              President would sign an executive memorandum that would target existing
              programs to support this vulnerable popUlation (e.g. AmeriCorps, Pell Grant
              outreach, the Gear-Up Initiative, Work Opportunities), and announce his proposed
               budget request to increase by 50 percent (to $135 million) the main federal
              support program administered by HHS and extend Medicaid coverage for this

January    Ensuring Equal Pay. The President could announce a $30 million program to
           advance outreach to businesses and employees to educate them about the
           requirement to pay equal wages. The program will provide technical assistance,
           improve training for EEOC employees and resources for increases in enforcement
           capabilities.   The program also funds a Women in Non-Traditional
           Occupations Initiative, which will identify best practices, emphasize
           anti-discrimination and anti-harassment activities, and explore incentives to
           improve access to and acceptance of women into glass ceiling and nontraditional
           opportunities such as construction, "high tech," and manufacturing. (Pending
           budget decision).

December   Family/Child Care Package
           The President could announce a "families agenda" that will include proposals to:
           help working families pay for child care through subsidies and tax credits; give a
           tax credit to help parents who wish to stay at home to care for their children;
           provide paid parental leave for families with newborn or newly adopted children;
           provide funding for home visiting and other parenting skills programs for parents
           with very young children; and increase support for after-school programs. Also,
           the President would propose expanding family medical leave so that it would
           cover employers with 25 employees or fewer. (Pending budget decisions.)

HEALTH:
December   Meeting with Presidential Task Force on People with Disabilities
           As required by the Executive Order the President signed in March, the Task
           Force has prepared a six month report which includes recommendations on
           administrative and legislative policies to improve employment opportunities
           for people with disabilities. The President could meet with the Task Force
           (Secretary Herman, chair, and Tony Coehlo, vice chair) and formally
           announce his endorsement of the Kennedy-Jeffords Work Incentives Improvement
           Act -- the disability community's top health priority. The President could also
           possibly announce at this time new budget proposals affecting people with
           disabilities, including a tax credit for people with disabilities to help them pay
           work-related expenses and/or a BRIDGE program to foster more integrated
           state and local services help people with disabilities go to work. (Ready --certain
           components pending budget decisions).

December   Long-Term Care Tax Credit Package
           The President would announce a proposal to provide a $1,000 tax credit to people
           with long-term care needs or their care givers -- which we expect will help about
           2.3 million people. At the same time, the President could call for the Federal
           Employees Health Benefit plan to offer long-term care insurance to federal
           employees, underscoring that a model employer should promote high-quality

                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
             300,000 people would buy these policies. This long-term care tax credit does
             not currently have offsets. However, pending budget decisions, this policy
             could be ready to go in December. (Pending budget decisions.)

WELFARE:
November      Food Stamp Fraud Directives
             The President could sign three directives to crack down on food stamp fraud: (I)
             The President would direct the Social Security Administration to share its death
             records with the Food Stamp agency to ensure that Food Stamp recipients who die
             are immediately removed from the rolls; (2) The President would direct USDA to
             de~elop a plan to create an interstate matching system to ensure Food Stamp
             recipients are not receiving benefits in multiple states; and (3) The President
             would direct Treasury to collect (through offset of federal payments and other
             means) unpaid fines owed by retailers that have violated Food Stamp rules, such
             as exchanging Food Stamps for cash. The first two directives will build on the
             Lugar legislation that passed at the end of the session. (Ready)

December     Work Participation Rates
             The President could visit a welfare-to-work program and announce: (I) new state
             work participation rates, showing that almost all states are meeting the welfare
             law's single-parent requirements, but some are failing to meet the law's separate
             two-parent requirement; (2) new caseload data showing continuing declines; and
             (3) new data on the number of people who were on welfare in 1997 and working
             in March 1998. (Expected to be ready in mid December.)

December     Welfare to Work Housing Vouchers
             The Congress approved in the VAIHUD appropriations bill full funding for the
             President's request for 50,000 welfare-to-work housing vouchers. The President
             could hold an event annoilncing the opening of the first competition for these
             vouchers. This is the first time ever that housing vouchers will be linked to
             welfare reform, and represents an improvement in the way welfare, employment,
             and housing agencies can work together. (Ready in December.)

EDUCATION:
December Social Promotions Report
         The President could announce a new Education Department report on best
         practices for ending social promotion. This would be an opportunity for the
         President to renew his call made this year to end social promotion. (Ready late
         December or January.)

January      No-Social-Promotions Initiative
             The President could announce a new $300 million dollar budget initiative to help
             local school systems around the country follow Chicago's example and end social
             promotions. This would be a competitive grants program through which the

                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
              after-school to help students meet promotion standards, if the school district
            . agrees to end social promotion. This may be appropriate to announce at the
              National School Boards Association meeting on January 29-31. (Pending budget
              decisions.)

January      Teacher Quality Report
             The National Center on Educational Statistics at the Department of Education has
             conducted a rapid response survey of teachers as well as an analysis of state
             efforts to improve the quality of the teaching force that will be included in the
             Department's first biennial teacher quality report. The President would announce
             the release of this report and possibly announce new budget and legislative
             proposals to improve teacher quality. (January)

EMPOWERMENT ZONES:
January Empowerment Zone Awards
        The President could announce the winners of the nationwide competition for the
        second round Empowerment Zones. Twenty communities will win designations
        as new EZs -- 15 urban and 5 rural. Like the first round, each EZ will receive a
        mixture of tax incentives and flexible grants to leverage private, non-profit, and
        state and local government resources to promote business development and job
        creation in some of our country's most distressed communities. The EZ statute
        requires that these designations be made by January 1, 1999. The EZ program is
        one of the cornerstones of the President's and Vice President's Community
        Empowerment Agenda. (Ready in January. The VP likely to do this.)

TOBACCO
December     Counter advertising
             The state tobacco settlement is expected to include significant funds for state
             tobacco Counter advertising and education. To assist states in using these funds
             most effectively, the President could direct HHS to: (1) designate a National
             Clearinghouse on Tobacco Counter advertising at the Centers for Disease Control
             (the President could release at the event a package of "top-10" t.v. ads); and (2)
             make effective anti-tobacco curriculum available to every school. Two of the
             "top-10" ads feature supermodel Christy Turlington and musical group "Boyz II
             Men" who could be invited to participate in the event. (Ready).

December     Second Hand Smoke
             The President could sign an Executive Order directing OSHA to issue within one
             year a standard establishing a smoke-free workplace for all private sector
             employees. ETS exposure in the workplace poses significant risks to employees
             who are non-smokers, including lung cancer, heart disease, and respiratory
             problems. This standard would be similar to the August 1997 Executive Order
             banning smoking in Federal building. (Ready in early December)


                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


