RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice    ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-NOV-1998 12:53:10.00

SUBJECT:   AP Story

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD']
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:

Monday November 16, 11:43 am
Eastern Time

Jockeying Starts Over
Tobacco Deal

By SKIP WOLLENBERG
AP Business Writer

NEW YORK (AP) -- Several state attorneys general say they are
impressed with the proposed $206 billion tobacco settlement but want to
examine the details before deciding whether to sign.

A formal announcement of the agreement was expected today.

Negotiators for eight states and the nation's four biggest tobacco makers
reached the agreement Saturday, a plan that will settle state claims
seeking
government health costs for treating smoking-related illnesses.

It has been shipped to the 46 states that have lawsuits pending against the
industry or have not yet filed suits, with a reply demanded by midday
Friday. It has been crafted in private meetings over the past five months.

The deal would be the biggest U.S. civil settlement ever, and it would
remove an enormous financial and legal threat to the industry should it
lose a
court case to one or more of the states.

This morning, White House press secretary Joe Lockhart said that
President Clinton, at a ceremony this afternoon, would call the settlement
"an important step forward in the fight to reduce teen smoking."   But he
said Clinton feels more work must be done with Congress to complete an
overall comprehensive strategy.

Tobacco stocks rose this morning. Philip (NYSE:MO - news) Morris Cos.
was up 62 1/2 cents a share at $54.687 1/2 on the New York Stock
Exchange while R.J. Reynolds Tobacco parent RJR (NYSE:RN - news)
Nabisco Holdings was up 31 1/4 cents a share at $30.93'3/4 and Lorillard
Tobacco parent Loews Co. (NYSE:LTR - news) gained $1.18 3/4 to
$101.25. American Depositary Receipts of British American Tobacco,


parent o.f Brewn & Williamsen Tebacce, were up 31 1/4 cents at $18 en
the NYSE.

The industry weuld cemmit $1.7 billien to. research and pregrams aimed at
disceuraging smoking, especially by yeungsters. It also. weuld accept limits
en hew it markets cigarettes, theugh cempanies ceuld still use human
figures
like the Marlbere Man and maintain at least ene sperts spenser ship a year.

The industry has not indicated hew many states are needed fer it to.
preceed with the settlement. It is likely that industry payments weuld be
reduced if states decided against signing.

Feur states -- Mississippi, Flerida, Texas and Minneseta -- have already
settled with the industry fer a tetal ef $40 billien.

Hewever, Wiscensin Atterney General James Deyle said the agreement is
much better than the $368.5 billien settlement atterneys general reached
last
year that later cellapsed in Cengress. The new deal deesn't need
cengressienal actien.

"The questien is whether the public health advances and the meney
invelved is eneugh fer Wiscensin to. say that it's time new to. move past
litigatien and fecus en cessation, " Deyle said Sunday.

Nebraska Atterney General Den Stenberg was leaning toward accepting
the deal because it appeared the state weuld gain mere than it ceuld by
pursuing its case.

One ef the chief architects ef the settlement, Washingten state Atterney
General Christine Gregeire, cenceded that the deal fell short ef what
industry critics weuld like.

"There is mere to. be dene legislatively, but we think this represents mere
than they can expect to. receive in the ceurts," she said.

Cennecticut Attorney General Richard Blumenthal teld The Hartferd
Ceurant that the deal falls shert ef the 1997 agreement but "may be the
best we can achieve new. ' ,

Tebacce analysts will be watching Massachusetts, Maryland and Michigan
fer their reactien. Massachusetts Atterney General Scett Harshbarger was
a state negetiator but walked eut ef the talks in late August and
questiened
the industry's commitment to. curbing underage smeking. Maryland and
Michigan are censidered to. have streng cases against the industry.

Public health advecates declined to. recommend whether the states sheuld
embrace the settlement.

"We think it's a pesitive step ferward in the war en tebacce, but it's
net the
answer and deesn't itself previde a natienal tebacce centrol pelicy, " said
Diane Caneva, speaking fer the American Heart Associatien.

She said federal legislatien is still needed to. give the Foed and Drug
Administratien autherity ever tebacce preducts.

Anti-smeking activist Bill Nevelli ef the Campaign fer Tebacce-Free Kids

.'
     said local public health officials were being alerted to make sure the
     money
     that would go to the states through the year 2025 --isn't diverted to
     non-public health areas. ' ,

     --There is going to a huge food fight over these dollars, "   he said.

     The negotiating states in addition to Washington were California, New
     York, North Carolina, Colorado, Oklahoma, North Dakota and
     pennsylvania.

     A separate deal was struck Saturday with U.S. Tobacco Co., the leading
     maker of chewing tobacco, Gregoire said. It would pay about $100 million
     over 10 years for education on the dangers of tobacco in exchange for state
     claims settlements.


         Copyright. 1998 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. The
     information
        contained in the AP News report may not be published, broadcast,
     rewritten, or
          redistributed without the prior written authority of The Associated
     Press.
                 See our Important Disclaimers and Legal Information.
                          Questions or Comments?


