RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-NOV-1998 12:38:34.00

SUBJECT:   Text of State Settlement Agreement

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]         )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Patrick G. Locke ( CN=Patrick G. Locke/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Richard J. Turman ( CN=Richard J. Turman/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: William H. White Jr.    (CN=William H. White Jr./OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]     )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Victoria A. Wachino ( CN=Victoria A. Wachino/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Frank J. Seidl III ( CN=Frank J. Seidl III/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: DanielN. Mendelson ( CN=Daniel N. Mendelson/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Emory L. Mayfield ( CN=Emory L. Mayfield/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Fred DuVal ( CN=Fred DuVal/OU=WHO/O=EOP     @   EOP [ WHO]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This 100 page document was posted on the web (www.tobacco.org) from ABC
news.  OMB does this change your thoughts on price per pack? ==================== A
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00;00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D99]MAIL47397002L.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043ll050000010A020l0000000205000000F9AB04000002000014207AAF579FODF714ASOA
0267E78AI0457BC5CC540263BB9584CD220E5C9DBE72B13870DB78CCF39142627F65F96A30BF41
08B644244BBEC0343944FFE3525C6D599BF5FDA6A7901E6EBBFDEBF30ASE8A4D37B96FFFI014C9
                                                  Hex-Dump ConveNion
ABCNEWS.com
 The full text of the Master Settlement Agreement:

      MASTER SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT

      This Master Settlement Agreement is made by the
undersigned Settling State officials (on behalf of their
respective Settling States) and the undersigned Participating
Manufacturers to settle and resolve with finality all Released
Claims against the Participating Manufacturers and related
entities as set forth herein.
      This Agreement constitutes the documentation effecting
this settlement with respect to each Settling State, and is
intended to and shall be binding upon each Settling State and
each Participating Manufacturer in accordance with the terms
hereof.

1. RECITALS
      WHEREAS, more than 40 States have commenced
litigation asserting various, claims for monetary, equitable and
injunctive relief against certain tobacco product manufacturers
and others as defendants, and the States that have not filed
suit can potentially assert similar claims;
      WHEREAS, the Settling States that have commenced
litigation have sought to obtain equitable relief and damages
under state laws, including consumer protection and/or
antitrust laws, in order to further the Settling States' policies
regarding public health, including policies adopted to achieve
a significant reduction in smoking by Youth;
      WHEREAS, defendants have denied each and every one
of the Settling States' allegations of unlawful conduct or
wrongdoing and have asserted a number of defenses to the
Settling States' claims, which defenses have been contested
by the Settling States;
      WHEREAS, the Settling States and the Participating
Manufacturers are committed to reducing underage tobacco
use by discouraging such use and by preventing Youth access
to Tobacco Products;
      WHEREAS, the Participating Manufacturers recognize
the concern of the tobacco grower community that it may be


                                  1
consumption resulting from this settlement, reaffirm their
commitment to work cooperatively to address concerns.
about the potential adverse economic impact on such
community, and will, within 30 days after the MSA Execution
Date, meet with the political leadership of States with grower
communities to address these economic concerns;
      WHEREAS, the undersigned Settling State officials
believe that entry into this Agreement and unifonn consent
decrees with the tobacco industry is necessary in order to
further the Settling States' policies designed to reduce Youth
smoking, to promote the public health and to secure
monetary payments to the Settling States; and
      WHEREAS, the Settling States and the Participating
Manufacturers wish to avoid the further expense, delay,
inconvenience, burden and uncertainty of continued litigation
(including appeals from any verdicts), and, therefore, have
agreed to settle their respective lawsuits and potential claims
pursuant to terms which will achieve for the Settling States
and their citizens significant funding for the advancement of
public health, the implementation of important
tobacco-related public health measures, including the
enforcement of the mandates and restrictions related to such
measures, as well as funding for a national Foundation
dedicated to significantly reducing the use of Tobacco
Products by Youth;
      NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT KNOWN THAT, in
consideration of the implementation of tobacco-related health
measures and the payments to be made by the Participating
Manufacturers, the release and discharge of all claims by the
Settling States, and such other consideration as described
herein, the sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the
Settling States and the Participating Manufacturers, acting by
and through their authorized agents, memorialize and agree as
follows:

II. DEFINITIONS
     (a) "Account" has the meaning given in the Escrow
Agreement.
     (b) "Adult" means any person or persons who are not
Underage.
     (c) "Adult-Only Facility" means a facility or restricted area
(whether open-air or enclosed) where the operator ensures

                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                  2
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
  identification as required under state law, or by checking the
  identification of any person appearing to be under the age of
  27) that no Underage person is present. A facility or
  restricted area need not be permanently restricted to Adults
.in order to constitute an Adult-Only Facility, provided that
  the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe that
  no Underage person is present during the event or time
  period in question.
        (d) "Affiliate" means a person who directly or indirectly
  owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under
  common ownership or control with, another person. Solely
  for purposes of this definition, the terms "owns," "is owned"
  and "ownership" mean ownership of an equity interest, or the
  equivalent thereof, of 10 percent or more, and the term
  "person" means an individual, partnership, committee,
  association, corporation or any other organization or group of
  persons.
        (e) "Agreement" means this Master Settlement
  Agreement, together with exhibits hereto, as it may be
  amended pursuant to subsection XVIII(j).
        (f) "Allocable Share" means the percentage set forth for
  the State in question as listed in Exhibit A hereto, without
  regard to any subsequent alteration or modification of such
  State's percentage share agreed to by or among any States;
  or, solely for the purpose of calculating payments under
  subsection IX(c)(2) (and corresponding payments under
  subsection IX(i», the percentage disclosed for the State in
  question pursuant to subsection IX(c)(2)(A) prior to June 30,
  1999, without regard to any subsequent alteration or
. modification of such State's percentage share agreed to by or
  among any States.
        (g) "Allocated Payment" means a particular Settling State's
  Allocable Share of the sum of all of the payments to be made
  by the Original Participating Manufacturers in the year in
  question pursuant to subsections IX(c)(I) and IX(c)(2), as
  such payments have been adjusted, reduced and allocated
  pursuant to clause "First" through the first sentence of clause
  "Fifth" of subsection IX(j), but before application of the other
  offsets and adjustments described in . clauses "Sixth" through
  "Thirteenth" of subsection IXO).
        (h) "Bankruptcy" means, with respect to any entity, the
  commencement of a case or other proceeding (whether


                                   3               Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex.DwnP Conversion
reorganization, rehabilitation, receivership, conservatorship,
or other relief with respect to such entity or its debts under
any bankruptcy, insolvency or similar law now or hereafter in
effect; (2) the appointment of a trustee, receiver, liquidator,
custodian or similar official of such entity or· any substantial
part of its business or property; (3) the consent of such entity
to any of the relief described in (1 ) above or to the
appointment of any official described in (2) above in any such
case or other proceeding involuntarily commenced against
such entity; or (4) the entry of an order for relief as to such
entity under the federal bankruptcy laws as now or hereafter
in effect. Provided, however, that an involuntary case or
proceeding otherwise within the foregoing definition shall not
be a "Bankruptcy" if it is or was dismissed within 60 days of
its commencement.
      (i) "Brand Name" means a brand name (alone or in
conjunction with any.other word), trademark, logo, symbol,
motto, selling message, recognizable pattern of colors, or any
other indication of product identification identical or similar to,
or identifiable with, those used for any domestic brand of
Tobacco Products. Provided, however, that the term "Brand
Name" shall not include the corporate name of any Tobacco
Product Manufacturer that does not after the MSA Execution
Date sell a brand of Tobacco Products in the States that
includes such corporate name.
      G) "Brand Name Sponsorship" means an athletic, musical,
artistic, or other social or cultural event as to which payment
is made (or other consideration is provided) in exchange for
use of a Brand Name or Names (1 ) as part of the name of
the event or (2) to identify, advertise, or promote such event
or an entrant, participant or team in such event in any other
way. Sponsorship of a single national or multi-state series or
tour (for example, NASCAR (including any number of
NASCAR races), or of one or more events within a single
national or multi-state series or tour, or of an entrant,
participant, or team taking part in events sanctioned by a
single approving organization (e.g., NASCAR or CART),
constitutes one Brand Name Sponsorship.
      Sponsorship of an entrant, participant, or team by a
Participating Manufacturer using a Brand Name or Names in
an event that is part of a series or tour that is sponsored by
such Participating Manufacturer or that is part of a series or


                                  4
                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
Participating Manufacturer does not constitute a separate
Brand Name Sponsorship.
      Sponsorship of an entrant, participant, or team by a
Participating Manufacturer using a Brand Name or Names in
any event (or series of events) not sponsored by such
Participating Manufacturer constitutes a Brand Name
Sponsorship. The term "Brand Name Sponsorship" shall not
include an event in an Adult-Only Facility.
      (k) "Business Day" means a day which is not a Saturday
or Sunday or legal holiday on which banks are authorized or
required to close in New York, New York.
      (1) "Cartoon" means any drawing or other depiction of an
object, person, animal, creature or any similar caricature that
satisfies any ofthe following criteria:
      (1) the use of comically exaggerated features;
      (2) the attribution of human characteristics to animals,
plants or other objects, or the similar use of anthropomorphic
technique; or
      (3) the attribution of unnatural or extrahuman abilities,
such as imperviousness to pain or injury, X-ray vision,
tunneling at very high speeds or transformation.
      The term "Cartoon" includes "Joe Camel," but does not
include any drawing or other depiction that on July 1, 1998,.
was in use in any State in any Participating Manufacturer's
corporate logo or in any Participating Manufacturer's
Tobacco Product packaging.
      (m) "Cigarette" means any product that contains nicotine,
is intended to be burned or heated under ordinary conditions
of use, and consists of or contains (1) any roll of tobacco
wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing tobacco;
or (2) tobacco, in any form, that is functional in the product,
which, because of its appearance, the type oftobacco used in
the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered
to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette; or (3) any roll
of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco
which, because of its appearance, the type oftobacco used in
the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered
to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette described in
clause (I) ofthis definition.
      The term "Cigarette" includes "roll-your-own" (i.e., any
tobacco which, because of its appearance, type, packaging,
or labeling is suitable for use and likely to be offered to, or


                                   5
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Except as provided in subsections II(z) and n(mm), 0.0325
ounces of "roll-your-own" tobacco shall constitute one
individual "Cigarette."
      (n) "Claims" means any and all manner of civil (i.e.,
non-criminal): claims, demands, actions, suits, causes of
action, damages (whenever incurred), liabilities of any nature
including-civil penalties and punitive damages, as well as
costs, expenses and attorneys' fees (except as to the Original
Participating Manufacturers' obligations under section XVII),
known or unknown, suspected or unsuspected, accrued or
unaccrued, whether legal, equitable, or statutory.
      (0) "Consent Decree" means a state-specific consent
decree as described in subsection XIIl(b )(l)(B) of this
Agreement.
      (P) "Court" means the respective court in each Settling
State to which this Agreement and the Consent Decree are
presented for approval and/or entry as to that Settling State.
      (q) "Escrow" has the meaning given in the Escrow
Agreement.
      (r) "Escrow Agent" means the escrow agent under the
Escrow Agreement.
      "Escrow Agreement" means an escrow agreement
substantially in the form of (t) "Federal Tobacco Legislation
Offset" means the offset described in section (u) "Final
Approval" means the earlier of: (1) the date by which
State-Specific Finality in a sufficient number of Settling States
has occurred; or (2) June 30, 2000.
      For the purposes of this subsection (u), "State-Specific
Finality in a sufficient number of Settling States" means that
State-Specific Finality has occurred in both:
      (A) a number of Settling States equal to at least 80% of
the total number of Settling States; and
      (B) Settling States having aggregate Allocable Shares
equal to at least 80% of the total aggregate Allocable Shares
assigned to all Settling States. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the Original Participating Manufacturers may, by unanimous
written agreement, waive any requirement for Final Approval
set forth in subsections (A) or (B) hereof.
      (v) "Foundation" means the foundation described in
section VI.
      (w) "Independent Auditor" means the firm described in
subsection XI(b).


                                  6                   Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
accordance with the fonnulas for inflation adjustments set
forth in Exhibit C.
     (y) "Litigating Releasing Parties Offset" means the offset
described in subsection XU(b).
     (z) "Market Share" means a Tobacco Product
Manufacturer's respective share (expressed as a percentage)
ofthe total number of individual Cigarettes sold in the fifty
United States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico
during the applicable calendar year, as measured by excise
taxes collected by the federal government and, in the case of
sales in Puerto Rico, arbitrios de cigarillos collected by the
Puerto Rico taxing authority.
     For purposes of the definition and detennination of
"Market Share" with respect to calculations under subsection
IX(i), 0.09 ounces of'roll your own" tobacco shall constitute
one individual Cigarette; for purposes of the definition and
detennination of "Market Share" with respect to all other
calculations, 0.0325 ounces of "roll your own" tobacco shall
constitute one individual Cigarette.
     (act) "MSA Execution Date" means November 23,1998.
     (bb) "NAAG" means the National Association of
Attorneys General, or its successor organization that is
directed by the Attorneys General to perfonn certain
functions under this Agreement.
     (cc) "Non-Participating Manufacturer" means any
Tobacco Product Manufacture that is not a Participating
Manufacturer.
     (dd) "Non-Settling States Reduction" means a reduction
detennined by multiplying the amount to which such reduction
applies by the aggregate Allocable Shares of those States that
are not Settling States on the date 15 days before such
payment is due.
     (ee) "Notice Parties" means each Participating
Manufacturer, each Settling State, Escrow Agent, the
Independent Auditor and NAAG.
       (95) "NPM Adjustment" means the adjustment specified
in subsection IX(d).
     (gg) "NPM Adjustment Percentage" means the
percentage detennined pursuant to subsection IX( d).
     (hh) "Original Participating Manufacturers" means the
following: Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation,
Lorillard Tobacco Company, Philip Morris Incorporated and


                                 7
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
successors of each ofthe foregoing. Except as expressly
provided in this Agreement, once an entity becomes an
Original Participating Manufacturer, such entity shall
permanently retain the status of Original Participating
Manufacturer.
     (ii) "Outdoor Advertising" means (1) billboards, (2) signs
and placards in arenas, stadiums, shopping malls and Video
Game Arcades (whether any of the foregoing are open air or
enclosed) (but not including any such sign or placard located
in an Adult-Only Facility), and (3) any other advertisements
placed (A) outdoors, or (B) on the inside surface of a
window facing outward.
     Provided, however, that the term "Outdoor Advertising"
does not mean ( 1 ) an advertisement on the outside of a
Tobacco Product manufacturing facility; (2) an individual
advertisement that does not occupy an area larger than 14
square feet (and that neither is placed in such proximity to any
other such advertisement so as to create a single
"mosaic" -type advertisement-larger than 14 square feet, nor
functions solely as a segment of a larger advertising unit or
series), and that is placed (A) on the outside of any retail
establishment that sells Tobacco Products (other than solely
through a vending machine), (B) outside (but on the property
ot) any such establishment, or (C) on the inside· surface of a
window facing outward in any such establishment; (3) an _
advertisement inside a retail establishment that sells Tobacco
Products (other than solely through a vending machine) that is
not placed on the inside surface of a window facing outward;
or (4) an outdoor advertisement at the site of an event to be
held at an Adult-Only Facility that is placed at such site
during the period the facility or enclosed area constitutes an
Adult-Only Facility, but in no event more than 14 days before
the event, and that does not advertise any Tobacco Product
(other than by using a Brand Name to identify the event).
      Gj) "Participating Manufacturer" means a Tobacco
Product Manufacturer that is or becomes a signatory to this
Agreement, provided that (1 ) in the case of a Tobacco
Product Manufacturer that is not an Original Participating
Manufacturer, such Tobacco Product Manufacturer is bound
by this Agreement and the Consent Decree (or, in any
Settling State that does not permit amendment of the Consent
Decree, a consent decree containing terms identical to those


                                  8
                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
this Agreement and the Consent Decree binds Original
Participating Manufacturers (provided, however, that such
Tobacco Product Manufacturer need only become bound by
the Consent Decree in those Settling States in which the
Settling State has filed a Released Claim against it), and (2) in
the case of a Tobacco Product Manufacturer that signs this
Agreement after the MSA Execution Date, such Tobacco
Product Manufacturer, within a reasonable period of time
after signing this Agreement, makes any payments (including
interest thereon at the Prime Rate) that it would have been
obligated to make in the intervening period had it been a
signatory as of the MSA Execution Date. "Participating
Manufacturer" shall also include the successor of a
Participating Manufacturer. Except as expressly provided in
this Agreement, once an entity becomes a Participating
Manufacturer such entity shall permanently retain the status of
Participating Manufacturer.
      Each Participating Manufacturer shall regularly report its
shipments of Cigarettes in or to the fifty United States, the
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico to Management
Science Associates, Inc. (or a successor entity as set forth in
subsection (mm». Solely for purposes of calculations
pursuant to subsection IX(d), a Tobacco Product
Manufacturer that is not a signatory to this Agreement shall
be deemed to be a "Participating Manufacturer" if the Original
Participating Manufacturers unanimously consent in writing.
      (kk) "Previously Settled States Reduction" means a
reduction determined by multiplying the amount to which such
reduction applies by 12.4500000%, in the case of payments
due in or prior to 2007; 12.2373756%, in the case of
payments due after 2007 but before 2018; and
11.0666667%, in the case of payments due in or after 2018.
      (11) "Prime Rate" shall mean the prime rate as published
from time to time by the Wall Street Journal or, in the event
the Wall Street Journal is no longer published or no longer
publishes such rate, an equivalent successor reference rate
determined by the Independent Auditor.
      (mm) "Relative Market Share" means an Original
Participating Manufacturer's respective share (expressed as a
percentage) of the total number of individual Cigarettes
shipped in or to the fifty United States, the District of
Columbia and Puerto Rico by all the Original Participating


                                  9             Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex..Dump Conversion
  preceding -e year in which the payment at issue is due
  (regardless of when such payment is made), as measured by
  the Original Participating Manufacturers' reports of shipments
  of Cigarettes to Management Science Associates, Inc. (or a
  successor entity acceptable to both Original Participating
  Manufacturers and a majority of those Attorneys General
   who are both the Attorney General of a Settling State and a
  member of the NAAG executive committee at the time in
  question).
        A Cigarette shipped by more than one Participating
  Manufacturer shall be deemed to have been shipped solely
  by the first Participating Manufacturer to do so. For purposes
  of the definition and detemiination of "Re1ative Market
  Share,"0.09 ounces of'roll your own" tobacco shall
  constitute one individual Cigarette.
        (nn) "Released Claims" means:
        (1) for past conduct, acts or omissions (including any
  damages incurred in the future arising from such past conduct,
  acts or omissions), those Claims directly or indirectly based
  on, arising out of or in any way related, in whole or in part, to
  (A) the use, sale, distribution, manufacture, development,
  advertising, marketing or health effects of, (B) the exposure
  to, or (C) research, statements, or warnings regarding,
  Tobacco Products (including, but not limited to, the Claims
  asserted in the actions identified in Exhibit D, or any
  comparable Claims that were, could be or could have been
. asserted now or in the future in those actions or in any
  comparable action in federal, state or local court brought by a
  Settling State or a Releasing Party (whether or not such
  Settling State or Releasing Party has brought such action»,
  except for claims not asserted in the actions identified in
  Exhibit D for outstanding liability under existing licensing (or
  similar) fee laws or existing tax laws (but not excepting claims
  for any tax liability of the Tobacco-Related Organizations or
  of any Released Party with respect to such Tobacco-Related
  Organizations, which claims are covered by the release and
  covenants set forth in this Agreement);
         (2) for future conduct, acts or omissions, only those
  monetary Claims directly or indirectly based on, arising out of
  or in any way related to, in whole or in part, the use of or
  exposure to Tobacco Products manufactured in the ordinary
  course of business, including without limitation any future

                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                   10
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
associated with the use of or exposure to Tobacco Products.
      (00) "Released Parties" means all Participating
Manufacturers and their past, present and future Affiliates,
divisions, officers, directors, employees, representatives,
insurers, lenders, underwriters, Tobacco-Related
Organizations, trade associations, suppliers, agents, auditors,
advertising agencies, public relations entities, attorneys,
retailers and distributors (and the predecessors, heirs,
executors, administrators, successors and assigns of each of
the foregoing).
      Provided, however, that "Rei eased Parties" does not
include any person or entity (including, but not limited to, an
Aff~liate) that is itself a Non-Participating Manufacturer at
any time after the MSA Execution Date, unless such person
or entity becomes a Participating Manufacturer. (Pp)
"Releasing Parties" means each Settling State and any of its
past, present and future agents, officials acting in their official
capacities, legal representatives, agencies, departments,
commissions and divisions; and also means, to the full extent
of the power of the signatories hereto to release past, present
and future claims, the following: (1) any Settling State's
subdivisions (political or otherwise, including, but not limited
to, municipalities, counties, parishes, villages, unincorporated
districts and hospital districts), public entities, public
instrumentalities and public educational institutions; and (2)
persons or entities acting in a parens patriae, sovereign,
quasi-sovereign, private attorney general, qui tam, taxpayer,
or any other capacity, whether or not any of them participate
in this settlement, (A) to the extent that any such person or
entity is seeking relief on behalf of or generally applicable to
the general public in such Settling State or the people of the
State, as opposed solely to private or individual relief for
separate and distinct injuries, or (B) to the extent that any
such entity (as opposed to an individual) is seeking recovery
of health-care expenses (other than premium or capitation
payments for the benefit of present or retired state
employees) paid or reimbursed, directly or indirectly, by a
Settling State.
      (qq) "Settling State" means any State that signs this
Agreement on or before the MSA Execution Date. Provided;
however, that the term "Settling State" shall not include (1)
the States of Mississippi, Florida, Texas and Minnesota; and


                                   11               Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
tenninated.
      (rr)"State" means any state of the United States, the
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the
Northern Marianas.
      (ss) "State-Specific Finality" means, with respect to the
Settling State in guestion:
      (1) this Agreement and the Consent Decree have been
approved and entered by the Court as to all Original
Panicipating Manufacturers, or, in the event of an appeal from
or review of a decision of the Court to withhold its approval
and entry of this Agreement and the Consent Decree, by the
court hearing such appeal or conducting such review; .
       (2) entry by the Court has been made of an order
dismissing with prejudice all claims against Released Parties in
the action as provided herein; and (3) the time for appeal or
to seek review of or pennission to appeal ("Appeal") from
the approval and entry as described in subsection (1)(A)
hereof and entry of such order described in subsection (1
)(B) hereof has expired; or, in the event of an Appeal from
such approval and entry, the Appeal has been dismissed, or
the approval and entry described in (1 )(A) hereof and the
order described in subsection (1)(B) hereof have been
affinned in all material respects by the court oflast resort to
which such Appeal has been taken and such dismissal or
affinnance has become no longer subject to further Appeal
(including, without limitation, review by the United States
Supreme Court).
     (tt) "Subsequent Participating Manufacturer" means a
Tobacco Product Manufacturer (other than an Original
Participating Manufacturer) that: (I ) is a Participating
Manufacturer, and (2) is a signatory to this Agreement,
regardless of when such Tobacco Product Manufacturer
became a signatory to this Agreement. "Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer" shall also include the successors
of a Subsequent Participating Manufacturer.
     Except as expressly provided in this Agreement, once an
entity becomes a Subsequent Participating Manufacturer such
entity shall pennanently retain the status of Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer, unless it agrees to assume the
obligations of an Original Participating Manufacturer as
provided in subsection XVIII(c). (uu) "Tobacco Product


                                 12
                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex.-Dump Conversion
Date directly (and not exclusively through any Affiliate):
       (1) manufactures Cigarettes anywhere that such
manufacturer intends to be sold in the States, including
Cigarettes intended to be sold in the States through an
importer (except where such importer is an Original
Participating Manufacturer that will be responsible for the
payments under this Agreement with respect to such
Cigarettes as a result ofthe provisions of subsections II(mm)
and that pays the taxes specified in subsection II(z) on such
Cigarettes, and provided that the manufacturer of such
Cigarettes does not market or advertise such Cigarettes in the
States);
      (2) is the first purchaser anywhere for resale in the States
of Cigarettes manufactured anywhere that the manufacturer
does not intend to be sold in the States; or
      (3) becomes a successor of an entity described in
subsection (1) or (2) above. The term "Tobacco Product
Manufacturer" shall not include an Affiliate of a Tobacco
Product Manufacturer unless such Affiliate itself falls within
any of subsections ( I ) - (3) above.
      (w) "Tobacco Products" means Cigarettes and smokeless
tobacco products. (ww) "Tobacco-Related Organizations"
means the Council for Tobacco Research-U.S.A., Inc., The
Tobacco Institute, Inc. ("TI"), and the Center for Indoor Air
Research, Inc. ("CIAR") and the successors, ifany, ofTI or
CIAR.
      (xx) "Transit Advertisements" means advertising on or
within private or public vehicles and all advertisements placed
at, on or within any bus stop, taxi stand, transportation
waiting area, train station, airport or any similar location.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tenn "Transit
Advertisements" does not include (1) any advertisement
placed in, on or outside the premises of any retail
establishment that sells Tobacco Products (other than solely
through a vending machine) (except if such individual
advertisement (A) occupies an area larger than 14 square
feet; (B) is placed in such proximity to any other such
advertisement so as to create a single "mosaic"-type
advertisement larger than 14 square feet; or (C) functions
solely as a segment of a larger advertising unit or series); or
(2) advertising at the site of an event to be held at an
Adult-Only Facility that is placed at such site during the


                                  13               Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
Facility, but in no event more than 14 days before the event,
and that does not advertise any Tobacco Product (other than
by using a Brand Name to identify the event).
     (-w- ) "Underage" means younger than the minimum age
at which it is legal purchase or possess (whichever minimum
age is older) Cigarettes in the applicable Settling State.
     (zz) "Video Game Arcade" means an entertainment
establishment primarily consisting of video games (other than
video games intended primarily for use by persons 18 years
of age or older) and/or pinball machines.
     (aaa) "Volume Adjustment" means an upward or
downward adjustment in accordance with the formula for
volume adjustments set forth in Exhibit E.
     (bbb) "Youth" means any person or persons under 18
years 111.

ill. PERMANENT RELIEF (a) Prohibition on Youth
Targeting. No Participating Manufacturer may take any
promotion or marketing of Tobacco Products, or take any
action the primary purpose of which is to initiate, maintain or
increase the incidence of Youth smoking within any Settling
State.
      (b) Ban on Use of Cartoon . Beginning 180 days after the
MSA Execution Date, no Participating Manufacturer may use
or cause to be used any Cartoon in the advertising,
promoting, packaging or labeling of Tobacco Products.
      (c) Limitation of Tobacco Brand Name Sponsorsh ps. (1)
Prohibited Sponsorships. After the MSA Execution Date, no .
Participating Manufacturer may engage in any Brand Name
Sponsorship in any State consisting of:
      (A) concerts; or
      (B) events in which the intended audience is comprised of
a sign)ficant percentage of Youth; or
      (C) events in which any paid participants or contestants
are Youth; or
      (D) any athletic event between opposing teams in any
football, basketball, baseball, soccer or hockey league. (2)
Limited Sponsorships.
      (A) No Participating Manufacturer may engage in more
than one Brand Name Sponsorship in the States in any
twelve-month period (such period measured from the date of
the initial sponsored event).

                                                   .              M      ement system
                                14             A\itofl\ated Records anag
                                               lIex.D\IIIlP Conversion
subsection (2)(A) above shall require a Participating
Manufacturer to breach or tenninate any sponsorship
contract in existence as of August 1, 1 998 (until the earlier of
(x) the current tenn of any existing contract, without regard to
any renewal or option that may be exercised by such
Participating Manufacturer or (y) three years after the MSA
Execution Date); and
      (ii) notwithstanding subsection (l)(A) above, Brown &
Williamson Tobacco Corporation may sponsor either the C
country music festival or the Kool jazz festival as its one a
Brand Name Sponsorship pennitted pursuant to subsection
as well as onf1 Brand Name Sponsorship pennitted pursuan
subsection (2)(B)(i).
      (3) Related Sponsorship Restrictions. With respect to any
Brand] Sponsorship pennitted under this subsection (c): (A)
advertising of the Brand Name Sponsorship event shal
advertise any Tobacco Product (other than by using the
Brand Narr identify such Brand Name Sponsorship event);
(B) no Participating Manufacturer may refer to a Brand Na
Sponsorship event or to a celebrity or other person in such an
even! advertising of a Tobacco Product;
      (C) nothing contained in the provisions of subsection m(e)
of this Agreement shall apply to actions taken by any
Participating Manufacturer in connection with a Brand Name
Sponsorship pennitted pursuant to the provisions of
subsections (2)(A) and (2)(B)(i); the Brand Name
Sponsorship pennitted by subsection (2)(B)(ii) shall be
subject to the restrictions of subsection m( e) except that such
restrictions shall not prohibit use of the Brand Name to
identify the Brand Name Sponsorship;
      (D) nothing contained in the provisions of subsections
m(t) and m(i) shall apply to apparel or other merchandise: (i)
marketed, distributed, offered, sold, or licensed at the site of
a Brand Name Sponsorship pennitted pursuant to
subsections (2)(A) or (2)(B)(i) by the person to which the
relevant Participating Manufacturer has provided payment in
exchange for the use ofthe relevant Brand Name in the
Brand N~e Sponsorship or a third-party that does not
receive payment from the relevant Participating Manufacturer
(or any Aff~liate of such Participating Manufacturer) in
connection with the marketing, distribution, offer, sale or
license of such apparel or other merchandise; or (ii) used at


                                 15            Automated Records Management System
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
subsection (2)(A) or (2)(B)(i) (during such event) that are not
distributed (by sale or otherwise) to any member of the
general public; and
      (E) nothing contained in the provisions of subsection III(d)
shall: (i) apply to the use of a Brand Name on a vehicle used
in a Brand Name Sponsorship; or (ii) apply to Outdoor
Advertising advertising the Brand Name Sponsorship, to the
extent that such Outdoor Advertising is placed at the site of a
Brand Name Sponsorship no more than 90 days before the
start of the initial sponsored event, is removed within 10 days
after the end of the last sponsored event, and is not
prohibited by subsection (3)(A) above.
      (4) Corporate Name Sponsorships: Nothing in this
subsection (c) shall prevent a Participating Manufacturer from
sponsoring or causing to be sponsored any aWetic, musical,
artistic, or other social or cultural event, or any entrant,
participant or team in such event (or series of events) in the
name ofthe corporation which manufactures Tobacco
Products, , provided that the COT name does not include
any Brand Name of domestic Tobacco Products.
      (5) Naming Rights Prohibition: No Participating
Manufacturer may enter into any agreement for the naming
rights of any stadium or arena located within a Settling State
using a Brand Name, and shall not otherwise cause a stadium
or arena located within a Settling State to be named with a
Brand Name.
      (6) Prohibition on on Sponsoring Teams and Leagues: No
Participating Manufacturer may enter into any agreement
pursuant to which payment is made (or other consideration is
provided) by such Participating Manufacturer to any football,
basketball, baseball, soccer or hockey league (or any team
involved in any such league) in exchange for use of a Brand
Name.
      (d) Elimination of Outdoor Advertising and Transit
Advertisements. Each Participating Manufacturer shall
discontinue Outdoor Advertising and Transit Advertisements
advertising Tobacco Products within the Settling States as set
forth herein.
      ( 1 ) Removal. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, each Participating Manufacturer shall remove from
within the Settling States within 150 days after the MSA
Execution Date all of its (A) billboards (to the extent that such


                                 16             Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Tobacco Products; (B) signs and placards (to the extent that
such signs and placards constitute Outdoor Advertising)
advertising Tobacco Products in arenas, stadiums, shopping
malls and Video Game Arcades; and (C) Transit
Advertisements advertising Tobacco Products.
      (2) Prohibition on New Outdoor Advertising and Transit
Advertisements. No Participating Manufacturer may, after the
MSA Execution Date, place or cause to be placed any new
Outdoor Advertising advertising Tobacco Products or new
Transit Advertisements advertising Tobacco Products within
any Settling State.
      (3) Alternative Advertising. With respect to those
billboards required to be removed under subsection ( I ) that
are leased (as opposed to owned) by any Participating
Manufacturer, the Participating Manufacturer will allow the
Attorney General of the Settling State within which such
billboards are located to substitute, at the Settling State's
option, alternative advertising intended to discourage the use
of Tobacco Products by Youth and their exposure to
secondhand smoke for the remaining term ofthe applicable
contract (without regard to any renewal or option term that
may be exercised by such Participating Manufacturer). The
Participating Manufacturer will bear the cost of the lease
through the end of such remaining term. Any other costs
associated with such alternative advertising will be borne by
                                                                                       o
the Settling State.
      (4) Ban on Agreements Inhibiting Anti-Tobacco
Advertising. Each Participating Manufacturer agrees that it
will not enter into any agreement that prohibits a third party
from selling, purchasing or displaying advertising discouraging
the use of Tobacco Products or exposure to second-hand
smoke. In the event and to the extent that any Participating
Manufacturer has entered into an agreement containing any
such prohibition, such Participating Manufacturer agrees to
waive such prohibition in such agreement.
      (5) Designation of Contact Person. Each Participating
Manufacturer that has Outdoor Advertising or Transit
Advertisements advertising Tobacco Products within a
Settling State shall, within 10 days after the MSA Execution
Date, provide the Attorney General of such Settling State
with the name of a contact person to whom the Settling State
may direct inquiries during the time such Outdoor Advertising


                                17            Autotllllted Records Management System
                                              Heit.]jump Conversion
whom the Settling State may obtain periodic reports as to the
progress of their elimination.
      (6) Adult-Only Facilities. To the extent that any
advertisement advertising Tobacco Products located within
an Adult-Only Facility constitutes Outdoor Advertising or a
Transit Advertisement, this subsection (d) shall not apply to
such advertisement, provided such advertisement is not
visible to persons outside such Adult-Only Facility. (e)
Prohibition on Payments Related to Tobacco Product and
Media. No Participating Manufacturer may, beginning 30
days after the MSA Execution Date, make, or cause to be
made, any payment or other consideration to any other
person or entity to use, display, make reference to or use as
any prop any Tobacco Product, Tobacco Product package,
or advertisement for a Tobacco Product.
      Participating Manufacturer; (4) apply to coupons or other
items used by Adults solely in connection with the purchase
of Tobacco Products; or (5) apply to apparel or other
merchandise used within an Adult-Only Facility that is not
distributed (by sale or otherwise) to any member ofthe
general pUblic.
      (g) Ban on Youth Access to Free Samples. After the
MSA Execution Date, no Participating Manufacturer may,
within any Settling State, distribute or cause to be distributed
any free samples of Tobacco Products except in an
Adult-Only Facility. For purposes of this Agreement, a "free
sample" does not include a Tobacco Product that is provided
to an Adult in connection with ( 1 ) the purchase, exchange or
redemption for proof of purchase of any Tobacco Products
(including, but not limited to, a free offer in connection with
the purchase of Tobacco Prodoffered, sold, licensed, or
caused to be marketed, distributed, offered, sold or licensed
by such ucts, such as a "two-for-one" offer), or (') the
conducting of consumer testing or evaluation of Tobacco
Products with persons who certify that they are Adults.
      (h) Ban on Gifts to Underaged Persons Based on Proofs
of Purchase. Beginning one year after the MSA Execution
Date, no Participating Manufacturer may provide or cause to
be provided to any person without sufficient proof that such
person is an Adult any item in exchange for the purchase of
Tobacco Products, or the furnishing of credits,
proofs-of-purchase, or coupons with respect to such a


                                 18
                                                 AtMfll!!ted Records Management System
                                                 Hell-Dump Conversion
        For purposes of the preceding sentence only, (1) a
  driver's license or other government-issued identification or
  legible photocopy thereof), the validity of which is certified by
  the person to whom the item is provided, shall by itself be
  deemed to be a sufficient form of proof of age; and in the
  case of items provided (or to be redeemed) at retail
  establishments, a Participating Manufacturer shall be entitled
  to rely on verification of proof of age by the retailer, where
  such retailer is required to obtain verification under applicable
  federal. state or local law .
        (i) Limitation on Third party Use of Brand Names. After
  the MSA Execution Date, no Participating Manufacturer may
  license or otherwise expressly authorize any third party to use
  or advertise within any Settling State any Brand Name in a
  manner prohibited by this Agreement if done by such
  Participating Manufacturer itself.
        Each Participating Manufacturer shall, within 10 days after
  the MSA Execution Date, designate a person (and provide
  written notice to NAAG of such designation) to whom the
  Attorney General of any Settling State may provide written
  notice of any such third-party activity that would be
  prohibited by this Agreement if done by such Participating
  Manufacturer itself.
        Following such written notice, the Participating
  Manufacturer will promptly take commercially reasonable
  steps against any such non-de minimis third-party activity.
  Provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall
  require any Participating Manufacturer to (1 ) breach or
  terminate any licensing agreement or other contract in
  existence as of July 1, 1998 (this exception shall not apply
  beyond the current term of any existing contract, without
  regard to any renewal or option term that may be exercised
. by such Participating Manufacturer); or (2) retrieve, collect or
  otherwise recover any item that prior to the MSA Execution
  Date was marketed, distributed, offered, sold, licensed or
  caused to be marketed, distributed, offered, sol<!- or licensed
  by such Participating kl-ufacturer.
       G) Ban on Non-Tobacco Brand Names. No Participating
  Manufacturer may, pursuant to any agreement requiring the
  payment of money or other valuable consideration, use or
  cause to be used as a brand name of any Tobacco Product
  any nationally recognized or nationally established brand


                                  19
                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    H~·Dump Conversion
nationally recognized or nationally established sports team,
entertainment group or individual celebrity. Provided,
however, that the preceding sentence shall not apply to any
Tobacco Product brand name in existence as of July 1, 1998.
For the purposes ofthis subsection, the term "other valuable
consideration" shall not include an agreement between two
entities who enter into such agreement for the sole purpose of
avoiding inffingement claims. .
      (k) Minimum Pack Size of twenty Cigarrettes. No
Participating Manufacturer may, beginning 60 days after the
MSA Execution Date and through and including December
31, 2001, manufacture or cause to be manufactured for sale
in any Settling State any pack or other container of Cigarettes
containing fewer than 20 Cigarettes (or, in the case of
roll-your-own tobacco, any package of roll-your-own
tobacco containing less than 0.60 ounces of tobacco).
      No Participating Manufacturer may, beginning 150 days
afler the MSA Execution Date and through and including
December 31 , 200 1 , sell or distribute in any Settling State
any pack or other container of Cigarettes containing fewer
than 20 Cigarettes (or, in the case of roll-your-own tobacco,
any package of roll-yourown tobacco containing less than
0.60 ounces of tobacco).
      Each Participating Manufacturer further agrees that
following the MSA Execution Date it shall not oppose, or
cause to be opposed (including through any third party or
Affiliate), the passage by any Settling State of any legislative
proposal or administrative rule applicable to all Tobacco
Product Manufacturers and all retailers of Tobacco Products·
prohibiting the manufacture and sale of any pack or other
container of Cigarettes containing fewer than 20 Cigarettes
(or, in the case of roll-your-own tobacco, any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than 0.60 ounces of
tobacco).
      (l) Corporate Culture Commitments Related to Youth
Access and Consumption. Beginning 180 days after the
MSA Execution Date each Participating Manufacturer shall:
      (l) promulgate or reaffirm corporate principles that
express and explain its commitment to comply with the
provisions of this Agreement and the reduction of use of
Tobacco Products by Youth, and clearly and regularly
communicate to its employees and customers its commitment


                                 20             Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
        (2) designate an executive level manager (and provide
  written notice to NAAG of such designation) to identify
  methods to reduce Youth access to, and the incidence of
  Youth consumption of, Tobacco Products; and (3)
  encourage its employees to identify additional methods to
  reduce Youth access to, and the incidence of Youth
  consumption of, Tobacco Products.
        (m) Limitations on Lobbying. Following State-Specific
  Finality in a Settling State:
        (1) No Participating Manufacturer may oppose, or cause
. to be opposed (including through any third party or A~liate),
  the passage by such Settling State (or any political subdivision
  thereof) of those state or local legislative proposals or
  administrative rules described in Exhibit F hereto intended by
  their terms to reduce Youth access to, and the incidence of
  Youth consumption of, Tobacco Products.
        Provided, however, that the foregoing does not prohibit
  any Participating Manufacturer from (A) challenging
  enforcement of, or suing for declaratory or injunctive relief
  with respect to, any such legislation or rule on any grounds;
  (B) continuing, after State-Specific Finality in such Settling
  State, to oppose or cause to be opposed, the passage during
  the legislative session in which State-Specific Finality in such
  Settling State occurs of any specific state or local legislative
  proposals or administrative rules introduced prior to the time
  of State Specific Finality in such Settling State; (C) opposing,
  or causing to be opposed, any excise tax or income, tax
  provision or user fee or other payments relating to Tobacco
  Products or Tobacco Product Manufacturers;· or (D)
  opposing, or causing to be opposed, any state or local
  legislative proposal or administrative rule that also includes
  measures other than those described in Exhibit F.
        (2) Each Participating Manufacturer shall require all of its
  of ficers and employees engaged in lobbying activities in such
  Settling State after State Specific Finality, contract lobbyists
  engaged in lobbying activities in such Settling State after
  State-Specific Finality, and any other third parties who
  engage in lobbying activities in such Settling State after
  State-Specific Finality on behalf of such Participating
 Manufacturer ("lobbyist" and "lobbying activities" having the
 meaning such terms have under the law of the Settling State in
.question) to certify in writing to the Participating


                                   21            Automated ReilOrds Management System
                                                 Hex-DIiiDp Conversion
      (A) will not support or oppose any state, local or federal
legislation, or seek or oppose any governmental action, on
behalf of the Participating Manufacturer without the
Participating Manufacturer's express authorization (except
where such advance express authorization is not reasonably
practicable);
      (B) are aware of and will fully comply with this Agreement
and all laws and reg~lations applicable to their lobbying
activities, including, without limitation, those related to
disclosure of financial contributions.                .
      Provided, however, that ifthe Settling State in question
has in existence no laws or regulations relating to disclosure
of financial contributions regarding lobbying activities, then
each Participating Manufacturer shall, upon request of the
Attorney General of such Settling State, disclose to such
Attorney General any payment to a lobbyist that the
Participating Manufacturer knows or has reason to know will
be used to influence legislative or administrative actions of the
state or local government relating to Tobacco Products or
their use.
      Disclosures made pursuant to the preceding sentence shall
be filed in writing with the Office of the Attorney General on
the first day of February and the first day of August of each
year for any and all payments made during the six month
period ending on the last day ofthe preceding December and
June, respectively, with the following information: (1) the
name, address, telephone number and e-mail address (if any)
of the recipient; (2) the amount of each payment; and (3) the
aggregate amount of all payments described in this subsection
(2)(B) to the recipient in the calendar year; and
      (C) have reviewed and will fully abide by the Participating
Manufacturer's corporate principles promulgated pursuant to
this Agreement when acting on behalf of the Participating
Manufacturer.
      (3) No Participating Manufacturer may support or cause
to be supp (including through any third party or Affiliate) in
Congress or any other fon legislation or rules that would
preempt, override, abrogate or diminish such Settling State's
rights or recoveries under this Agreement. Except as
specifically provided in this Agreement, nothing herein shall
be deemed to restrain any Settling State or Participating
Manufacturer from advocating terms of any national

                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                22
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
tobacco.
       (n) Restriction on Advocacy Concerning Settlement
Proceeds. After the MS Execution Date, no Participating
Manufacturer may support or cause to be supported ;
(including through any third party or Affiliate) the diversion of
any proceeds of this settlement to any program or use that is
neither tobacco-related nor health-related in connection with
the approval of this Agreement appropriation of settlement
proceeds.
       (0) Dissolution of The Tobacco Institute, Inc., the Council
for Tobacco Research S.A., Inc. and the Center for Indoor
Air Research, Inc.
       (1) The Council for Tobacco Research-U.S.A., Inc.
("CTR") (a not-forprofit corporation fornied under the laws
of the State of New York) shall, pursuant to the plan of
dissolution previously negotiated and agreed to between the
Attorney General of the State of New York and CTR, cease
all operations and be dissolved in accordance with the laws
of the State of New York (and with the preservation of all
applicable Privileges held by any member company ofCTR).
       (2) The Tobacco Institute, Inc. ("TI") (a not-for-profit
corporation formed under the laws ofthe State of New
York) shall, pursuant to a plan of dissolution to be negotiated
by the Attorney General of the State of New York and the
Original Participating Manufacturers in accordance with
Exhibit G hereto, cease all operations and be dissolved in
accordance with the laws ofthe State of New York and
under the authority of the Attorney General of the State of
New York (and with the preservation of all applicable
privileges held by any member company of TI) .
     . (3) Within 45 days after Final Approval, the Center for
Indoor Air Research, Inc. ("CIAR") shall cease all operations
and be dissolved in a manner consistent with applicable law
and with the preservation of all applicable privileges
(including, without limitation, privileges held by any member
company of CIAR).
       (4) The Participating Manufacturers shall direct the
Tobacco-Related Organizations to preserve all records that
relate in any way to issues raised in sn-oking-related health
litigation.
       (5) The Participating Manufacturers may not reconstitute
CTR or its function in any form.


                                 23
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Helc.-DiUhP Conversion
have the authority to and will effectuate subsections (1)
through (5) hereof.
      (P) Regulation and Oversight of new Tobacco-Related
Associations.
      (1) A Participating Manufacturer may form or participate
in new tobaccorelated trade associations (subject to all
applicable laws), provided such acsociations agree in writing
not to act in any manner contrary to any provision ofthis
Agreement. Each Participating Manufacturer agrees that if
any new tobacco related trade association fails to so agree,
such Participating Manufacturer will not participate in or
support such association. (2) Any tobacco-related trade
association that is formed or controlled by one or more ofthe
Participating Manufacturers after the MSA Execution Date
shall adopt by-laws governing the association's procedures
and the activities of its members, board, employees, agents
and other representatives with respect to the tobacco-related
trade association. Such by-laws shall include, among other
things, provisions that:
      (A) each officer of the association shall be appointed by
the board of the association, shall be an employee of such
association, and during such officer's term shall not be a
director of or employed by any member of the association or
by an Affiliate of any member of the association;
      (B) legal counsel for the association shall be independent,
and neither counsel nor any member or employee of counsel's
law firm shall serve as legal counsel to any member of the
association or to a manufacturer of Tobacco Products that is
an Affiliate of any member of the association during the time
that it is serving as legal counsel to the association; and
      (C) minutes describing the substance of the meetings of
the board of directors of the association shall be prepared
and shall be maintained by the association for a period of at
least five years following their preparation.
       (3) Without limitation on whatever other rights to access
they may be permitted by law, for a period of seven years
from the date any new tobaccorelated trade association is
formed by any ofthe Participating Manufacturers after the
MSA Execution Date the antitrust authorities of any Settling
State may, for the purpose of enforcing this Agreement, upon
reasonable cause to believe that a violation ofthis Agreement
has occurred, and upon reasonable prior written notice (but


                                 24               Autdtrtllted Records Management System
                                                  Hex.Oump Conversion
      (A) have access during regular offce hours to inspect and
copy all relevant non-privileged, non-work-product books,
records, meeting. agenda and minutes, and other documents
(whether in hard copy form or stored electronically) of such
association insofar as they pertain to such believed violation;
and
      (B) interview the association's directors, offcers and
employee (who shall be entitled to have counsel present) with
respect to relevant, non-privileged, non-work-product
matters pertaining to such believed violation.
      Documents and information provided to Settling State
antitrust authorities shall be kept confidential by and among
such authorities, and shall be utilized only by the Settling
States and only for the purpose of enforcing this Agreement
or the criminal law. The discovery rights provided to the
Settling States pursuant to this subsection shall be
coordinated so as to avoid repetitive and excessive inspection
and discovery.
      (q) Prohibition on Agreements to Suppress Research. No
Participating .\lanufacturer may enter into any contract,
combination or conspiracy with any other Tobacco Product
Manufacturer that has the purpose or effect of: (1) limiting
competition in the production or distribution of information
about health hazards or other consequences of the use of
their products; (2) limiting or suppressing research into
smoking and health; or (3) limiting or suppressing research
into the marketing or development of new products.
Provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be
deemed to (1) require any Participating Manufacturer to
produce, distribute or otherwise disclose any information that
is subject to any privilege or protection; (2) preclude any
Participating Manufacturer from entering into any joint
defense or joint legal interest agreement or arrangement
(whether or not in writing), or from asserting any privilege
pursuant thereto; or (3) impose any affirmative obligation on
any Participating Manufacturer to conduct any research.
      (r) Prohibition on Material Misrepresentations. No
Participating Manufacturer may make any material
misrepresentation of fact regarding the health consequences
of using any Tobacco Product, including any tobacco
additives, filters, paper or other ingredients. Nothing in this
subsection shall limit the exercise of any First Amendment


                                 25              Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
legislative or regulatory forum.

N. PUBLIC ACCESS TO DOCUMENTS
      (a) After the MSA Execution Date, the Original
Participating Manufacturers and the Tobacco-Related
Organizations will support an application for the dissolution of
any protective orders entered in each Settling State's lawsuit
identified in Exhibit D with respect only to those documents,
indices and privilege logs that have been produced as of the
MSA Execution Date to such Settling State and (1) as to
which defendants have made no claim, or have withdrawn
any claim, of attorney-client privilege, attorney work product
protection, common interest/joint defense privilege
(collectively, "privilege"), trade-secret protection, or
confidential or proprietary business information; and (2) that
are not inappropriate for public disclosure because of
personal privacy interests or contractual rights ofthird parties
that may not be abrogated by the Original Participating
Manufacturers or the Tobacco-Related Organizations.
      (b) Notwithstanding State-Specific Finality, if any order,
ruling or recommendation was issued prior to September 17,
1998 rejecting a claim of privilege or trade-secret protection
with respect to any document or documents in a lawsuit
identified in Exhibit D, the Settling State in which such order,
ruling or recommendation was made may, no later than 45
days after the occurrence of State-Specific Finality in such
Settling State, seek public disclosure of such document or
documents by application to the court that issued such order,
ruling or recommendation and the court shall retain
jurisdiction for such purposes.
      The Original Participating Manufacturers and
Tobacco-Related Organizations do not consent to, and may
object to, appeal from or otherwise oppose any such
application for disclosure. The Original Participating
Manufacturers and tobacco related Organizations will not
assert that the settlement of such lawsuit has divested the
court of jurisdiction or that such Settling State lacks standing
to seek public disclosure on any applicable ground.
      (c) The Original Participating Manufacturers will maintain
at their expense their Internet document websites accessible
through "TobaccoResolution.com" or a similar website until
June 30, 2010. The Original Participating Manufacturers will


                                  26                   Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
respective websites and will add additional documents to
their web sites as provided in this section IV. (d) Within 180
days after the MSA Execution Date, each Original
Participating Manufacturer and Tobacco-Related
Organization will place on its website copies of the following
documents, except as provided in subsections IV(e) and
IV(f) below:
      (1) all documents produced by such Original Participating
Manufacturer or Tobacco-Related Organization as of the
MSA Execution Date in any action identified in Exhibit D or
any action identified in section 2 of Exhibit H that was filed by
an Attorney General.
      Among these documents, each Original Participating
Manufacturer and Tobacco-Related Organization will give
the highest priority to (A) the documents that were listed by
the State of Washington as trial exhibits in the State of
Washington v. American Tobacco Co., et aI., No.
96-2-15056-8 SEA (Wash. Super. Ct., County of King);
and (B) the documents to which such Original Participating
Manufacturer or Tobacco-Related Organization withdrew
any claim of privilege as a result of the re-examination of
privilege claims pursuant to court order in State of Oklahoma
v. R.I. Reynolds Tobacco Company, et aI.; CI-96-2499-L
(Diet. Ct., Cleveland County);
      (2) all documents that can be identified as having been
produced by, and copies of transcripts of depositions given
by, such Original Participating Manufacturer or
Tobacco-Related Organization as ofthe MSA Execution
Date the litigation matters specified in section 1 of Exhibit H;
and
      (3) all documents produced by such Original Participating
Manufacture or Tobacco-Related Organization as of the
MSA Execution Date and listed by the plaintiffs as trial
exhibits in the litigation matters specified in section 2 of
Exhibit H.
      (e) Unless copies of such documents are already on its
website, each Original Participating Manufacturer and
Tobacco-Related Organization will place on its website
copies of documents produced in any production of
documents that takes place on or after the date 30 days
before the MSA Execution Date in any federal or state court
civil action concerning smoking and health. Copies of any


                                 27                Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
this subsection will be placed on such website within the later
of 45 days after the MSA Execution Date or within 45 days
after the production of such documents in any federal or state
court action concerning smoking and health. This obligation
will continue until June 30, 2010. In placing such newly
produced documents on its website, each Original
Participating Manufacturer or Tobacco-Related Organization
will identify, as part of its index to be created pursuant to
subsection IV(h), the action in which it produced such
documents and the date on which such documents " ere
added to its website ..
      (t) Nothing in this section IV shall require any Original
Participating Manufacturer or Tobacco-Related Organization
to place on its website or otherwise disclose documents that:
(1) it continues to claim to be privileged, a trade secret,
confidential or proprietary business information, or that
contain other information not appropriate for public
disclosure because of personal privacy interests or
contractual rights of third parties; or (2) continue to be
subject to any protective order, sealing order or other order
or ruling that prevents or limits a litigant from disclosing such
documents.
       (g) Oversized or multimedia records will not be required
to be placed on the Website, but each Original Participating
Manufacturers and Tobacco-Related Organizations will make
any such records available to the public by placing copies of
them in the document depository established in The State of
Minnesota, et al v. Philip Morris Incorporated, et aI., C
1-94-8565 (County of Ramsey, District Court, 2d Judicial
Cir.).
      (h) Each Original Participating Manufacturer will establish
an index and other features to improve searchable access to
the document images on its website, as set forth in Exhibit I.
      (i) Within 90 days after the MSA Execution Date, the
Original Participating Manufacturers will furnish NAAG with
a project plan for completing the Original Participating
Manufacturers' obligations under subsection IV(h) with
respect to documents currently on their websites and
documents being placed on their websites pursuant to
subsection IV(d). NAAG may engage a computer consultant
at the Original Participating Manufacturers' expense for a
period not to exceed two years and at a cost not to exceed


                                 28
                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
plan and make recommendations consistent with this
Agreement. In addition, within 120 days after completion of
the Original Participating Manufacturers' obligations under
subsection IV (d), NAAG's computer consultant may make
final recommendations with respect to the web sites consistent
with this Agreement. In preparing these recommendations,
NAAG's computer consultant may seek input from Settling
State officials, public hearings, organizations and other users
of the websites.
       G} The expenses incurred pursuant to subsection IV(i},
and the expenses related to documents of the
Tobacco-Related Organizations, will be severally shared
among the Original Participating Manufacturers (allocated
among them according to their Relative Market Shares). All
other expenses incurred under this section will be borne by
the Original Participating Manufacturer that incurs such
expense.
V. TOBACCO CONTROL AND UNDERAGE USE
LAWS
Each Participating Manufacturer agrees thatfollowing
State-Specific Finality in a Settling State it will not initiate, or
cause to be initiated, a facial challenge against the
enforceability or constitutionality of such Settling State's (or
such Settling State's political subdivisions') statutes,
ordinances and administrative rules relating to tobacco
control enacted prior to June 1, 1998 (other than a statute,
ordinance or rule challenged in any lawsuit listed in Exhibit
M).
VI. ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL
FOUNDATION
      (a) Foundation Purposes. The Settling States believe that
a comprehensive, coordinated program of public education
and study is important to further the remedial goals of this
Agreement. Accordingly, as part ofthe settlement of claims
described herein, the payments specified in subsections
VI(b}, VI(c}, and IX(e} shall be made to a charitable
foundation, trust or similar organization (the "Foundation")
and/or to a program to be operated within the Foundation
(the "National Public Education Fund"). I he purposes ofthe
Foundation will be to support {l} the study of and programs
to reduce Youth Tobacco Product usage and Youth
substance abuse in the States, and 2} the study of and


                                   29               Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
use of Tobacco Products in the States.
       (b) Base Foundation Payments. On March 31,1999,
and on March 31 of each subsequent year for a period of
nine years thereafter, each Original Participating
Manufacturer shall severally pay its Relative Market Share of
$25,000,000 to fund the Foundation. The payments to be
made by each of the Original Participating Manufacturers
pursuant to this subsection (b) shall be subject to no
adjustments, reductions, or offsets, and shall be paid to the
Escrow Agent (to be credited to the Subsection VI(b)
Account), who shall disburse such payments to the
Foundation only upon the occurrence of State-Specific
Finality in at least one Settling State.
     (c) National Public Education Fund Payments. (1) Each
Original Participating Manufacturer shall severally pay its
Relative Market Share of the following base amounts on the
following dates to the Escrow Agent for the benefit of the
Foundation's National Public Education Fund to be used for
the purposes and as described in subsections VI(f)(1), VI(g)
and VIO below: $250,000,000 on March 31, 1999;
$300,000,000 on March 31, 2000; S300,000,000 on
March 31, 2001; $300,000,000 on March 31, 2002; and
S300,000,000 on March 31, 2003, as such amounts are
modified in accordance with this subsection (c). The payment
due on March 31,1999 pursuant to this subsection (c)(1) is to
be credited to the Subsection (c) Account (First). The
payments due on or after March 31, 2000 pur~uant to this
subsection VICc)(1) are to be credited to the Subsection
VI(c) Account (Subsequent).
     (2) The payments to be made by the Original Participating
Manufacturers pursuant to this subsection (c), other than the
payment due on March 31,1999, shall be subject to the
Inflation Adjustment, the Volume Adjustment and the offset
for miscalculated or disputed payments described in
subsection XI(i).
     (3) The payment made pursuant to this subsection (c) on
March 31, 1999 shall be disbursed by the Escrow Agent to
the Foundation only upon the occurrence of State-Specific
Finality in at least one Settling State. Each remaining payment
pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be disbursed by the
Escrow Agent to the Foundation only when State-Specific
Finality has occurred in Settling States having aggregate

                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                30                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Allocable Shares assigned to all States that were Settling
States as of the MSA Execution Date.
      (4) In addition to the payments made pursuant to this
subsection (c), the National Public Education Fund will be
funded (A) in accordance with subsection IX(e), and (B)
through monies contributed by other entities directly to the
Foundation and designated for the National Public Education
Fund ("National Public Education Fund Contributions").
      (5) The payments made by the Original Participating
Manufacturers pursuant to this subsection (c) and/or
subsection IX(e) and monies received from a National Public
Education Fund Contributions will be deposited and invested
in accordance with the laws ofthe state of incorporation of
the Foundation. (d) Creation and Organization fthe
Foundation. NAAG, through its executive committee, will
provide for the creation ofthe Foundation. The Foundation
shall be organized exclusively for charitable, scientific, and
educational purposes within the meaning oflntemal Revenue
Code section 501(c)(3). The organizational documents of the
Foundation shall specifically incorporate the provisions of this
Agreement relating to the Foundation, and will provide for
payment of the Foundation's administrative expenses from the
funds paid pursuant to subsection VI(b) or VI(c).
      The Foundation shall be governed by a board of
directors. The board of directors shall be comprised of
eleven directors. NAAG, the National Governors'
Association ("NGA"), and the National Conference of State
Legislatures ("NCSL") shall each select from its membership
two directors. These six directors shall select the five
additional directors. One of these five additional directors
shall have expertise in public health issues. Four ofthese five
additional directors shall have expertise in medical, child
psychology, or public health disciplines. The board of
directors shall be nationally geographically diverse.
      (e) Foundation Affiliation. The Fpundation shall be
formally affiliated with an educational or medical institution
selected by the board of directors. (f) Foundation Functions.
The functions ofthe Foundation shall be:
     ( I ) carrying out a nationwide sustained advertising and
education program to (A) counter the use by Youth of
Tobacco Products, and (B) educate consumers about the
cause and prevention of diseases associated with the use of


                                 31
                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                HeX-Dump Conversion
      (2) developing and disseminating model advertising and
education programs to counter the use by Youth of
substances that are unlawful for use or purchase by Youth,
with an emphasis on reducing Youth smoking; monitoring and
testing the effectiveness of such model programs; and, based
on the information received from such monitoring and testing,
continuing to develop and disseminate revised versions of
such model programs, as appropriate;
      (3) developing and disseminating model classroom
education programs and curriculum ideas about smoking and
substance abuse in the K- 12 school system, including
specific target programs for special at-risk populations;
monitoring and testing the effectiveness of such model
programs and ideas; and, based on the information received
from such monitoring and testing, continuing to develop and
disseminate revised versions of such model programs or
ideas, as appropriate;
      (4) developing and disseminating criteria for effective
cessation programs; monitoring and testing the effectiveness
of such criteria; and continuing to develop and disseminate
revised versions of such criteria, as appropriate;
      (5) commissioning studies, funding research, and
publishing reports on factors that influence Youth smoking
and substance abuse and developing strategies to address the
conclusions of such studies and research;
      (6) developing other innovative Youth smoking prevention
programs;
      (7) providing targeted training and information for parents;
      (8) maintaining a library open to the public of
Foundation-funded studies reports and other pUblications
related to smoking and substance abuse;
      (9) tracking and monitoring Youth smoking and substance
abuse, with a focus on the reasons for any increases or
failures to decrease Youth smoking and substance abuse
and what ,actions can be taken to reduce Youth smoking and
substance abuse;
      (10) receiving, controlling, and managing contributions
from other entities to further the purposes described in this
Agreement; and
      (I I ) receiving, controlling, and managing such funds paid
by the Participating Manufacturers pursuant to subsections
VI(b) and VI(c) above. (g) Foundation Grant-Making. The


                                 32             Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Public Education Fund to Settling States and their political
subdivisions to carry out sustained advertising and education
programs to (1) counter the use by Youth of Tobacco
Products, and (2) educate consumers about the cause and
prevention of diseases associated with the use of Tobacco
Products. In making such grants, the Foundation shall
consider whether the Settling State or political subdivision
applying for such grant:
       (1) demonstrates the extent of the problem regarding
Youth smoking in such Settling State or political subdivision;
       (2) either seeks the grant to implement a model program
developed by the Foundation or provides the Foundation
with a specific plan for such applicant's intended use of the
grant monies, including demonstrating such applicant's ability
to develop an effective advertising/education campaign and to
assess the effectiveness of such advertising/education
campaign;
     o (3) has other funds readily available to carry out a

sustained advertising and education program to (A) counter
the use by Youth of Tobacco Products, and (B) educate
consumers about the cause and prevention of diseases
associated with the use of Tobacco Products; and
        (4)is a Settling State that has not severed this section
VI from its settlement with the Participating Manufacturers
pursuant to subsection VI(i) below, or is a political
subdivision in such a Settling State.
       (h) Foundation Activities. The Foundation shall not engage
in, nor shall any of the Foundation's money be used to engage
in, any political activities or lobbying, including, but not limited
to, support of or opposition to candidates, ballot initiatives,
referenda or other similar activities.
       The National Public Education Fund shall be used only for
public education and advertising regarding the addictiveness,
health effects, and social costs related to the use of tobacco
products and shall not be used for any personal attack on, or
vilification of, any person (whether by name or business
affiliation), company, or governmental agency, whether
individually or collectively. The Foundation shall work to
ensure that its activities are carried out in a culturally and
linguistically appropriate manner.
       The Foundation's activities (including the National Public
Education Fund) shall be carned out solely within the States.


                                  33            Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
 are made at the direction and on behalf of Settling States. By
 making such payments in such manner, the Participating
 Manufacturers do not undertake and expressly disclaim any
 responsibility with respect to the creation, operation,        .
 liabilities, or tax status of the Foundation or the National
 Public Education Fund.
       (i) Severance of this Section. If the Attorney General of a
 Settling State determines that such Settling State may not
 lawfully enter into this section VI as a matter of applicable
state law, such Attorney General may sever this section VI
 from its settlement with the Participating Manufacturers by
giving written notice of such severance to each Participating
Manufacturer and NAAG pursuant to subsection XVIII(k
hereof. If any Settling State exercises its right to sever this
section VI, this section VI shall not be considered a part of
the specific settlement between such Settling State and the
Participating Manufacturers, and this section VI shall not be
enforceable by or in such Settling State:
       The payment obligation of subsections VI(b) and VI( c)
hereof shall apply regardless of a determination by one or
more Settling States to sever section VI hereof; provided,
however, that if all Settling States sever section VI hereof, the
payment obligations of subsections (b) and (c) hereof shall be
null and void.
       If the Attorney General of a Settling State that severed this
section VI subsequently determines that such Settling State
may lawfully enter into this section VI as a matter of
applicable state law, such Attorney General may rescind such
Settling State's previous severance of this section VI by giving
written notice of such rescission to each Participating
Manufacturer and NMG pursuant to subsection XVIII(k). If
any Settling State rescinds such severance, this section VI
shall be considered a part of the specific settlement between
such Settling State and the Participating Manufacturers
(including for purposes of subsection (g)(4)), and this section
VI shall be enforceable by and in such Settling State.
VIT. ENFORCEMENT
      (a) Jurisdiction. Each Participating Manufacturer and each
Settling State acknowledge that the Court: ( I) has
jurisdiction over the subject matter ofthe action identified in
Exhibit D in such Settling State and over each Participating
Manufacturer;


                                  34           Automated Records Management System
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
implementing and enforcing this Agreement and the Consent
Decree as to such Settling State; and (3) except as provided
in subsections IX(d), XI(c) and XVII(d) and Exhibit 0, shall
be the only court to which disputes under this Agreement or
the Consent Decree are presented as to such Settling State.
Provided, however, that notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Escrow Court (as defined in the Escrow Agreement) shall
have exclusive jurisdiction, as provided in section 15 of the
Escrow Agreement, over any suit, action or proceeding
seeking to interpret or enforce any provision of, or based on
any right arising out of, the Escrow .Agreement.
      (b) Enforcement of Consent Decree. Except as expressly
provided in the Consent Decree, any Settling State or
Released Party may apply to the Court to enforce the tenns
of the Consent Decree (or for a declaration construing any
such tenn) with respect to alleged violations within· such
Settling State. A Settling State may not seek to enforce the
Consent Decree of another Settling State; provided,
however, that nothing contained herein shall affect the ability
of any Settling State to (1) coordinate state enforcement
3.lions or proceedings, or (2) file or join any amicus brief. In
the event that the Court detennines that any Participating
Manufacturer or Settling State has violated the Consent
Decree within such Settling State, the party that initiated the
proceedings may request any and all relief available within
such Settling State pursuant to the Consent Decree.
      (c) Enforcement of this Agreement. (1) Except as
provided in subsections IX(d), XI( c), XVII(d) and Exhibit 0,
any Settling State or Participating Manufacturer may bring an
action in the Court to enforce the terms of this Agreement (or
for a declaration construing such term ("Declaratory Order")
with respect to disputes, alleged violations alleged breaches
within such Settling State.
      (2) Before initiating such proceedings, a party shall
provide 30 days' written notice to the Attorney General of
each Settling State, to NAAG, and to each Participating
Manufacturer of its intent to initiate proceedings pursuant to
this subsection. The 30-day notice period may be shortened
in the event that the relevant Attorney General reasonably
determines that a compelling time-sensitive public health and
safety concern requires more immediate action.
      (3) In the event that the Court determines that any


                                  35
                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
breached this Agreement, the party that initiated the
proceedings may request an order restraining such violation
or breach, and/or ordering compliance within such Settling
State (an "Enforcement Order").
      (4) If an issue arises as to whether a Participating
Manufacturer has failed to comply with an Enforcement
Order, the Attorney General for the Settling State in question
may seek an order for interpretation or for monetary, civil
contempt or criminal sanctions to enforce compliance with
such Enforcement Order.
      (5) If the Court finds that a good-faith dispute exists as to
the meaning of the terms of this Agreement or a Declaratory
Order, the Court may in its discretion determine to enter a
Declaratory Order rather than an Enforcement Order.
      (6) Whenever possible, the parties shall seek to resolve an
alleged violation of this Agreement by discussion pursuant to
subsection XVIII(m) of this Agreement. In addition, in
determining whether to seek an Enforcement Order, or in
determining whether to seek an order for monetary, civil
contempt or criminal sanctions for any claimed violation of an
Enforcement Order, the Attorney General shall give
good-faith consideration to whether the Participating
Manufacturer that is claimed to have violated this Agreement
has taken appropriate and reasonable steps to cause the
claimed violation to be cured, unless such party has been
guilty of a pattern of violations of like nature.
      (d) Right of Review. All orders and other judicial
determinations made by an, court in connection with this
Agreement or any Consent Decree shall be subject to all
applicable appellate review, and nothing in this Agreement or
any Consent Decree shall be deemed to constitute a waiver
of any right to any such review.
      (e) Applicability. This Agreement and the Consent Decree
apply only to the Participating Manufacturers in their
corporate capacity acting through their respective successors
and assigns, directors, officers, employees, agents,
subsidiaries, divis,ions, or :her internal organizational units of
any kind or any other entities acting in concert or participation
with them.
      The remedies, penalties and sanctions that may be
imposed or assessed in connection with a breach or violation
of this Agreement or the Consent Decree (or any Declaratory


                                  36
                                               Automated Records Management Systen
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
Agreement or the Consent Decree) shall only apply to the
Participating Manufacturers, and shall not be imposed or
assessed against any employee, officer or director of any
Participating Manufacturer, or against any other person or
entity as a consequence of such such breach or violation, and
the Court shall have no jurisdiction to do so.
      (f) Coordination of Enforcement. The Attorneys General
of the Settling States (through NAAG) shall monitor potential
conflicting interpretations by courts of different States of this
Agreement and the Consent Decrees. The Settling States
shall use their best efforts, in cooperation with the
Participating Manufacturers, to coordinate and resolve the
effects of such conflicting interpretations as to matters that are
not exclusively local in nature.
      (g) Inspection and Discovery Rights. Without limitation on
whatever other rights to access they may be permitted by
law, following State-Specific Finality in a Settling State and
for seven years thereafter, representatives ofthe Attorney
General of such Settling State may, for the purpose of
enforcing this Agreement and the Consent Decree, upon
reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this Agreement
or the Consent Decree has occurred, and upon reasonable
prior written notice (but in no event less than 10 Business
Days):
      (1) have access during regular office hours to inspect and
copy all relevant non-privileged, non-work-product books,
records, meeting agenda and minutes, and other documents
(whether in hard copy form or stored electronically) of each
'Participating Manufacturer insofar as they pertain to such .
believed violation; and (2) interview each Participating
Manufacturer's directors, officers and employees (who shall
be entitled to have counsel present) with respect to relevant,
non-privileged, non-work-product matters pertaining to such
believed violation.
      Documents and information provided to representatives of
the Attorney General of such Settling State pursuant to this
section VII shall be kept confidential by the Settling States,
and shall be utilized only by such Settling States and only for
purposes of enforcing this Agreement, the Consent Decree
and the criminal law. The inspection and discovery rights
provided to such Settling State pursuant to this subsection
shall be coordinated through NAAG so as to avoid repetitive


                                 37              Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
       Vlll. CERTAIN ONGOING RESPONSmILITIES
OF THE SETTLING STATES (a) Upon approval of the
NAAG executive committee, NAAG will provide
coordination and facilitation for the implementation and
enforcement of this Agreement on behalf of the Attorneys
General ofthe Settling States, including the following:
      (1) NAAG will assist in coordinating the inspection and
discovery activities referred to in subsections III(p)(3) and
VII(g) regarding compliance with this Agreement by the
Participating Manufacturers and any new tobacco-related
trade associations.
      (2) NAAG will convene at least two meetings per year
and one major national conference every three years for the
Attorneys General of the Settling States, the directors of the
Foundation and three persons Participating Manufacturer.
      The purpose of the meetings and conference is to evaluate
the success of this Agreement and coordinate efforts by the
Attorneys General and the Participating Manufacturers to
continue to reduce Youth smoking.
      (3) NAAG will periodically inform NGA, NCSL, the
National Association of Counties and the National League of
Cities of the results ofthe meetings and conferences referred
to in subsection (a)(2) above. (4) NAAG will support and
coordinate the efforts of the Attorneys General of the Settling
Agreement.
      (5) NAAG will perform the other functions specified for it
. Agreement, including the functions specified in section IV.
       (b) Upon approval by the NAAG executive committee
to assume the responsibilities outlined in subsection VIII(a)
hereof, each Original Participating Manufacturer shall cause
to be paid, beginning on December 31,1998, and on
December 31 of each year thereafter through and including
December 31, 2007, its Relative Market Share of$150,000
per year to the Escrow Agent (to be credited to the
Subsection VIII(b Account), who shall disburse such monies
to NAAG within 10 Business Days, to fund the activities
described in subsection ymCa).
      (c) The Attorneys General of the Settling States, acting
through NAAG, shall establish a fund ("The States'
Antitrust/Consumer Protection Tobacco Enforcement Fund")
in the form attached as Exhibit J, which will be maintained by
such Attorneys General to supplement the Settling States' ( 1


                                38              Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Agreement and the Consent Decrees, and (2) investigation
and litigation of potential violations oflaws with respect to
Tobacco Products, as set forth in Exhibit J. Each Original
Participating Manufacturer shall on March 31, 1999,
severally pay its Relative Market Share of $50,000,000 to
the Escrow Agent (to be credited to the Subsection Vill{c)
Account), who shall disburse such monies to NAAG upon
the occurrence of State-Specific Finality in at least one
Settling State. Such funds will be used in accordance with the
provisions of Exhibit J.
      IX. PAYMENTS
      (a) All Payments Into Escrow. All payments made
pursuant to this Agreement (except those payments made
pursuant to section XVII) shall be made into escrow pursuant
to the Escrow Agreement, and shall be credited to the
appropriate Account established pursuant to the Escrow
Agreement. Such payments shall be disbursed to the
beneficiaries or returned to the Participating Manufacturers
only as provided in section XI and the Escrow Agreement.
      No payment obligation under this Agreement shall arise
(I) unless and until the Escrow Court has approved and
retained jurisdiction over the Escrow Agreement or (2) if
such approval is reversed (unless and until such reversal is
itself reversed). The parties agree to proceed as expeditiously
as possible to resolve any issues that prevent approval ofthe
Escrow Agreement.
      If any payment (other than the first initial payment under
subsection IX{b)) is delayed because the Escrow Agreement
has not been approved, such payment shall be due and
payable (together with interest at the Prime Rate) within 10
Business Days after approval of the Escrow Agreement by
the Escrow Court.
      (b) Initial Payments. On the second Business Day after the
Escrow Court .approves and retains jurisdiction over the
Escrow Agreement, each Original Participating Manufacturer
shall severally pay to the Escrow Agent (to be credited to the
Subsection l\;(b) Account (First) its Market Capitalization
Percentage (as set forth in Exhibit K) of the. base amount of
$2,400,000,000. On January 10, 2000, each Original
Participating Manufacturer shall severally pay to the Escrow
Agent its Relative Market Share of the amount of
$2,472,000,000. On January 10, 2001, each Original


                                39
                                             Automated Records Management System
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
Agent its Relative Market Share of the base amount of
$2,546,160,000.
      On January 10, 2002, each Original Participating
Manufacturer shall severally pay to the Escrow Agent its
Relative Market Share of the e amount of $2,622,544,800.
On January 10, 2003, each Original Participating
Manufacturer shall severally pay to the Escrow Agent its
Relative Market Share of the base amount of
$2,701,221,144. The payments pursuant to this subsection
(b) due on or after January 10, 2000 shall be credited to the
Subsection IX{b) Account (Subsequent).
      The foregoing payments shall be modified in accordance
with this subsection (b). The payments made by the Original
Participating Manufacturers pursuant to this subsection (b)
(other than the first such payment) shall be subject to the
Volume Adjustment, the Non-Settling States Reduction and
the offset for miscalculated or disputed payments described in
subsection XI{i). The first payment due under this subsection
(b) shall be subject to the Non-Settling States Reduction, but
such reduction shall be determined as of the date one day
before such payment is due (rather than the date 15 days
before).
      (c)Annual Payments and Strategic Contribution Payments.
(I) On April 15, 2000 and on April 15 of each year
thereafter in perpetuity, each Original Participating
Manufacturer shall severally pay to the Escrow Agent (to be
credited to the Subsection IX{c)(I) Account) its Relative
Market Share of the base amounts specified below, as such
payments are modified in accordance with this subsection
{c)(1).
      The payments made by the Original Participating
Manufacturers pursuant to this subsection (c)(1) shall be
subject to the Inflation Adjustment, the Volume Adjustment,
the Previously Settled States Reduction, the Non-Settling
States Reduction, the NPM Adjustment, the offset for
miscalculated or disputed payments described in subsection
XI{i), the Federal Tobacco Legislation Offset, the Litigating
Releasing Parties Offset, and the offsets for claims over
described in subsections XlI{a){4){B) imd XII{a){8).
      (2) On April 15, 2008 and on April 15 of each year
thereafter through 2017, each Original Participating
Manufacturer shall severally pay to the Escrow Agent {to be


                               40               Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Market Share of the base amount of $861 ,000,000, as such
payments are modified in accordance with this subsection
(c )(2). The payments made by the Original Participating
Manufacturers pursuant to this subsection (c )(2) shall be
subject to the Inflation Adjustment, the Volume Adjustment,
the NPM Adjustment, the offset for miscalculated or disputed
payments described in subsection XI(i), the Federal Tobacco
Legislation Offset, the Litigating Releasing Parties Offset, and
the offsets for claims over described in subsections
Xll(a)(4)(B) and Xll(a)(8).
      Such payments shall also be subject to the Non-Settling
States Reduction; provided, however, that for purposes of
payments due pursuant to this subsection (c)(2) (and
corresponding payments by Subsequent Participating
Manufacturers under subsection IX(i), the Non-Settling
States Reduction shall be derived as follows:                            "
      (A) the payments made by the Original Participating
Manufacturers pursuant to this subsection (c)(2) shall be
allocated among the Settling States on a percentage basis to
be determined by the Settling States pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Exhibit U, and the resulting allocation
percentages disclosed to the Escrow Agent, the Independent
Auditor and the Original Participating Manufacturers not later
than June 30, 1999; and (B) the Non-Settling States
Reduction shall be based on the sum ofthe Allocable Shares
so established pursuant to subsection (c)(2)(A) for those
States that were Settling States as of the MSA Execution
Date and as to which this Agreement has terminated as of the
date 15 days before the payment in question is due.
      (d) Non-Participating Manufacturer Adjustment. (1)
Calculation ofNPM Adjustment for Original Participating
Manufacturers. To protect the public health gains achieved by
this Agreement, certain payments made pursuant to this
Agreement shall be subject to an NPM Adjustment.
Payments by the Original Participating Manufacturers to
which the NPM Adjustment applies shall be adjusted as
provided below: (A) Subject to the provisions of subsections
(d)(l)(C), (d)(l)(D) and (d)(2) below, each Allocated
Payment shall be adjusted by subtracting from such Allocated
Payment the product of such Allocated Payment amount
multiplied by the NPM Adjustment Percentage. The "NPM
Adjustment Percentage" shall be calculated as follows:


                                 41               Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
preceding the year in which the payment in question is due is
less than or equal to 0 (zero), then the NPM Adjustment
Percentage shall equal zero.
      (ii) If the Market Share Loss for the year immediately
preceding the year in which the payment in question is due is
greater than 0 (zero) and less than or equal to 16 2/3
percentage points, then the NPM Adjustment Percentage
shall be equal to the product of (x) such Market Share Loss
and (y) 3 (three).
      (iii) Ifthe Market Share Loss for the year immediately
preceding the year in which the payment in question is due is
greater than 16 2/3 percentage points, then the NPM
Adjustment Percentage shall be equal to the sum of (x) 50
percentage points and (y) the product of (1) the Variable
Multiplier and (2) the result of such Market Share Loss minus
16 2/3 percentage points.
      (B) Definitions: (i) "Base Aggregate Participating
Manufacturer Market Share" means the result ()f (x) the sum
of the applicable Market Shares (the applicable Market
Share to be that for 1997) of all present and former Tobacco
Product Manufacturers that were Participating Manufacturers .
during the entire calendar year immediately preceding the
year in which is due minus (y) 2 (two) percentage points.
      (ii) "Actual Aggregate Participating Manufacturer Market
Share" means the sum of the applicable Market Shares of all
present and former Tobacco Product Manufacturers that
were Participating Manufacturers during the entire calendar
year immediately preceding the year in which the payment in
question is due (the applicable Market Share to be that for
the calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the
payment in question is due).
      (iii) "Market Share Loss" means the result of (x) the Base
Aggregate Participating Manufacturer Market Share minus
(y) the Actual Aggregate Participating Manufacturer Market
Share.
      (iv) "Variable Multiplier" equals 50 divided by the result of
(x) the Base Aggregate Participating Manufacturer Market
Share minus (y) 16 2/3 percentage points.
      (C) On or before February 2 of each year following a
year in which there was a Market Share Loss greater than
zero, a nationally recognized firm of economic consultants
(the "Firm") shall determine whether the disadvantages


                                 42            Automated Records Management System
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
were a significant factor contributing to the Market Share
Loss for the year in question.
      If the Firm determines that the disadvantages experienced
as a result of the provisions of this Agreement were a
significant factor contributing to the Market Share Loss for
the year in question, the NPM Adjustment described in
subsection IX(d)(J) shall apply. If the Firm determines that
the disadvantages experienced as a result ofthe provisions of
this Agreement were not a significant factor contributing to
the Market Share Loss for the year in question, the NPM
Adjustment described in subsection IX( d)(l) shall not apply.
      The Original Participating Manufacturers, the Settling
States, and the Attorneys General for the Settling States shall
cooperate to ensure that the determination described in this
subsection (1 )(C) is timely made. The Firm shall be
acceptable to (and the principals responsible for this
assignment shall be acceptable to) both the Original
Participating Manufacturers and a majority of those Attorneys
General who are both the Attorney General of a Settling
State and a member of the NAAG executive committee at
the time in question (or in the event no such firm or no such
principals shall be acceptable to such parties, National
Economic Research Associates, Inc., or its successors by
merger, acquisition or otherwise ("NERA"), acting through a
principal or principals acceptable to such parties, if such a
person can be identified and, if not, acting through a principal
or principal identified by NERA, or a successor firm selected
by the CPR Institute for Dispute Resolution).
      As soon as practicable after the MSA Execution Date, the
Firm shall be jointly retained by the Settling States and the
Original Participating Manufacturers for the purpose of
making the foregoing determination, and the Firm shall
provide written notice to each Settling State, to NAAG, to
the Independent Auditor and to each Participating
Manufacturer of such determination.
      The determination of the Firm with respect to this issue
shall be conclusive and binding upon all parties, and shall be
final and non-appealable. The reasonable fees and expenses
of the Firm shall be paid by the Original Participating
Manufacturers according to their Relative Market Shares.
Only the Participating Manufacturers and the Settling States,
and their respective counsel, shall be entitled to communicate


                                 43                 Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
this subsection (1)(C).
       (D) No NPM-Adjustment shall be made with respect to a
payment if the aggregate number of Cigarettes shipped in or
to the fifty United States, the District of Columbia and Puerto
Rico in the year immediately preceding the year in which the
payment in question is due by those Participating
Manufacturers that had become Participating Manufacturers
prior to 14 days after the MSA Execution Date is greater
than the aggregate number of Cigarettes shipped in or to the
fifty United States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico
in 1997 by such Participating Manufacturers (and any of their
Affiliates that made such shipments 1997, as demonstrated
by certified audited statements of such Affiliate shipments,
and that do not continue to make such shipments after the
MSA Execution Date because the responsibility for such
shipments I been transferred to one of such Participating .
Manufacturers) .
     . Measurements of shipments for purposes of this
subsection (D) shall made in the manner prescribed in
subsection ll(mm); in the event the shipment data is
unavailable for any Participating Manufacturer for 1 such
Participating Manufacturer's shipment volume for such year
as measured in the manner prescribed in subsection II(z).
       (2) Allocation among Settling States ofNPM Adjustment
for Original Participating Manufacturers.
       (A) The NPM Adjustment set forth in subsection (d)(l)
shall to the Allocated Payments of all Settling States, except
as set forth be (B) A Settling State's Allocated Payment shall
not be subject NPM Adjustment: (i) if such Settling State
continuously had a Quality; Statute (as defined in subsection
(2)(E) below) in full force and effect during the entire
calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the
payment in question is due, and diligently enforced the
provisions such statute during such entire calendar year; or (ii)
if such Settling State enacted the Model Statute (as defined in
subsection (2)(E) below) for first time during the calendar
year immediately preceding the year in which the payment in
question is due, continuously had the Model Statute in full
force and effect during the last six months of such calendar
year, and diligently enforced the provisions of such statute
during the period i which it was in full force and effect.
       (C) The aggregate amount of the NPM Adjustments that


                                 44                Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
Settling States that are not subject to an NPM Adjustment
pursuant to subsection (2)(B) shall be reallocated among all
other Settling States pro rata in proportion to their respective
Allocable Shares (the applicable Allocable Shares being
those listed in Exhibit A), and such other Settling States'
Allocated Payments shall be further reduced accordingly.
      (D) This subsection (2)(D) shall apply if the amount ofthe
NPM Adjustment applied pursuant to subsection (2)(A) to
any Settling State plus the amount of the NPM Adjustments
reallocated to such Settling State pursuant to subsection
(2)(C) in any individual year would either (i) exceed such
Settling State's Allocated Payment in that year, or (ii) if
subsection (2)(F) applies to the Settling State in question,
exceed 65% of such Settling State's Allocated Payment in
that year. For each Settling State that has an excess as
described in the preceding sentence, the excess amount of
NPM Adjustment shall be further reallocated among all other
Settling States whose Allocated Payments are subject to an
NPM Adjustment and that do not have such an excess, pro
rata in proportion to their respective Allocable Shares, and
such other Settling States' Allocated Payments shall be further
reduced accordingly.
      The provisions of this subsection (2)(D) shall be
repeatedly applied in any individual year until either (i) the
aggregate amount ofNPM Adjustments has been fully
reallocated or (ii) the full amount of the NPM Adjustments
subject to reallocation under subsection (2)(C) or (2)(D)
cannot be fully reallocated in any individual year as described
in those subsections because (x) the Allocated Payment in
that year of each Settling State that is subject to an NPM
Adjustment and to which subsection (2)(F) does not apply
has been reduced to zero, and (y) the Allocated Payment in
that year of each Settling State to which subsection (2)(F)
applies has been reduced to 35% of such Allocated Payment.
      (E) A "Qualifying Statute" means a Settling State's statute,
regulation, law and/or rule (applicable everywhere the Settling
State has authority to legislate) that effectively and fully
neutralizes the cost disadvantages that the Participating
Manufacturers experience vis-a-vis Non-Participating
Manufacturers within such Settling State as a result of the
provisions of this Agreement.
      Each Participating Manufacturer and each Settling State


                                 45
                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
 (the "Model Statute"), if enacted without modification or
 addition (except for particularized state procedural or
 technical requirements) and not in conjunction with any other
 legislative or regulatory proposal, shall constitute a Qualifying
 Statute. Each Participating Manufacturer agrees to support
the enactment of such Model Statute if such Model Statute is
 introduced or proposed (i) without modification or addition
 (except for particularized procedural or technical
requirements), and (ii) not in conjunction with any other
 legislative proposal.
      (F) If a Settling State (i) enacts the Model Statute without
any modification or addition (except for particularized state
procedural or technical requirements) and not in conjunction
with any other legislative or regulatory proposal, (ii) uses its
best efforts to keep the Model Statute in full force and effect
by, among other things, defending the Model Statute fully in
any litigation brought in state or federal court within such
Settling State (including litigating all available appeals that may
affect the effectiveness of the Model Statute), and (iii)
otherwise complies with subsection (2)(B), but a court of
competent jurisdiction nevertheless invalidates or renders
unenforceable the Model Statute with respect to such Settling
State, and but for such ruling the Settling State would have
been exempt from an NPM Adjustment under subsection
(2)(B), then the NPM Adjustment (including reallocations
pursuant to subsections (2)(C) and (2)(D)) shall still apply to
such Settling State's Allocated Payments but in any individual
year shall not exceed 65% of the amount of such Allocated
Payments.
      (G) In the event a Settling State proposes and/or enacts a
statute, regulation, law and/or rule (applicable everywhere the
Settling State has authority to legislate) that is not the Model
Statute and asserts that such statute, regulation, law and/or
rule is a Qualifying Statute, the Firm shall be jointly retained
by the Settling States and the Original Participating
Manufacturers for the purpose of determining whether or not
such statute, regulation, law and/or rule constitutes a
Qualifying Statute.
      The Firm shall make the foregoing determination within 90
days of a written request to it from the relevant Settling State
(copies of which request the Settling State shall also provide
to all Participating Manufacturers and the Independent


                                 46
                                                 Automated Records Management SyS!(
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
  written notice of such detennination to the relevant Settling
  State, NAAG, all Participating Manufacturers and the
  Independent Auditor. The detennination of the Finn with
  respect to this issue shall be conclusive and binding upon all
  parties, and shall be final and non-appealable; provided,
  however, (i) that such detennination shall be of no force and
  effect with respect to a proposed statute, regulation, law
  and/or rule that is thereafter enacted with any modification or
  addition; and (ii) that the Settling State in which the Qualifying
  Statute was enacted and any Participating Manufacturer may
  at any time request that the Finn reconsider its detennination
  as to this issue in light of subsequent events (including, without
  limitation, subsequent judicial review, interpretation,
  modification and/or disapproval of a Settling State's
  Qualifying Statute, and the manner and/or the effect of
  enforcement of such Qualifying Statute).
        The Original Participating Manufacturers shall severally
  pay their Relative Market Shares of the reasonable fees and
  expenses of the Finn. Only the Participating Manufacturers
  and Settling States, and their respective counsel, shall be
  entitled to communicate with the Finn with respect to the
  Finn's activities pursuant to this subsection (2)(G).
        (H) Except as provided in subsection (2)(F), in the event·
  a Qualifying Statute is enacted within a Settling State and is
. thereafter invalidated or declared unenforceable by a court of
  competent jurisdiction, otherwise rendered not in full force
  and effect, or, upon reconsideration by the Finn pursuant to
  subsection (2)(G) detennined not to constitute a Qualifying
  Statute, then such Settling State's Allocated Payments shall
  be fully subject to an NPM Adjustment unless and until the
  requirements of subsection (2)(B) have been once again
  satisfied. (3) Allocation ofNPM Adjustment Among Original
  Participating Manufacturers. The portion of the total amount
  of the NPM Adjustment to which the Original Participating
 Manufacturers are entitled in any year that can be applied in
  such year consistent with subsection lX(d)(2) (the "Available
 NPM Adjustment") shall be allocated among them as
  provided in this subsection IX(d)(3)
        (A) The "Base NPM Adjustment" shall be detennined for
 each Original Participating Manufacturer in such year as
  follows:
        (i) For those Original Participating Manufacturers whose

                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                   47
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
year in which the NPM Adjustment in question is applied
exceed or are equal to their respective 1997 Relative Market
Shares, the Base NPM Adjustment shall equal 0 (zero).
   . (ii) For those Original Participating Manufacturers whose
Relative Market Shares in the year in which the NPM
Adjustment in immediately preceding the year question is
applied are less than their respective 1997 Relative Market
Shares, the Base NPM Adjustment shall equal the result of
(x) the difference between such Original Participating
Manufacturer's Relative Market Share in such preceding year
and its 1997 Relative Market Share multiplied by both (y) the
number of individual Cigarettes (expressed in thousands of
units) shipped in or to the United States, the District of
Columbia and Puerto Rico by all the Original Participating
Manufacturers in such preceding year (detennined in
accordance with subsection II(mm) and (z) $20 per each
thousand units of Cigarettes (as this number is adjusted
pursuant to subsection IX(d)(3)(C) below).
      (iii) For those Original Participating Manufacturers whose
Base NPM Adjustment, if calculated pursuant to subsection
I (ii) above, would exceed $300 million (as this number is
adjusted pursuant to subsection IX(d)(3)(C) below), the
Base NPM Adjustment shall equal $300 million (or such
adjusted number, as provided in subsection IX(d)(3)(C)
below).
       (B) The share of the Available NPM Adjustment each
Original Participating Manufacturer is entitled to shall be
calculated as follows:
      (i) lfthe Available NPM Adjustment the Original
Participating Manufacturers are erititled to in any year is less
the or equal to the sum ofthe Base NPM Adjustments of all
Original Participating Manufacturers in such year, then such
Available NPM Adjustment shall be allocated among those
Original Participating Manufacturers whose Base NPM
Adjustment is not equal to 0 (zero) pro rata in proportion to
their respective Base NPM Adjustments.
      (ii) lfthe Available NPM Adjustment the Original
Participating Manufacturers are entitled to in any year
exceeds the sum of the Base NPM Adjustments of all
Original Participating Manufacturers in such year, then (x) the
difference between such Available NPM Adjustment and
such sum of the Base NPM Adjustments shall be allocated


                                48               Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
proportion to their Relative Market Shares (the applicable
Relative Market Shares to be those in the year immediately
preceding such year), and (y) each Original Participating
Manufacturer's share of such Available NPM Adjustment
shall equal the sum of (1) its Base NPM Adjustment for such
year, and (2) the amount allocated to such Original
Participating Manufacturer pursuant to clause (x).
      (iii) If an Original Participating Manufacturer's share of the
Available NPM Adjustment calculated pursuant to subsection
IX(d)(3)(B)(i) or IX(d)(3)(B)(ii) exceeds such Original
Participating Manufacturer's payment amount to which such
NPM Adjustment applies (as such payment amount has been
detennined pursuant to step B of clause "Seventh" of
subsection IXU», then (1) such Original Participating
Manufacturer's share of the Available NPM Adjustment shall
equal such payment amount, and (2) such excess shall be
reallocated among the other Original Participating
Manufacturers pro rata in proportion to their Relative Market
Shares. (C) Adjustments:
      (i) For calculations made pursuant to this subsection
IX( d)(3) (if any) with respect to payments due in the year
2000, the number used in subsection IX(d)(3)(A)(ii)(z) shall
be $20 and the number used in subsection IX(d)(3)(A)(iii)
shall be $300 million. Each year thereafter, both these
numbers shall be adjusted upward or downward by
multiplying each of them by the quotient produced by dividing
(x) the average revenue per Cigarette of all the Original
Participating Manufacturers in the year immediately preceding
such year, by (y) the average revenue per Cigarette of all the
Original Participating Manufacturers in the year immediately
preceding such immediately preceding year.
       (ii) For purposes of this subsection, the average revenue
per Cigarette of all the Original Participating Manufacturers in
any year shall equal (x) the aggregate revenues of all the
Original Participating Manufacturers from sales of Cigarettes
in the fifty United States, the District of Columbia and Puerto
Rico after Federal excise taxes and after payments pursuant
to this Agreement and the tobacco litigation Settlement
Agreements with the States of Florida, Mississippi,
Minnesota and Texas (as such revenues are reported to the
United States Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC")
for such year (either independently by the Original


                                  49              Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
  statements reported to the SEC by an Affiliate of the Original
  Participating Manufacturers) or, in the case of an Original
  Participating Manufacturer that does not report income to the
  SEC, as reported in financial statements prepared in
  accordance with United States generally accepted accounting
  principles and audited by a nationally recognized accounting
  firm), divided by (y) the aggregate number of the individual
  Cigarettes shipped in or to the United States, the District of
  Columbia and Puerto Rico by all the Original Participating
  Manufacturers in such year (determined in accordance with
. subsection II(mm).
        (D) In the event that in the year immediately preceding the
  year in which the NPM Adjustment in question is applied
  both (x) the Relative Market Share of Lorillard Tobacco
  Company (or of its successor) ("Lorillard") was less than or
  equal to 20.0000000%, and (y) the number of individual
  Cigarettes shipped in or to the United States, the District of
  Columbia and Puerto Rico by Lorillard (determined in
  accordance with subsection II(mm)) (for purposes of this
  subsection (D), "Volume") was less than or equal to 70
  billion, Lorillard's and Philip Morris Incorporated's (or its
  successor's) ("Philip Morris") shares of the Available NPM
 Adjustment calculated pursuant to subsections (3)(A)-(C)
  above shall be further reallocated between Lorillard and
 Philip Morris as follows (this subsection (3)(D) shall not
  apply in the year in which either ofthe two conditions
  specified in this sentence is not satisfied):
        (i) Notwithstanding subsections (A)-(C) of this subsection
  (d)(3), but subject to further adjustment pursuant to
  subsections (D)(ii) and (D) (iii) below, Lorillard's share of the
 Available NPM Adjustment shall equal its Relative Market
  Share of such Available NPM Adjustment (the applicable
 Relative Market Share to be that in the year immediately
 preceding the year in which such NPM Adjustment is
  applied). The dollar amount of the difference between the
  share of the Available NPM Adjustment Lorillard is entitled
 to pursuant to the preceding sentence and the share of the
 Available NPM Adjustment it would be entitled to in the
  same year pursuant to subsections (d)(3)(A)-(C) shall be
 reallocated to Philip Morris and used to decrease or increase,
  as the case may be, Philip Morris's share of the Available
 NPM Adjustment in such year calculated pursuant to

                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                  50
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
      (ii) In the event that in the year immediately preceding the
year in which the NPM Adjustment in question is applied
either (x) Lorillard's Relative Market Share was greater than
15.0000000% (but did not exceed 20.0000000%), or (y)
Lorillard's Volume was greater than 50 billion (but did not
exceed 70 billion), or both, Lorillard's share of the Available
NPM Adjustment calculated pursuant to subsection
(d)(3)(D)(i) shall be reduced by a percentage equal to the
greater of (I) 10.0000000% for each percentage point (or
fraction thereof) of excess of such Relative Market Share
over 15.0000000% (if any), or (2) 2.5000000% for each
billion (or fraction thereof) of excess of such Volume over 50
billion (if any). The dollar amount by which Lorillard's share
of the Available NPM Adjustment is reduced in any year
pursuant to this subsection (D)(ii) shall be reallocated to
Philip Morris and used to increase Philip Morris's share of the
Available NPM Adjustment in such year.
      (iii) In the event that in any year a reallocation ofthe
shares of the Available NPM Adjustment between Lorillard
and Philip Morris pursuant to this subsection (d)(3)(D) results
in Philip Morris's share of the Available NPM Adjustment in
such year exceeding the greater of (x) Philip Morris's Relative
Market Share of such Available NPM Adjustment (the
applicable Relative Market Share to be that in the year
immediately preceding such year), or (y) Philip Morris's share
of the Available NPM Adjustment in such year calculated
pursuant to subsections (d)(3)(A)-(C), Philip Morris's share
of the Available NPM Adjustment in such year shall be
reduced to equal the greater of (x) or (y) above. In such
instance, the dollar amount by which Philip Morris's share of
the Available NPM Adjustment is reduced pursuant to the
preceding sentence shall be reallocated to Lorillard and used
to increase Lorillard's share of the Available NPM
Adjustment in such year.
      (iv) In the event that either Philip Morris or Lorillard is
treated as a Non-Participating Manufacturer for purposes of
this subsection IX(d)(3) pursuant to subsection
XVill(w)(2)(A), this subsection (3)(D) shall not be applied,
and the Original Participating Manufacturers' shares of the
Available NPM Adjustment shall be detennined solely as
described in subsections (3)(A)-(C) .
    . (4) NPM Adjustment for Subsequent Participating

                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                  51
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
IX(i)(3), a Subsequent Participating Manufacturer shall be
entitled to an NPM Adjustment with respect to payments due
from such Subsequent Participating Manufacturer in any year
during which m-NPM Adjustment is applicable under
subsection (d)(1) above to payments due from the Original
Participating Manufacturers.
      The amount of such NPM Adjustment shall equal the
product of (A) the NPM Adjustment Percentage for such
year multiplied by (B) the sun- of the payments due in the
year in question from such Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer that correspond to payments due from Original
Participating Manufacturers pursuant to subsection IX(c) (as
such payment amounts due from such Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer have been adjusted and allocated
pursuant to clauses "First" through "Fifth" of subsection
IXU)).
      The NPM Adjustment to payments by each Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer-shall be allocated and reallocated,
among the Settling States in a manner consistent with
subsection (d)(2) above. (e) Supplemental Payments.
Beginning on April 15, 2004, and on April 15 of each year
thereafter in perpetuity, in the event that the sum of the
Market Shares of the Participating Manufacturers that were
Participating Manufacturers during the entire calendar year
immediately preceding the year in which the payment in
question would be due (the applicable Market Share to be
that for the calendar year immediately preceding the year in
which the payment in question would be due) equals or
exceeds 99.0500000%, each Original Participating
Manufacturer shall severally pay to the Escrow Agent (to be
credited to the Subsection IX(e) Account) for the benefit of
the Foundation its Relative Market Share of the base amount
of $300,000,000, as such payments are modified in
accordance with this subsection (e).
      Such payments shall be utilized by the Foundation to fund
the national public education functions of the Foundation
described in section VI(f)(1), in the manner described in and
subject to the provisions of sections VI(g) and VI(h). The
payments made by the Original Participating Manufacturers
pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to the Inflation
Adjustment, the Volume Adjustment, the Non-Settling States
Reduction, and the offset for miscal~ulated or disputed

                                              Automated Records Management System
                                52            Hex-Dump Conversion
      (f) Payment Responsibility. The payment obligations of
each Participating Manufacturer pursuant to this Agreement
shall be the several responsibility only ofthat Participating
Manufacturer. The payment obligations of a Participating
Manufacturer shall not be the obligation or responsibility of
any Affiliate of such Participating Manufacturer. The payment
obligations of a Participating Manufacturer shall not be the
obligation or responsibility of any other Participating
Manufacturer. Provided, however, that no provision of this
Agreement shall waive or excuse liability under any state or
federal fraudulent conveyance or fraudulent transfer law. Any
Participating Manufacturer whose Market Share (or Relative
Market Share) in any given year equals zero shall have no
payment obligations under this Agreement in the succeeding
year.
      (g) Corporate Structures. Due to the particular corporate
structures ofRJ. Reynolds Tobacco Company ("Reynolds")
and Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation ("B&W")
with respect to their non-domestic tobacco operations,
Reynolds and B&W shall be severally liable for their
respective shares of each payment due pursuant to this
Agreement up to (and their liability hereunder shall not
exceed) the full extent of their assets used in and earnings
derived from, the manufacture and/or sale in the States of
Tobacco Products intended for domestic consumption, and
no recourse shall be bad against any of their other assets or
earnings to satisfy such obligations.
      (h) Accrual of Interest. Except as expressly provided
otherwise in this Agreement, any payment due hereunder and
not paid when due (or payments requiring the accrual of
interest under subsection XI(d)) shall accrue interest from and
including the date such payment is due until (but not including)
the date paid at the Prime Rate plus three percentage points.
(i) Payments by Subsequent Participating Manufacturers.
      ( I ) A Subsequent Participating Manufacturer shall have
payment obligations under this Agreement only in the event
that its Market Share in any calendar year exceeds 125
percent of its 1997 Market Share (subject to the provisions
of subsection (i)(4)). In the year following any such calendar
year, such Subsequent Participating Manufacturer shall make
payments corresponding to those due in that same following
year from the Original Participating Manufacturers pursuant

                                                Automated Records Management System
                                53
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
31, 1999), !X(c)(1), !X(c)(2) and !X(e). The amounts of such
corresponding payments by a Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer are in addition to the corresponding payments
that are due from the Original Participating Manufacturers
and shall be determined as described in subsections (2) and
(3) below. Such payments by a Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer shall (A) be due on the same dates as the
corresponding payments are due from Original Participating
Manufacturers; (B) be for the same purpose as such
corresponding payments; and (C) be paid, allocated and
distributed in the same manner as such corresponding
payments.
      (2) The base amount due from a Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer on any given date shall be determined by
multiplying (A) the corresponding base amount due on the
same date from all of the Original Participating Manufacturers
(as such base amount is specified in the corresponding
subsection ofthis Agreement and is adjusted by the Volume
Adjustment (except for the provisions of subsection (B)(ii) of
Exhibit E), but before such base amount is modified by any
other adjustments, reductions or offsets) by (B) the quotient
produced by dividing (i) the result of (x) such Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer's applicable Market Share (the
applicable Market Share being that for the calendar year
immediately preceding the year in which the payment in
question is due) minus (y) 125 percent of its 1997 Market
Share, by (ii) the aggregate Market Shares of the Original
Participating Manufacturers (the applicable Market Shares
being those for the calendar year immediately preceding the
year in which the payment in question is due).
      (3) Any payment due from a Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer under subsections (1) and (2) above shall be
subject (up to the full amount of such payment) to the
Inflation Adjustment, the Non-Settling States Reduction, the
NPM Adjustment, the offset for miscalculated ordisputed
payments described in subsection XI(i), the Federal Tobacco
Legislation Offset, the Litigating Releasing Parties Offset and
the offsets for claims over described in subsections
XII(a)(4)(B) and XII(a)(8), to the extent that such
adjustments, reductions or offsets would apply to the
corresponding payment due from the Original Participating
Manufacturers. Provided, however, that all adjustments and


                                54
                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
  entitled may only be applied against payments by such
  Subsequent Participating Manufacturer, if any, that are due
  within 12 months after the date on which the Subsequent
  Participating Manufacturer becomes entitled to such
  adjustment or makes the payment that entitles it to such
  offset, and shall not be carried forward beyond that time even
  if not fully used.
        (4) For purposes of this subsection (i), the 1997 Market
  Share (and 125 percent thereof) of those Subsequent
  Participating Manufacturers that either (A) became a
  signatory to this Agreement more than 60 days after the
  MSA Execution Date or (B) had no Market Share in 1997,
  shall equal zero. G) Order of Application of Allocations,
  Offsets, Reductions and Adjustments.
        The payments due under this Agreement shall be
  calculated as set forth below. The "base amount" referred to
  in clause "First" below shall mean (1) in the case of payments
  due from Original Participating Manufacturers, the base
  amount referred to in the subsection establishing the payment
  obligation in question; and (2) in the case of payments due
  from a Subsequent Participating Manufacturer, the base
  amount referred to in subsection (i)(2). ill the event that a
  particular adjustment, reduction or offset referred to in a
. clause below does not apply to the payment being calculated,
  the result of the clause in question shall be deemed to be
  equal to the result of the immediately preceding clause. (If
  clause "First" is inapplicable, the result of clause First" will be
  the base amount of the payment in question prior to ariy
  offsets, reductions or adjustments.)
        First: the illflation Adjustment shall be applied to the base
  amount of the payment being calculated;
        Second: the Volume Adjustment (other than the
  provisions of subsection (B)(iii) of Exhibit E) shall be applied
  to the result of clause "First";
         Third: the result of clause "Second" shall be reduced by
  the Previously Settled States Reduction;
        Fourth: the result of clause "Third" shall be reduced by the
  Non-Settling States Reduction;
        Fifth: in the case of payments due under subsections
  IX(c )(1) and IX(c )(2), the results of clause "Fourth" for each
  such payment due in the calendar year in question shall be
  apportioned among the Settling States pro rata in proportion


                                   55
                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
amounts for each particular Settling State shall then added
together to form such Settling State's Allocated Payment. In
the case of payments due under subsection !X(i) that
correspond to payments due under subsections 1. Y( c)(1) or
!X(c)(2), the results of clause "Fourth" for all such payments
due from a particular Subsequent Participating Manufacturer
in the calendar year in question shall be apportioned among
the Settling States pro rata in proportion to their respective
Allocable Shares, and the resulting amounts for each
particular Settling State shall then be added together. (In the
case of all other payments made pursuant to this Agreement,
this clause Fifth" is inapplicable.);
      Sixth: the NPM Adjustment shall be applied to the results
of clause "Fifth" pursuant to subsections !X(d)(l ) and (d)(2)
(or, in the case of payments due from the Subsequent
Participating Manufacturers, pursuant to subsection !X(d)(4);
      Seventh: In the case of payments due from the Original
Participating \manufacturers to which clause "Fifth" (and
therefore clause "Sixth") does not apply, the result of clause
"Fourth" shall be allocated among the Original Participating
\manufacturers according to their Relative Market Shares.
      In the case of payments due from the Original
Participating Manufacturers to which clause "Fifth" applies:
(A) the Allocated Payments of all Settling States determined
pursuant to clause "Fifth" (prior to reduction pursuant to
clause "Sixth") shall be added together; (B) the resulting sum
shall be allocated among the Original Participating
Manufacturers according to their Relative Market Shares and
subsection (B)(iii) of Exhibit E hereto (if such subsection is
applicable); (C) the Available NPM Adjustment (as
determined pursuant to clause Sixth") shall be allocated
among the Original Participating Manufacturers pursuant to
subsection !X(d)(3); (D) the respective result of step (C)
above for each Original Participating Manufacturer shall be
subtracted from the respective result of step (B) above for
such Original Participating Manufacturer; and (E) the resulting
payment amount due from each Original Participating
Manufacturer shall then be allocated among the Settling
States in proportion to the respective results of clause "Sixth"
for each Settling State.
      The offsets described in clauses "Eighth" through "Twelfth"
shall then be applied separately against each Original

                                56          Automated Records Management System
                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
Settling State by Settling State basis) according to each
Original Participating Manufacturer's separate entitlement to
such offsets, if any, in the calendar year in question. (In the
case of payments due from Subsequent Participating
Manufacturers, this clause "Seventh" is inapplicable.)
      Eighth: the offset for miscalculated or disputed payments
described in subsection XI(i) (and any carry-forwards arising
from such offset) shall be applied to the results of clause
"Seventh" (in the case of payments due from the Original
Participating Manufacturers) or to the results of clause "Sixth"
(in the case of payments due from Subsequent Participating
Manufacturers);
      Ninth: the Federal Tobacco Legislation Offset (including
any carry-forwards arising from such offset) shall be applied
to the results of clause "Eighth";
      Tenth: the Litigating Releasing Parties Offset (including any
carry-forwards arising from such offset) shall be applied to
the results of clause "Ninth";
      Eleventh: the offset for claims over pursuant to subsection
XII(a)(4)t(B) "including any carry-forwards arising from such
offset) shall be applied to the results of .clause "Tenth";
Twelfth: the offset for claims over pursuant to subsection
XII(a)(8) (including .any carry-forwards arising from such
offset) shall be applied to the results of clause Eleventh"; and
      Thirteenth: in the case of payments to which clause "Fifth"
applies, the Settling States' allocated shares ofthe payments
due from each Participating Manufacturer (as such shares
have been determined in step (E) of clause "Seventh" in the
case of payments from the Original Participating
Manufacturers or in clause "Sixth" in the case of payments
from the Subsequent Participating Manufacturers, and have
been reduced by clauses "Eighth" through "Twelfth") shall be
added together to state the aggregate payment obligation of
each Participating Manufacturer with respect to the payments
in question. (In the case of a payment to which clause "Fifth"
does not apply, the aggregate payment obligation of each
Participating Manufacturer with respect to the payment in
question shall be stated by the results of clause "Eighth.") .




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                 57           Hex.-Dump Conversion

(a) Iffederal tobacco-related legislation is enacted on or
before November 30, 2002, and if such legislation provides
for payment(s) by any Original Participating Manufacturer
(whether by settlement payment, tax or any other: means), all
or part of which are actually made available to a Settling
State ("Federal Funds"), each Original Participating
Manufacturer shall receive a continuing dollar-far-dollar
offset for any and all amounts that are paid by such Original
Participating Manufacturer pursuant to such legislation and
actually made available to such Settling State (except as
described in subsections (b) and (c) below).
      Such offset shall be applied against the applicable Original
Participating Manufacturer's share (determined as described
in step E of c1ause- Seventh" of subsection IXO)) of such
Settling State's Allocated Payment, up to the full amount of
such Original Participating Manufacturer's share of such
Allocated Payment (as such share had been reduced by
adjustment, if any, pursuant to the NPM Adjustment and has
been reduced by offset, if any, pursuant to the offset for
miscalculated or disputed payments).
      Such offset shall be made against such Original
Participating Manufacturer's share of the first Allocated
Payment due after such Federal Funds are first available for
receipt by such Settling State.
      In the event that such offset would in any given year
exceed such Original Participating Manufacturer's share of
such Allocated Payment: (1) the offset to which such Original
Participating Manufacturer is entitled under this section in
such year shall be the full amount of such Original
Participating Manufacturer's share of such Allocated
Payment, and (2) all amounts not offset by reason of
subsection (1) shall carry forward and be offset in the
following year(s) until all such amounts have been offset.
      (b) The offset described in subsection (a) shall apply only
to that portion of Federal Funds, if any, that are either
unrestricted as to their use, or restricted to any form of health
care or to any use related to tobacco (including, but not
limited to, tobacco education, cessation, control or
enforcement).
      XI. CALCULATION AND DISBURSEMENT OF
PAYMENTS


                                 58
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Beginning with payments due in the year 2000, an
Independent Auditor shall calculate and detennine the amount
of all payments owed pursuant to this Agreement, the
adjustments, reductions and offsets thereto (and all resulting
carry-forwards, if any), the allocation of such payments,
adjustments, reductions, offsets and carry-forwards among
the Participating Manufacturers and among the Settling
States, and shall perfonn all other calculations in connection
with the foregoing (including, but not limited to, detennining
Market Share, Relative Market Share, Base Aggregate
Participating Manufacturer Market Share and Actual
Aggregate Participating Manufacturer Market Share).
      The Independent Auditor shall promptly collect all
infonnation necessary to make such calculations and
detenninations. Each Participating Manufacturer and each
Settling State shall provide the Independent Auditor, as
promptly as practicable, with infonnation in its possession or
readily available to it necessary for the Independent Auditor
to perfonn such calculations. The Independent Auditor shall
agree to maintain the confidentiality of all such infonnation,
except t?at the Independent Auditor may provide such
infonnation to Participating Manufacturers and the Settling
States as set forth in this Agreement. The Participating
Manufacturers and the Settling States agree to maintain the
confidentiality of such infonnation.
      (2) Payments due from the Original Participating
Manufacturers prior to January 1, 2000 (other than the first
payment due pursuant to subsection IX( shall be based on the
1998 Relative Market Shares of the Original Participating
Manufacturers or, if the Original Participating Manufacturers
are unable to on such Relative Market Shares, on their 1997
Relative Market Shares specified in Exhibit Q.
      (b) Identity of Independent Auditor. The Independent
Auditor shall be a major, nationally recognized, certified
public accounting finn jointly selected by agreement of the
Original Participating Manufacturers and those Attorneys
General of the Settling States who are members of the
NAAG executive committee, who shall jointly retain the
power to replace the Independent Auditor and appoint its
successor.
     Fifty percent of the costs and fees of the Independent
Auditor (but in no event more than $500,000 per annum),


                                59            Automated Records Management System
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
the balance of such costs and fees shall be paid by the
Original Participating Manufacturers, allocated among them
according to their Relative Market Shares. The agreement
retaining the Independent Auditor shall provide that the
Independent Auditor shall perform the functions specified for
it in this Agreement, and that it shall do so in the manner
specified in this Agreement.
       (c) Resolution of Disputes. Any dispute, controversy or
claim arising out of or relating to calculations performed by,
or any determinations made by, the Independent Auditor
(including, without limitation, any dispute concerning the
operation or Application of any of the adjustments,
reductions, offsets, carry-forwards and allocations 'described
in subsection !X(j) or subsection XI(i) shall be submitted to
binding arbitration before a panel of three neutral arbitrators,
each of whom shall be a former Article III federal judge.
Each of the two sides to the dispute shall select one
arbitrator. The two arbitrators so selected shall select the
third arbitrator. The arbitration shall be governed by the
United States Federal Arbitration Act. (d) General Provisions
as to Calculation of Payments.
       ( I ) Not less than 90 days prior to the scheduled due
date of any payment due pursuant to this Agreement
("Payment Due Date"), the Independent Auditor shall deliver
to each other Notice Party a detailed itemization of all .
information required by the Independent Auditor to complete
its calculation of (A) the amount due from each Participating
Manufacturer with respect to such payment, and (B) the
portion of such amount allocable to each entity for whose
benefit such payment is to be made.
       To the extent practicable, the Independent Auditor shall
specify in such itemization which Notice Party is requested to
produce which information. Each Participating Manufacturer
and each Settling State shall use its best efforts to promptly
supply all of the required information that is within its
possession or is readily available to it to the Independent .
Auditor, and in any event not less than 50 days prior to such
Payment Due Date. Such best efforts obligation shall be
continuing in the case of information that comes within the
possession of, or becomes readily available to, any Settling
State or Participating Manufacturer after the date 50 days
prior to such Payment Due Date.

                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                 60
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
the Independent Auditor shall deliver to each other Notice
Party (A) detailed preliminary calculations ("Preliminary
Calculations") ofthe amount due from each Participating
Manufacturer and of the amount allocable to each entity for
whose benefit such payment is to be made, showing all
applicable offsets, adjustments, reductions and
carry-forwards and setting forth all the information on which
the Independent Auditor relied in preparing such Preliminary
Calculations, and (B) a statement of any information still
required by the Independent Auditor to complete its
calculations.
      (3) Not less than 30 days prior to the Payment Due Date,
any Participating Manufacturer or any Settling State that
disputes any aspect of the Preliminary Calculations (including,
but not limited to, disputing the methodology that the
Independent Auditor employed, or the information on which
the Independent Auditor relied, in preparing such
calculations) shall notify each other Notice Party of such
dispute, including the reasons and basis therefor.
      (4) Not less than 15 days prior to the Payment Due Date,
the Independent Auditor shall deliver to each other Notice
Party a detailed recalculation (a "Final Calculation") of the
amount due from each Participating Manufacturer, the
amount allocable to each entity for whose benefit such
payment is to be made, and the Account to which such
payment is to be credited, explaining any changes from the
Preliminary Calculation.
      The Final Calculation may include estimates of a-amounts
in the circumstances described in subsection (d)(5). (5) The
following provisions shall govern in the event that the
information required by the Independent Auditor to complete
its calculations is not in its possession by the date as of which
the Independent Auditor is required to provide either a
Preliminary Calculation or a Final Calculation.
      (A) If the information in question is riot readily available to
any Settling State, any Original Participating Manufacturer or
any Subsequent Participating Manufacturer, the Independent
Auditor shall employ an assumption as to the missing
information producing the minimum amount that is likely to be
due with respect to the payment in question, and shall set
forth its assumption as to the missing information in its
Preliminary Calculation or Final Calculation, whichever is at

                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                  61
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
     Any Original Participating Manufacturer, Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer or Settling State may dispute any
such assumption employed by the Independent Auditor in its
Preliminary Calculation in the manner prescribed in
subsection (d)(3) or any such assumption employed by the
Independent Auditor in its Final Calculation in the manner
prescribed in subsection (d)(6). lfthe missing information
becomes available to the Independent Auditor prior to the
Payment Due Date, the Independent Auditor shall promptly
revise its Preliminary Calculation or Final Calculation
(whichever is applicable) and shall promptly provide the
revised calculation to each Notice Party, showing the newly
available information.
     If the missing information does not become available to
the Independent Auditor prior to the Payment Due Date, the
minimum amount calculated by the Independent Auditor
pursuant to this subsection (A) shall be paid on the Payment
Due Date, subject to disputes pursuant to subsections (d)(6)
and (d)(8) and without prejudice to a later final determination
of the correct amount. If the missing information becomes
available to the Independent Auditor after the Payment Due
Date, the Independent Auditor shall calculate the correct
amount of.the payment in question and shall apply any
overpayment or underpayment as an offset or additional
payment in the manner described in subsection (i).
      (B) If the information in question is readily available to a
Settling State, Original Participating Manufacturer or
Subsequent Participating Manufacturer, but such Settling
State, Original Participating Manufacturer or Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer does not supply such information
to the Independent Auditor, the Independent Auditor shall
base the calculation in question on its best estimate of such
information, and shall show such estimate in its Preliminary
Calculation or Final Calculation, whichever is applicable. Any
Original Participating Manufacturer, Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer or Settling State (except the entity that withheld
the information) may dispute such estimate employed by the
Independent Auditor in its Preliminary Calculation in the
manner prescribed in subsection (d)(3) or such estimate
employed by the Independent Auditor in its Final Calculation
in the manner prescribed in subsection (d)( 6).
      If the withheld information is not made available to the


                                  62             Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Due Date, the estimate employed by the Independent Auditor
(as revised by the Independent Auditor in light of any dispute
filed pursuant to the preceding sentence) shall govern the
amounts to be paid on the Payment Due Date, subject to
disputes pursuant to subsection (d)(6) and without prejudice
to a later final determination of the correct amount. In the
event that the withheld information subsequently becomes
available, the Independent Auditor shall calculate the correct
amount and shall apply any overpayment or underpayment as
an offset or additional payment in the manner described in
subsection (i).
      (6) Not less than five days prior to the Payment Due
Date, each Participating Manufacturer and each Settling State
shall deliver to each Notice Party a statement indicating
whether it disputes the Independent Auditor's Final
Calculation and, if so, the disputed and undisputed amounts
and the basis for the dispute. Except to the extent a
Participating Manufacturer or a Settling State delivers a .
statement indicating the existence of a dispute by such date,
the amounts set forth in the Independent Auditor's Final
Calculation shall be paid on the Payment Due Date.
      Provided, however, that (A) in the event that the
Independent Auditor revises its Final Calculation within five
days of the Payment Due Date as provided in subsection
(5)(A) due to receipt of previously missing information, a
Participating Manufacturer or Settling State may dispute such
revision pursuant to the procedure set forth in this subsection
(6) at any time prior to the Payment Due Date; and (B) prior
to the date four years after the Payment Due Date, neither
failure to dispute a calculation made by the Independent
Auditor nor actual agreement with any calculation or payment
to the Escrow Agent or to another payee shall waive any
Participating Manufacturer's or Settling State's rights. to
dispute any payment (or the Independent Auditor's
calculations with respect to any payment) after the Payment
Due Date. No Participating Manufacturer and no Settling
State shall have a right to raise any dispute with respect to
any payment or calculation after the date four years after such
payment's Payment Due Date.
      (7) Each Participating Manufacturer shall be obligated to
pay by the Payment Due Date the undisputed portion of the
total amount calculated as due from it by the Independent


                                63               Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
  render the Participating Manufacturer liable for interest
  thereon as provided in subsection IX(h) of this Agreement, in
  addition to any other remedy available under this Agreement.
        (8) As to any disputed portion of the total amount
  calculated to be due pursuant to the Final Calculation, any
  Participating Manufacturer that by the Payment Due Date
  pays such disputed portion into the Disputed Payments
  Account (as defined in the Escrow Agreement) shall not be
  liable for interest thereon even if the amount disputed was in
  fact properly due and owing. Any Participating Manufacturer
  that by the Payment Due Date does not pay such disputed
  portion into the Disputed Payments Account shall be liable
  for interest as provided in subsection IX(h) if the amount
  disputed was in fact properly due and owing.
        (9) On the same date that it makes any payment pursuant
  to this Agreement, each Participating Manufacturer shall
  deliver a notice to each other Notice Party showing the
  amount of such payment and the Account to which such
  payment is to be credited.
        ( 10) On the first Business Day after the Payment Due
  Date, the Escrow Agent shall deliver to each other Notice
  Party a statement showing the amounts received by it from
  each Participating Manufacturer and the Accounts credited
  with such amounts.
        (e) General Treatment of Payments. The Escrow Agent
  may disburse amounts from an Account only if permitted, and
  only at such time as permitted, by this Agreement and the
  Escrow Agreement. No amounts may be disbursed to a
  Settling State other than those credited to such Settling
  State's State-Specific Account (as defined in the Escrow
  Agreement).
        The Independent Auditor, in delivering payment
  instructions to the Escrow Agent, shall specify: the amount to
  be paid; the Account or Accounts from which such payment
  is to be disbursed; the payee of such payment (which may be
  an Account); and the Business Day on which such payment is
  to be made by the Escrow Agent. Except as expressly
  provided in subsection (f) below, in no event may any amount
  be disbursed from any Account prior to Final Approval.
        (f) Disbursements and Charges Not Contingent on Final
  Approval. Funds may be disbursed from Accounts without
  regard to the occurrence of Final Approval in the following


                                 64                                   ement System
                                              Automated Reeor ds Manag
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
      (l ) Payments of Federal and Stat Taxes. Federal, state,
local or other taxes imposed with respect to the amounts
credited to the Accounts shall be paid from such amounts.
The Independent Auditor shall prepare and file any tax
returns required to be filed with respect to the escrow. All
taxes required to be paid shall be allocated to and charged
against the Accounts on a reasonable basis to be determined
by the Independent Auditor. Upon receipt of written
instructions from the Independent Auditor, the Escrow Agent
shall pay such taxes and charge such payments against the
Account or Accounts specified in those instructions.
      (2) Payments to and From Disputed Payments Account.
The Independent ~uditor shall instruct the Escrow Agent to
credit funds from an Account to the Disputed Payments
Account when a dispute arises as to such funds, and shall
instruct the Escrow Agent to credit funds from the Disputed
Payments Account to the appropriate payee when such
dispute is resolved with finality. The Independent Auditor
shall provide the Notice Parties not less than 10 Business
Days prior notice before instructing the Escrow Agent to
disburse funds from the Disputed Payments Account.
      (3) Payments to a State-Specific Account. Promptly
following the occurrence of State-Specific Finality in any
Settling State, such Settling State and the Original
Participating Manufacturers shall notify the Independent
Auditor of such occurrence. The Independent Auditor shall
promptly thereafter notify each Notice Party of such
State-Specific Finality and of the portions of the amounts in
the Subsection IX(b) Account (First), Subsection IX(b)
Account (Subsequent), Subsection IX(c)(1 ) Account and
Subsection IX(c)(2) Account, respectively (as such Accounts
are defined in the Escrow Agreement), that are at such time
held i such Accounts for the benefit of such Settling State,
and which are to be transferred to the appropriate
State-Specific Account for such Settling State.
     If neither the Settling State in question nor any
Participating Manufacturer disputes such amounts or the
occurrence of such State-Specific Finality by notice
delivered' to each other Notice Party not later than 10
Business Days after delivery by the Independent Auditor of
the notice described in the preceding sentence, the
Independent Auditor shall promptly instruct the Escrow


                                65               Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
or any Participating Manufacturer disputes such amounts or
the occurrence of such State-Specific Finality by notice
delivered to each other Notice Party not later than 10
Business Days after delivery by the Independent Auditor of
the notice described in the second sentence of this subsection
(f)(3), the Independent Auditor shall promptly instruct the
Escrow Agent to credit the amount disputed to the Disputed
Payments Account and the undisputed portion to the
appropriate State-Specific Account.
      No amounts may be transferred or credited to a
State-Specific Account for the benefit of any State as to
which State-Specific Finality has not occurred or as to which
this Agreement has terminated.
      (4) Payments to Parties other than Particular Settling
States. (A) Promptly following the occurrence of
State-Specific Finality in one Settling State, such Settling
State and the Original Participating Manufacturers shall notify
the Independent Auditor of such occurrence. The
Independent Auditor shall promptly thereafter notify each
Notice Party of the occurrence of State-Specific Finality in at
lea~t one Settling State and of the amounts held in the
Subsection VI(b) Account, Subsection VI(c) Account (First),
and Subsection Vill(c) Account (as such Accounts are
defined in the Escrow Agreement), if any.
      If neither any of the Settling States nor any of the
Participating Manufacturers disputes such amounts or
disputes the occurrence of State-Specific Finality in one
Settling State, by notice delivered to each Notice Party not
later than ten Business Days after delivery by the Independent
Auditor of the notice described in the preceding sentence, the
Independent Auditor shall promptly instruct the Escrow
Agent to disburse the funds held in such Accounts to the
Foundation or to the Fund specified in subsection Vill(c), as
appropriate .
    . If any Settling State or Participating Manufacturer disputes
such amounts or the occurrence of such State-Specific
Finality by notice delivered to each other Notice Party not
later than 10 Business Days after delivery by the Independent
Auditor of the notice described in the second sentence ofthis
subsection (4)(A), the Independent Auditor shall promptly
instruct the Escrow Agent to credit the amounts disputed to
the Disputed Payments Account and to disburse the


                                 66
                                              Automated Records Management System
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
in subsection VIll(c), as appropriate.
      (B) The Independent Auditor shall instruct the Escrow
Agent to disburse funds on deposit in the Subsection VIll(b)
Account and Subsection IX(e) Account (as such Accounts
are defined in the Escrow Agreement) to NAAG or to the
Foundation, as appropriate, within 10 Business Days after the
date on which such amounts were credited to such Accounts.
      (C) Promptly following the occurrence of State-Specific
Finality in Settling States having aggregate Allocable Shares
equal to at least 80% of the total aggregate Allocable Shares
assigned to all States that were Settling States as of the MSA
Execution Date, the Settling States and the Original
Participating Manufacturers shall notify the Independent
Auditor of such occurrence.
      The Independent Auditor shall promptly thereafter notify
each Notice Party of the occurrence of such State-Specific
Finality and of the amounts held in the Subsection VI(c)
Account (Subsequent) (as such Account is defined in the
Escrow Agreement), if any. If neither any of the Settling
States nor any of the Participating Manufacturers disputes
such amounts or disputes the occurrence of such
State-Specific Finality, by notice delivered to each Notice
Party not later than 10 Business Days after delivery by the
Independent Auditor of the notice described in the preceding
sentence, the Independent Auditor shall promptly instruct the
Escrow Agent to disburse the funds held in such Account to
the Foundation.
      If any Settling State or Participating Manufacturer disputes
such amounts or the occurrence of such State-Specific
Finality by notice delivered to each other Notice Party not
later than 10 Business Days after delivery by the Independent
Auditor of the notice described in the second sentence of this
subsection (4)(C), the Independent Auditor shall promptly
instruct the Escrow Agent to credit the amounts disputed to
the Disputed Payments Account and to disburse the
undisputed portion to the Foundation. (5) Treatment of
Payments Following Termination.
      (A) As to amounts held for Settling States. Promptly upon
the termination of this Agreement with respect toany Settling
State (whether or not as part of the termination of this
Agreement as to all Settling States) such State or any
Participating Manufacturer shall notify the Independent


                                 67
                                              Automated Records Management System
                                              Helt.DIlDlP Conversion
     The Independent Auditor shall promptly thereafter notify .
each Notice Party of such termination and ofthe amounts
held in the Subsection IX(b) Account (First), the Subsection
IX(b) Account (Subsequent), the Subsection IX(c)(l )
Account, the Subsection IX( c)(2) Account, and the
State-Specific Account for the benefit of such Settling State.
     If neither the State in question nor any Participating
Manufacturer disputes such amounts or the occurrence of
such termination by notice delivered to each other Notice
Party not later than 10 Business Days after delivery by the
Independent Auditor of the notice described in the preceding
sentence, the Independent Auditor shall promptly instruct the
Escrow Agent to transfer such amounts to the Participating
Manufacturers (on the basis of their respective contributions
of such funds). If the State in question or any Participating
Manufacturer disputes the amounts held in the Accounts or
the occurrence of such termination by notice delivered to
each other Notice Party not later than 10 Business Days after
delivery by the Independent Auditor of the notice described
in the second sentence of this subsection (5)(A), the
Independent Auditor shall promptly instruct the Escrow
Agent to transfer the· amount disputed to the Disputed
Payments Account and the undisputed portion to the
Participating Manufacturers (on the basis of their respective
contributions of such funds).
     As to amounts held for others: If this Agreement is
terminated with respect to all of the Settling States, the
Original Participating Manufacturers shall promptly notify the
Independent Auditor of such occurrence. The Independent
Auditor shall promptly thereafter notify each Notice Party of
such termination and of the amounts held in the Subsection
VI(b) Account, the Subsection VI( c) Account (First), the
Subsection VIII(b) Account, the Subsection VIII(c) Account
and the Subsection IX(e) Account.
     If neither any such State nor any Participating
Manufacturer disputes such amounts or the occurrence of
such termination by notice delivered to each other Notice
Party not later than 10 Business Days after delivery by the
Independent Auditor of the notice described in the preceding
sentence, the Independent Auditor shall promptly instruct the
Escrow Agent to transfer such amounts to the Participating
Manufacturers (on the basis of their respective contributions


                                68          Automated Records Management System
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
Manufacturer disputes the amounts held in the Accounts or
the occurrence of such tennination by notice delivered to
each other Notice Party not later than 10 Business Days after
delivery by the Independent Auditor of the notice described
in the second sentence of this subsection (5)(B), the
Independent Auditor shall promptly instruct the Escrow
Agent to credit the amount disputed to the Disputed
Payments Account and transfer the undisputed portion to the
Participating Manufacturers (on the basis of their respective
contribution of such funds).
      (C) As to amounts held in the Subsection VI6(c) Account
(Subsequent). If this Agreement is tenninated with respect to
Settling States having aggregate Allocable Shares equal to
more than 20% of the total aggregate Allocable Shares
assigned to those States that were Settling States as of the
MSA Execution Date, the Original Participating
Manufacturers shall promptly notify the Independent Auditor
of such occurrence.
      The Independent Auditor shall promptly thereafter notify
each Notice Party of such tennimition and of the amounts
held in the Subsection VI(c) Account (Subsequent) (as
defined in the Escrow Agreement). If neither any such State
with respect to which this Agreement has tenninated nor any
Participating Manufacturer disputes such amounts or the
occurrence of such tennination by notice delivered to each
other Notice Party not later than 10 Business Days after
delivery by the Independent Auditor of the notice described
in the preceding sentence, the Independent Auditor shall
promptly instruct the Escrow Agent to transfer such amounts
to the Participating Manufacturers (on the basis of their
respective contributions of such funds).
      If any such State or any Participating Manufacturer
disputes the amounts held in the Account or the occurrence
of such tennination by notice delivered to each other Notice
Party not later than 10 Business Days after delivery by the
Independent Auditor ofthe notice described in the second
sentence ofthis subsection (S)(C), the Independent Auditor
shall promptly instruct the Escrow Agent to credit the amount
disputed to the Disputed Payments Account and transfer the
undisputed portion to the Participating Manufacturers (on the
basis of their respective contribution of such funds).
     (g) Payments to be Made Only After Final Approval.


                                69               Automated Records Management System.
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Settling States and the Original Participating Manufacturers
shall notify the Independent Auditor of such occurrence. The
Independent Auditor shall promptly thereafter notify each
Notice Party of the occurrence of Final approval and of the
amounts held in the State-Specific Accounts.
      Ifneither any of the Settling States nor any of the
Participating Manufacturers disputes such amounts, disputes
the occurrence of Final Approval or claims that this
Agreement has terminated as to any Settling State for whose
benefit the funds are held in a State-Specific Account, b)
notice delivered to each Notice Party not later than 10
Business Days after delivery by the Independent Auditor of
such notice of Final Approval, the Independent Auditor shall
promptly instruct the Escrow Agent to disburse the funds held
in the State-Specific accounts to the respective Settling
States.
      If any Notice Party disputes such amounts or the
occurrence of Final Approval, or claims that this Agreement
has terminated as to any Settling State for whose benefit the
funds are held in a State-Specific Account, by notice
delivered to each other Notice Party not later than 10
Business Days after delivery by the Independent Auditor of
such notice of Final Approval, the Independent Auditor shall
promptly instruct the Escrow Agent to credit the amounts
disputed to the Disputed as meets Account and to disburse
the undisputed portion to the respective Settling States.
      (h) Applicability to Section XVII Payments. This section
XI shall not be applicable to payments made pursuant to
section XVII; provided, however, that the Independent
Auditor shall be responsible for calculating Relative Market
Shares in connection with such paYments, and the
Independent Auditor shall promptly provide the results of
such calculation to any Original Participating Manufacturer or
Settling State that requests it do so.
      (i) Miscalculated or Disputed Payments.
      (1) Underpayments. (A) If information becomes available
to the Independent Auditor not later than four years after a
Payment Due Date, and such information shows that any
Participating Manufacturer was instructed to make an
insufficient payment on such date ("original payment"), the
Independent Auditor shall promptly determine the additional
payment owed by such Participating Manufacturer and the


                                70            Automated Records Management System
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
payees.
     The Independent Auditor shall then reduce such additional
payment (up to the full amount of such additional payment) by
any adjustments or offsets that were available to the
Participating Manufacturer in question against the original
payment at the time it was made (and have not since been
used) but which such Participating Manufacturer was unable
to use against such original payment because such
adjustments or offsets were in excess of such original
payment (provided that any adjustments or offsets used
against such additional payment shall reduce on a
dollar-for-dollar basis any remaining carry-forward held by
such Participating Manufacturer with respect to such
adjustment or offset).
     The Independent Auditor shall then add interest at the
Prime Rate (calculated from the Payment Due Date in
question) to the additional payment (as reduced pursuant to
the preceding sentence), except that where the additional
payment owed by a Participating Manufacturer is the result of
an underpayment by such Participating Manufacturer caused
by such Participating Manufacturer's withholding of
information as descnbed in subsection (d)(5)(B), the
applicable interest rate shall be that described in subsection
IX(h).
      The Independent Auditor shall promptly give notice of the
additional payment owed by the Participating Manufacturer in
question (as reduced and/or increased as described above)
to all Notice Parties, showing the new information and all
calculations. Upon receipt of such notice, any Participating
Manufacturer or Settling State may dispute the Independent
Auditor's calculations in the manner described in subsection
(d)(3), and the Independent Auditor shall promptly notify
each Notice Party of any subsequent revisions to its
calculations.
      Not more than 15 days after receipt of such notice (or, if
the Independent Auditor revises its calculations, not more
than 15 days after receipt of the revisions), any Participating
Manufacturer and any Settling State may dispute the
Independent Auditor's calculations in the manner prescribed
in subsection (d)(6).
      Failure to dispute the Independent Auditor's calculations
in this manner shall constitute agreement with the Independent


                                71
                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
  subsection (d)(6). Payment of the undisputed portion of an
  additional payment shall be made to the Escrow Agent not
  more than 20 days after receipt of the notice described in this
  subsection (A) (or, if the Independent Auditor revises its
 calculations, not more than 20 days after receipt of the
  revisions).
        Failure to pay such portion shall render the Participating
  Manufacturer liable for interest thereon as provided in
  subsection JX(h). Payment of the disputed portion shall be
  governed by subsection (d)(8).
        (B) To the extent a dispute as to a prior payment is
  resolved with finality against a Participating Manufacturer: (i)
  in the case where the disputed amount has been paid into the
  Disputed Payments Account pursuant to subsection (d)(8),
  the Independent Auditor shall instruct the Escrow Agent to
  transfer such amount to the applicable payee Account(s); (ii)
  in the case where the disputed amount has not been paid into
  the Disputed Payments Account and the dispute was
  identified prior to the Payment Due Date in question by
  delivery ofa statement pursuant to subsection (d)(6)
  identifying such dispute, the Independent Auditor shall
  calculate interest on the disputed amount from the Payment
  Due Date in question (the applicable interest rate to be that
  provided in subsection JX(h» and the allocation of such
  amount and interest among the applicable payees, and shall
  provide notice of the amount owed (and the identity of the
  payor and payees) to all Notice Parties; and (iii) in all other
  cases, the procedure described in subsection (ii) shall apply,
  except that the applicable interest rate shall be the Prime
  Rate.
        (2) Overpayments.
        (A) If a dispute as to a prior payment is resolved with
  finality in favor of a Participating Manufacturer where the
. disputed amount has been paid into the Disputed Payments
  Account pursuant to subsection (d)(8), the Independent
  Auditor shall instruct the Escrow Agent to transfer such
  amount to such Participating Manufacturer.
        (B) If information becomes available to the Independent
  Auditor not later than four years after a Payment Due Date
  showing that a Participating Manufacturer made an .
  overpayment on such date, or if a dispute as to a prior
  payment is resolved with finality in favor of a Participating


                                   72
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
not into the Disputed Payments Account, such Participating
Manufacturer shall be entitled to a continuing dollar-for-dollar
offset as follows:
      (i) offsets under this subsection (B) shall be applied only
against eligible payments to be made by such Participating
Manufacturer after the entitlement to the offset arises. The
eligible payments shall be: in the case of offsets arising from
payments under subsection IX(b) or IX(c)(l), subsequent
payments under any of such subsections; in the case of offsets
arising from payments under subsection IX(c)(2), subsequent
payments under such subsection or, if no subsequent
payments are to be made under such subsection, subsequent
payments under subsection IX( c)(1); in the case of offsets
arising from payments under subsection IX(e), subsequent
payments under such subsection or subsection IX(c); in the
case of offsets arising from payments under subsection VI( c),
subsequent payments under such subsection or, if no
subsequent payments are to be made under such subsection,
subsequent payments under any of subsection IX(c)(1),
IX(c)(2) or IX(e); in the case of offsets arising from payments
under subsection VIII(b), subsequent payments under such
subsection or, if no subsequent payments are to be made
under such subsection, subsequent payments under either
subsection IX( c)( 1 ) or IX(c)(2); in the case of offsets arising
from payments under subsection VIII(c), subsequent
payments under either subsection IX(c)(I) or IX(c)(2); and,
in the case of offsets arising from payments under subsection
IX(i), subsequent payments under such subsection.
      (ii) in the case of offsets to be applied against payments
under subsection IX( c), the offset to be applied shall be
apportioned among the Settling States pro rata in proportion
to their respective shares of such payments.
      (iii) the total amount of the offset to which a Participating'
Manufacturer shall be entitled shall be the full amount of the
overpayment it made, together with interest calculated from
the time of the overpayment to the Payment Due Date ofthe
first eligible payment against which the offset may be applied.
The applicable interest rate shall be the Prime Rate (except
that, where the overpayment is the result of a Settling State's
withholding of information as described in subsection
(d)(S)(B), the applicable interest rate shall be that described
in subsection IX(h).


                                  73              Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
  to the full amount of the Participating Manufacturer's share (in
  the case of payments due from Original Participating
  Manufacturers, determined as described in the first sentence
  of clause "Seventh" of subsection IXO) (or, in the case of
  payments pursuant to subsection IX( c), step D of such
  clause)) ofthe eligible payment in question, as such payment
  has been adjusted and reduced pursuant to clauses "First"
  through "Sixth" of subsection IXO), to the extent each such
  clause is applicable to the payment in question.
.       In the event that the offset to which a Participating
  Manufacturer is entitled under this subsection (B) would
  exceed such Participating Manufacturer's share of the eligible
  payment against which it is being applied, the offset shall be
  the full amount of such Participating Manufacturer's share of
  such eligible payment and all amounts not offset shall carry
  forward and be offset against subsequent eligible payments
  until all such amounts have been offset.
        (j) Payments After Applicable Condition. To the extent
  that a payment is made after the occurrence of all applicable
  conditions for the disbursement of such payment to the
  payee(s) in question, the Independent Auditor shall instruct
  the Escrow Agent to use such payment promptly following its
  deposit.

XII. SETTLING STATES' RELEASE, DISCHARGE
AND COVENANT
(a)Release. ( 1 ) Upon the occurrence of State-Specific
Finality in a Settling State, such Settling State shall absolutely
and unconditionally release and forever discharge all
Released Parties from all Released Claims that the Releasing
Parties directly, indirectly, derivatively or in any other
capacity ever had, now have, or hereafter can, shall or may
have ..
     (2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, this release and
discharge shall not apply to any defendant in a lawsuit settled
pursuant to this Agreement (other than a Participating
Manufacturer) unless and until such defendant releases the
Releasing Parties (and delivers to the Attorney General of the
applicable Settling State a copy of such release) from any and
all Claims of such defendant relating to the prosecution of
such lawsuit.
     (3) Each Settling State (for itself and for the Releasing


                                   74             Automated i<.ecorcis M.aI'''6Cllleni ~J ~lem
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
Releasing Parties) shall not after the occurrence of
State-Specific Finality sue or seek to establish civil liability
against any Released Party based, in whole or in part, upon
any of the Released Claims, and further agrees that such
covenant and agreement shall be a complete defense to any
such civil action or proceeding.
      (4) (A) Each Settling State (for itself and for the Releasing
Parties) agrees that, if a Released Claim by a Releasing Party
against any person or entity that is not a Released Party (a
"non-Released Party") results in or in any way gives rise to a
claim-over (on any theory whatever other than a claim based
on an express written indemnity agreement) by such
non-Released Party against any Released Party (and such
Released Party gives notice to the applicable Settling State
within 30 days of the service of such claim-over (or within 30
days after the MSA Execution Date, whichever is later) and
prior to entry into any settlement of such claim-over), the
Releasing Party: (i) shall reduce or credit against any
judgment or settlement such Releasing Party may obtain
against such non-Released Party the full amount of any
judgment or settlement such non-Released Party may obtain
against the Released Party on such claim-over; and (ii) shall,
as part of any settlement with such non-Released Party,
obtain from such non-Released Party for the benefit of such
Released Party a satisfaction in full of such non-Released
Party's judgment or settlement against the Released Party.
      (B) Each Settling State further agrees that in the event that
the provisions of subsection (4)(A) do not fully eliminate any
and all liability of any Original Participating Manufacturer (or
of any person or entity that is a Released Party by virtue of its
relation to any Original Participating Manufacturer) with
respect to claims-over (on any theory whatever other than a
claim based on an express written indemnity agreement) by
any non-Released Party to recover in whole or in.part any
liability (whether direct or indirect, or whether by way of
settlement (to the extent that such Released Party has given
notice to the applicable Settling State within 30 days of the
service of such claim-over (or within 30 days after the MSA
Execution Date, whichever is later) and prior to entry into any
settlement of such claim-over), judgment or otherwise) of
such non-Released Party to any Releasing Party arising out of
any Released Claim, such Original Participating Manufacturer


                                  75
                                                A~~i.&e£Q.ni~MW1~ement$):stiIDl
                                                ~~n
amounts paid by such Original Participating Manufacturer (or
by any person or entity that is a Released Party by virtue of
its relation to such Original Participating Manufacturer) on
any such liability against such Original Participating
Manufacturer's share (determined as described in step E of
clause "Seventh" of subsection IXU) of the applicable Settling
State's Allocated Payment, up to the full amount of such
Original Participating Manufacturer's share of such Allocated
Payment each year, until all such amounts paid on such
liability have been offset.
      In the" event that the offset under this subsection (4) with
respect to a particular Settling State would in any given year
exceed such Original Participating Manufacturer's share of
such Settling State's Allocated Payment (as such share had
been reduced by adjustment, if any, pursuant to the NPM
Adjustment, and has been reduced by offsets, if any, pursuant
to the offset for miscalculated or disputed payments,the
Federal Tobacco Legislation Offset and the Litigating
Releasing Parties Offset): (i) the offset to which such Original
Participating Manufacturer, is entitled under this subsection in
such year shall be the full amount of such Original
Participating Manufacturer's share of such Allocated
Payment; and (ii) all amounts not offset by reason of
subsection (i) shall carry forward and be offset in the
following year(s) until all such amounts have been offset.
      (C) Each Settling State further agrees that, subject to the
provisions of section IX(i)(3), each Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer shall be entitled to the offset described in
subsection (B) above to the extent that it (or any person or
entity that is a Released Party by virtue of its relationship with
such Subsequent Participating Manufacturer) has paid on
liability that would give rise to an offset under such subsection
ifpaid by an Original Participating Manufacturer.
      (5) This release and covenant shall not operate to interfere
with a Settling State's ability to enforce as against any
Participating Manufacturer the provisions of this Agreement,
or with the Court's ability to enter the Consent Decree or to
maintain continuing jurisdiction to enforce such Consent
Decree pursuant to the terms thereof. Provided, however,
that neither subsection Ill(a) or Ill(r) of this Agreement nor
subsection YeA) or V(I) of the Consent Decree shall create a
right to challenge the continuation, after the MSA Execution


                                  76          Automated Records Management System
                                               Hex.Dwnp Conversion
use of a Cartoon) that was not unlawful prior to the MSA
Execution Date.
      (6) The Settling States do not purport to waive or release
any claim on behalf of Indian tribes.
      (7) The Settling States do not waive or release any
criminal liability based on federal, state or local law. (8)
Notwithstanding the foregoing (and the definition of Released
Parties), this release and covenant shall not apply to retailers,
suppliers or distributors to the extent of any liability arising
from the sale or distribution of Tobacco Products of, or the
supply of component parts of Tobacco Products to, any
non-Released Party.
      (A) Each Settling State (for itself and for the Releasing
Parties) agrees that, if a claim by a Releasing Party against a
retailer, supplier or distributor that would be a Released
Claim but for the operation of the preceding sentence results
in or in any way gives rise to a claim-over (on any theory
whatever) by such retailer, supplier or distributor against any
Released Party (and such Released Party gives notice to the
applicable Settling State within 30 days of the service of such
claim-over (or within 30 days after the MSA Execution Date,
whichever is later) and prior to entry into any settlement of
such claim-over), the Releasing Party: (i) shall reduce or
credit against any judgment or settlement such Releasing
Party may obtain against such retailer, supplier or distributor
the full amount of any judgment or settlement such retailer,
supplier or distributor may obtain against the Released Party
on such claim-over; and (ii) shall, as part of any settlement
with such retailer, supplier or distributor, obtain from such
retailer, supplier or distributor for the benefit of such
Released Party a satisfaction in full of such retailer's,
supplier's or distributor's judgment or settlement against the
Released Party.
      (B) Each Settling State further agrees that in the event that
the provisions of subsection (8)(A) above do not fully
eliminate any and all liability of any Original Participating
Manufacturer (or any person or entity that is a Released
Party by virtue of its relationship to an Original Participating
Manufacturer) with respect to claims-over (on any theory
whatever) by any such retailer, supplier or distributor to
recover in whole or in part any liability (whether direct or
indirect, or whether by way of settlement (to the extent that


                                  77
                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Settling State within 30 days of the service of such claim-over
(or within 30. days after the MSA Execution Date, whichever
is later) and prior to entry into any settlement of such
claim-over), judgment or otherwise) of such retailer, supplier
or distributor to any Releasing Party arising out of any claim·
that would be a Released Claim but for the operation of the
first sentence of this subsection (8), such Original
Participating Manufacturer shall receive a continuing
dollar-for-dollar offset for any amounts paid by such Original
Participating Manufacturer (or by any person or entity that is
a Released Party by virtue of its relation to such Original
Participating Manufacturer) on any such liability against such
Original Participating Manufacturer's share (determined as
described in step E of clause "Seventh" of subsection IXU) of
the applicable Settling State's Allocated Payment, up to the
full amount of such Original Participating Manufacturer's
share of such Allocated Payment each year, until all such
amounts paid on such liability have been offset.
      Participating Manufacturer's share of such Allocated
Payment each year, until all such amounts paid on such
liability have been offset. In the event that the offset under this
subsection (8) with respect to a particular Settling State
would in any given year exceed such Original Participating
Manufacturer's share of such Settling State's Allocated
Payment (as such share had been reduced by adjustment, if
any, pursuant to the NPM Adjustment, and has been reduced
by offsets, if any, pursuant to the offset for miscalculated or
disputed payments, the Federal Tobacco Legislation Offset,
the Litigating Releasing Parties Offset and the offset for
claims-over under subsection XII(a)(4)(B): (i) the offset to
which such Original Participating Manufacturer is entitled
under this subsection in such year shall be the full amount of
such Original Participating Manufacturer's share of such
Allocated Payment; and (ii) all amounts not offset by reason
of clause (i) shall carry forward and be offset in the following
year(s) until all such amounts have been offset.
      (C) Each Settling State further agrees that, subject to the
provisions of subsection IX(i)(3), each Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer shall be entitled to the offset
described in subsection (B) above to the extent that it (or any
person or entity that is a Released Party by virtue of its
relationship with such Subsequent Participating Manufacturer)


                                  78              Automated Records Management SysteTP
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
such subsection if paid by an Original Participating
Manufacturer.
     (9) Notwithstanding any provision of law, statutory or
otherwise, which provides that a general release does not
extend to claims which the creditor does not know or suspect
to exist in its favor at the time of executing the release, which
if known by it must have materially affected its settlement with
the debtor, the releases set forth in this section XII release all
Released Claims against the Released Parties, whether
known or unknown, foreseen or unforeseen, suspected or
unsuspected, that the Releasing Parties may have against the
Released Parties, and the Releasing Parties understand and
acknowledge the significance and consequences of waiver of
any such provision and hereby assume full responsibility for
any injuries, damages or losses that the Releasing Parties may
incur.
     (b) Released Claims Against Released Parties. If a
Releasing Party (or any person or entity enumerated in
subsection II(pp), without regard to the power of the
Attorney General to release claims of such person or entity)
nonetheless attempts to maintain a Released Claim against a
Released Party, such Released Party shall give written notice
of such potential claim to the Attorney General of the
applicable Settling State within 30 days of receiving notice of
such potential claim (or within 30 days after the MSA
Execution Date, whichever is later) (unless such potential
claim is being maintained by such Settling State). The
Released Party may offer the release and covenant as a
complete defense. If it is determined at any point in such
action that the release of such claim is unenforceable or
invalid for any reason (including, but not limited to, lack of
authority to release such claim), the following provisions shall
apply:
     (1) The Released Party shall take all ordinary and
reasonable measures to defend the action fully. The Released
Party may settle or enter into a stipulated judgment with
respect to the action at any time in its sole discretion, but in
such event the offset described in subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3)
below shall apply only if the Released Party obtains the
relevant Attorney General's consent to such settlement or
stipulated judgment, which consent shall not be umeasonably
withheld. The Released Party shall not be entitled to the offset


                                  79
                                                     Automated Records MWlagement System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
Released Party failed to take ordinary and reasonable
measures to defend the action fully. (2) The following
provisions shall apply where the Released Party is an Original
Participating Manufacturer (or any person or entity that is a
Released Party by virtue of its relationship with an Original
Participating Manufacturer):
      (A) In the event of a settlement or stipulated judgment, the
settlement or stipulated amount shall give rise to a continuing
offset as such amount is actually paid against the full amount
of such Original Participating Manufacturer's share
(determined as described in step E of clause "Seventh" of
subsection !X(j) of the applicable Settling State's Allocated
Payment until such time as the settlement or stipulated amount
is fully credited on a dollar-for-dollar basis.
      (B) Judgments (other than a default judgment) against a
Released Party in such an action shall, upon payment of such
judgment,give rise to an immediate and continuing offset
against the full amount of such Original Participating
Manufacturer's share (determined as described in subsection
(A) of the applicable Settling State's Allocated Payment, until
such time as the judgment is fully credited on a
dollar-for-dollar basis.
      (C) Each Settling State reserves the right to intervene in
such an action (unless such action was brought by the Settling
State) to the extent authorized by applicable law in order·to
protect the Settling State's interest under this Agreement.
Each Participating Manufacturer agrees not to oppose any
such intervention.
      (D) In the event that the offset under this subsection (b)(2)
with respect to a particular Settling State would in any given
year exceed such Original Participating Manufacturer's share
of such Settling State's Allocated Payment (as such share had
been reduced by adjustment, if any, pursuant to the NPM
Adjustment, and has been reduced by offsets, if any, pursuant
to the Federal Tobacco Legislation Offset and the offset for
miscalculated or disputed payments):
      (i) the offset to which such Original Participating
Manufacturer is entitled under this subsection (2) in such year
shall be the full amount of such Original Participating
Manufacturer's share of such Allocated Payment; and (ii) all
amounts not offset by reason of clause (i) shall carry forward
and be offset in the followingyear(s) until all such amounts


                                  80
                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
where the Released Party is a Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer (or any person or entity that is a Released
Party by virtue of its relationship with a Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer): Subject to the provisions of
subsection IX(i)(3), each Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer shall be entitled to the offset as described in
subsections (2)(A)-(C) above against payments it otherwise
would owe under section IX(i) to the extent -at it (or any
person or entity that is a Released Party by virtue of its
relationship with such Subsequent Participating Manufacturer)
has paid on a settlement, stipulated judgment or judgment that
would give rise to an offset under such subsections if paid by
an Original Participating Manufacturer.

xm CONSENT DECREES AND DISMISSAL OF
CLAIMS
      (a) Within 10 days after the MSA Execution Date (or, as
to any Settling State identified in the Additional States
provision of Exhibit D, concurrently with the filing of IRS
lawsuit), each Settling State and each Participating
Manufacturer that is a party in any of the lawsuits identified in
Exhibit D shall jointly move for a stay of all proceedings in
such Settling State's lawsuit with respect to the Participating
Manufacturers and all other Released Parties (except any
proceeding seeking public disclosure of documents pursuant
to subsection IV(b). Such stay of a Settling State's lawsuit
shall be dissolved upon the earlier of the occurrence of
State-Specific Finality or termination of this Agreement with
respect to such Settling State pursuant to subsection
XVill(u)(I)
      (b) Not later than December 1 1, (or, as to any Settling
State identified in the Additional States provision of Exhibit
D, concurrently with the filing of its lawsuit): (I) each Settling
State that is a party to a lawsuit identified in Exhibit D and
each Participating Manufacturer will:
    . (A) tender this Agreement to the Court in such Settling
State for its approval; and (B) tender to the Court in such
Settling State for entry a consent decree confonning to the
model consent decree attached hereto as Exhibit L (revisions
or changes to such model consent decree shall be limited to
the extent required by state procedural requirements to reflect
accurately the factual setting of the case in question, but shall


                                  81
                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
obligations of any Settling State or Participating
Manufacturer, except by agreement of all Original
Participating Manufacturers); and
      (2) each Settling State shall seek entry of an order of
dismissal of claims dismissing with prejudice all claims against
the Participating Manufacturers and any other Released Party
in such Settling State's action identified in Exhibit D.
Provided, however, that the Settling State is not required to
seek entry of such an order in such Settling State's action .
against such a Released Party (other than a Participating
Manufacturer) unless and until such Released Party has
released the Releasing Parties (and delivered to the Attorney
General of such Settling State a copy of such release) (which
release shall be effective upon the occurrence of
State-Specific Finality in such Settling State, and shall recite
that in the event this· Agreement is terminated with respect to
such Settling State pursuant to subsection XVill(u)( 1 ) the
Released Party agrees that the order of dismissal shall be null
and void and of no effect) from any and all Claims of such
Released Party relating to the prosecution of such action as
provided in subsection XII(a)(2).

XIV. PARTICIPATING MANUFACTURERS'
DISMISSAL OF RELATED LAWSUITS
      (a) Upon State-Specific Finality in a Settling State, each
Participating Manufacturer will dismiss without prejudice (and
without costs and fees) the lawsuit(s) listed in Exhibit M
pending in such Settling State in which the Participating
Manufacturer is a plaintiff. Within 10 days after the MSA
Execution Date, each Participating Manufacturer and each
Settling State that is a party in any ofthe lawsuits listed in
Exhibit M shall jointly move for a stay of all proceedings in
such lawsuit. Such stay of a lawsuit against a Settling State
shall be dissolved upon the earlier ofthe occurrence of State
Specific Finality in such Settling State or termination of this
Agreement with respect to such Settling State pursuant to
subsection XVill(u)(l).
      (b) Upon State-Specific Finality in a Settling State, each
Participating Manufacturer will release and discharge any and
all monetary Claims against such .Settling State and any of
such Settling State's officers, employees, agents,
administrators, representatives, officials acting in their official


                                  82
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
counsel relating to or in connection with the lawsuit(s)
commenced by the Attorney General of such Settling State
identified in Exhibit D.
     (c) Upon State-Specific Finality in a Settling State, each
Participating Manufacturer will release lind discharge any and
all monetary Claims against all subdivisions (political or
otherwise, including, but not limited to, municipalities,
counties, parishes, villages, unincorporated districts and
hospital districts) of such Settling State, and any of their
officers, employees, agents, administrators, representatives,
officials acting in their official capacity, agencies, departments,
commissions, divisions and counsel arising out of Claims that
have been waived and released with continuing full force and
effect pursuant to section xn of this Agreement.

xv. VOLUNTARY ACT OF THE PARTIES
      The Settling States and the Participating Manufacturers
acknowledge and agree that this Agreement is voluntarily
entered into by each Settling State and each Participating
Manufacturer as the result of arm's-length negotiations, and
each Settling State and each Participating Manufacturer was
represented by counsel in deciding to enter into this
Agreement.
      Each Participating Manufacturer further acknowledges
that it understands that certain provisions of this Agreement
may require it to act or refrain from acting in a manner that
could otherwise give rise to state or federal constitutional
challenges and that, by voluntarily consenting to this
Agreement, it (and the tobacco-related Organizations (or any
trade associations formed or controlled by any Participating
Manufacturer)) waives for purposes of performance ofthis
Agreement any and all claims that the provisions of this
Agreement violate the state or federal constitutions.
      Provided, however, that nothing in the foregoing shall
constitute a waiver as to the entry of any court order (or any
interpretation thereof) that would operate to limit the exercise
of any constitutional right except to the extent of the
restrictions, limitations or obligations expressly agreed to in
this Agreement or the Consent Decree.

XVI. CONSTRUCTION
    (a) No Settling State or Participating Manufacturer shall


                                  83
                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
Decree, or any provision of either, for the purpose of any
statute, case law or rule of interpretation or construction that
would or might cause any provision to be construed against
the drafter.
      (b) Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as
approval by the Settling States of any Participating
Manufacturer's business organizations, operations, acts or
practices, and no Participating Manufacturer may make any
representation to the contrary.

XVII. RECOVERY OF COSTS AND ATTORNEYS'
FEES
      (a) The Original Participating Manufacturers agree that,
with respect to any Settling State in which the Court has
approved this Agreement and the Consent Decree, they shall
severally reimburse the following "Governmental Entities": (1)
the office of the Attorney General of such Settling State;
      (2) the office of the governmental prosecuting authority for
any political subdivision of such Settling State with a lawsuit
pending against any Participating Manufacturer as of July 1,
1998 (as identified in Exhibit N) that has released such
Settling State and such Participating Manufacturer(s) from
any and all Released Claims (a "Litigating Political
Subdivision"); and (3) other appropriate agencies of such
Settling State and such Litigating Political Subdivision, for
reasonable costs and expenses incurred in connection with
the litigation or resolution of claims asserted against the
Participating Manufacturers in the actions set forth in Exhibits
D, M and N; provided that such costs and expenses are of
the same nature as costs and expenses for which the Original
Participating Manufacturers would reimburse their own
counselor agents (but not including costs and expenses
relating to lobbying activities).
      (b) The Original Participating Manufacturers further agree
severally to pay the Governmental Entities in any Settling
State in which State-Specific Finality has occurred an amount
sufficient to compensate such Governmental Entities for time
reasonably expended by attorneys and paralegals employed
in such offices in connection with the litigation or resolution of
claims asserted against or by the Participating Manufacturers
in the actions identified in Exhibits D, M and N (but not
including time relating to lobbying activities), such amount to


                                  84               Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
rate.
      (c) Such Governmental Entities seeking payment pursuant
to subsection (a) and for (b) shall provide the Original
Participating Manufacturers with an appropriately
documented statement of all costs, expenses and attorney
and paralegal time for which payment is sought, and, solely
with respect to payments sought pursuant to subsection (b)
shall do so no earlier than the date on which State-Specific
Finality occurs in such Settling State.
      All amounts to be paid pursuant to subsections.(a) and (b)
shall be subject to reasonable verification if requested by any
Original Participating Manufacturer; provided, however, that
nothing contained in this subsection (c) shall constitute, cause,
or require the performance of any act that would constitute
any waiver (in whole or in part) of any attorney-client
privilege, work product protection or common interest/joint
prosecution privilege.
      All such amounts to be paid pursuant to subsections (a)
and (b) shall be subject to an aggregate cap of$150 million
for all Settling States, shall be paid promptly following
submission of the appropriate documentation (and the
completion of any verification process), shall be paid
separately and apart from any other amounts due pursuant to
this Agreement, and shall be paid severally by each Original
Participating Manufacturer according to its Relative Market
Share. All amounts to be paid pursuant to subsection (b) shall
be paid to such Governmental Entities in the order in which
State Specific Finality has occurred in such Settling States
(subject to the $150 million aggregate cap).
      (d) The Original Participating Manufacturers agree that,
upon the occurrence of State-Specific Finality in a Settling
State, they will severally pay reasonable attorneys' fees to the
private outside counsel, if any, retained by such Settling State
(and each l.litigating Political Subdivision, if any, within such
Settling State) in connection with the respective actions
identified in Exhibits D, M and N and who are designated in
Exhibit S for each Settling State by the relevant Attorney
General (and for each Litigating Political Subdivision, as later
certified in writing to the Original Participating Manufacturers
by the relevant governmental prosecuting authority of each
Litigating Political Subdivision) as having been retained by
and having represented such Settling State (or such Litigating


                                 85
                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
in the Model Fee Payment Agreement attached as Exhibit O.

XVIII. MISCELLANEOUS
       (a) Effect of Current or Future Law. If any current or
future law includes obligations or prohibitions applying to
Tobacco Product Manufacturers related to any of the
provisions of this Agreement, each Participating Manufacturer
shall comply with this Agreement unless compliance with this
Agreement would violate such law.
       (b) Limited Most-Favored Nation Provision. (1) If any
Participating Manufacturer enters into any future settlement
agreement of other litigation comparable to any of the actions
identified in Exhibit D brought by a non-foreign governmental
plaintiff other than the federal government ("Future Settlement
Agreement"): (A) before October 1, 2000, on overall terms
more favorable to such governmental plaintiff than the overall
terms ofthis Agreement (after due consideration of relevant
differences in population or other appropriate factors), then,
unless a majority of the Settling States determines that the
overall terms of the Future Settlement Agreement are not
more favorable than the overall terms ofthis Agreement, the
overall terms of this Agreement will be revised so that the
Settling States will obtain treatment with respect to such
Participating Manufacturer at least a relatively favorable as
the overall terms provided to any such governmental plaintiff;
provided, however, that as to economic terms this Agreement
shall not be revised based on any such Future Settlement
Agreement if such Future Settlement Agreement is entered
into after:
       (i) the impaneling ofthe jury (or, in the event of a nonjury
trial, the commencement of trial) in such litigation or any
severed or bifurcated portion thereof; or (ii) any court order
or judicial determination relating to such litigation that (x)
grants judgment (in whole or in part) against such
Participating Manufacturer; or (y) grants injunctive or other
relief that affects the assets or on-going business activities of
such Participating Manufacturer in a manner other than as
expressly provided for in this Agreement; or
       (B) on or after October 1,2000, on terms more favorable
to such governmental plaintiff than the terms of this
Agreement (after due consideration of relevant differences in
population or other appropriate factors), and such Future


                                  86
                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
        implementation of non-economic tobacco~related public
        health measures different from those contained in this
        Agreement, then this Agreement shall be revised to include
        terms comparable to such noneconomic terms, unless a
        majority of the Settling States elects against such revision.
              (2) If any Settling State resolves Claims against any
        Non-Participating Manufacturer after the MSA Execution
        Date comparable to any Released Claim and such resolution
        includes overall terms that are more favorable to such
        Non-Participating Manufacturer than the terms of this
        Agreement (including, without limitation, any terms that relate
    \   to the marketing or distribution of Tobacco Products and any
        term that provides for a lower settlement cost on a per pack
        sold basis), then the overall terms of this Agreement will be
        revised so that the Original Participating Manufacturers will
        obtain, with respect to that Settling State, overall terms at
        least as relatively favorable (taking into account, among other
        things, all payments previously made by the Original
        Participating Manufacturers and the timing of any payments)
        as those obtained by such NonParticipating Manufacturer
        pursuant to such resolution of Claims. The foregoing shall .
        include but not be limited:
              (a) to the treatment by any Settling State of a Future
        Affiliate, as that term is defined in agreements between any of
        the Settling States and Brooke Group Ltd., Liggett & Myers
        Inc. and/or Liggett Group, Inc. ("Liggett"), whether or not
        such Future Affiliate is merged with, or its operations
        combined with, Liggett or any Affiliate thereof; and (b) to any
        application of the terms of any such agreement (including any
        terms subsequently negotiated pursuant to any such
        agreement) to a brand of Cigarettes (or tobacco-related
        assets) as a result ofthe purchase by or sale to Liggett of
        such brand or assets or as a result of any combination of
        ownership among Liggett and any entity that manufactures
        Tobacco Products.
o             Provided, however, that revision ofthis Agreement
        pursuant to this subsection (2) shall not be required by virtue
        of the subsequent entry into this Agreement by a Tobacco
        Product Manufacturer that has not become a Participating
        Manufacturer as of the MSA Execution Date.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection XVillU), the
        provisions of this subsection XVIII{b )(2) may be waived by


                                        87

                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
Participating Manufacturers.
      (3) The parties agree that if any term ofthis Agreement is
revised pursuant to subsection (b)(l) or (b)(2) above and the
substance of such term before it was revised was also a term
ofthe Consent Decree, each affected Settling State and each
affected Participating Manufacturer shall jointly move the
Court to amend the Consent Decree to conform the terms of
the Consent Decree to the revised terms of the Agreement.
      (4) If at any time any Settling State agrees to relieve, in
any respect, any Participating Manufacturer's obligation to
make the payments as provided in this Agreement, then, with
respect to that Settling State, the terms of this Agreement
shall be revised so that the other Participating Manufacturers
receive terms as relatively favorable.
      c) Transfer of Tobacco Brands. No Original Participating
Manufacturer may sell or otherwise transfer or permit the sale
or transfer of any of its Cigarette brands, Brand Names,
Cigarette product formulas or Cigarette businesses (other
than a sale or transfer of Cigarette brands or Brand Names to
be sold, product formulas to be used, or Cigarette businesses
to be conducted, by the acquiror or transferee exclusively
outside of the States) to any person or entity unless such
person or entity is an Original Participating Manufacturer or
prior to the sale or acquisition agrees to assume the
obligations of an Original Participating Manufacturer with
respect to such Cigarette brands, Brand Names, Cigarette
product formulas or businesses. No Participating
Manufacturer may sell or transfer any of its Cigarette brands,
Brand Names, Cigarette product formulas or Cigarette
businesses (other than a sale or transfer of Cigarette brands
or Brand Names to be sold, Cigarette product formulas to be
used, or businesses to be conducted, by the acquiror or
transferee exclusively outside of the States) to any person or
entity unless such person or entity is or becomes prior to the
sale or acquisition a Participating Manufacturer.
      In the event of any such sale or transfer of a Cigarette
brand, Brand Name, Cigarette product formula or Cigarette
business by a Participating Manufacturer to a person or entity
that within 180 days prior to such sale or transfer was a
Non-Participating Manufacturer, the Participating
Manufacturer shall certify to the Settling States that it has
detemiined that such person or entity has the capability to
                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    88
certification shall not survive beyond one year following the
date of any such transfer. Each Original Participating
Manufacturer certifies and represents that, except as.
provided in Exhibit R, it (or a wholly owned Affiliate)
exclusively owns and controls in the States the Brand Names
of those Cigarettes that it currently manufactures for sale (or
sells) in the States and that it has the capacity to enter into an
effective agreement concerning the sale or transfer of such
Brands pursuant to this subsection XVIll( c). Nothing in this
Agreement is intended to create any right for a State to obtain
any Cigarette product formula that it would not otherwise
have under applicable law.
      (d) Payments in Settlement. All payments to be made by
the Participating Manufacturers pursuant to this Agreement
are in settlement of all of the Settling States' antitrust,
consumer protection, common law negligence, statutory,
common law and equitable claims for monetary,
restitutionary, equitable and injunctive relief alleged by the
Settling States with respect to the year of payment or earlier
years, except that no part of any payment under this
Agreement is made in settlement of an actual or potential
liability for a fine, penalty (civil or criminal) or enhanced
damages or is the cost of a tangible or intangible asset or
other future benefit.
      (e) No Determination or Admission. This Agreement is
not intended to be and -hall not in any event be construed or
deemed to be, or represented or caused to be represented
as, an admission or concession or evidence of (I) any liability
or any wrongdoing whatsoever on the part of any Released
Party or that any Released party has engaged in any of the
activities barred by this Agreement; or (2) personal
jurisdiction over any person or entity other than the
Participating Manufacturers. Each Participating Manufacturer
specifically disclaims and denies any liability or wrongdoing
whatsoever with respect to the claims and allegations
asserted against it by the Attorneys General of the Settling
States and the Litigating Political Subdivisions. Each
Participating Manufacturer has; entered into this Agreement
solely to avoid the further expense, inconvenience, burden
and risk of litigation.
      (f) Non-Admissibility. The settlement negotiations resulting
in this Agreement have been undertaken by the Settling States


                                 89                  Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
settlement purposes only, and no evidence of negotiations or
discussions underlying this Agreement shall be offered or
received in evidence in any action or proceeding for any
purpose. Neither this Agreement nor any public discussions,
public statements or public comments with respect to this
Agreement by any Settling State or Participating
Manufacturer or its agents shall be offered or received in
evidence in any action or proceeding for any purpose other
than in or relating to this Agreement.
      (g) Representations' of Parties. Each Settling State and
each Participating Manufacturer hereby represents that this
Agreement has been duly authorized and, upon execution,
will constitute a valid and binding contractual obligation,
enforceable in accordance with its terms, of each of them.
The signatories hereto on behalf of their respective Settling
States expressly represent and warrant that they have the
authority to settle and release all Released Claims oftheir
respective Settling States and any of their respective Settling
States' past, present and future agents, officials acting in their
official capacities, legal representatives, agencies,
departments, commissions and divisions, and that such
signatories are aware of no authority to the contrary.
      It is recognized that the Original Participating
Manufacturers are relying on the foregoing representation and
warranty \n making the payments required by and in
otherwise performing under this Agreement. The Original
Participating Manufacturers shall have the right to terminate
this Agreement pursuant to subsection XVIll(u) as to any
Settling State as to which the foregoing representation and
warranty is breached or not effectively given.
      (h) Obligations Several, Not Joint. All obligations of the
Participating Manufacturers pursuant to this Agreement
(including, but not limited to, all payment obligations) are
intended to be, and shall remain, several and not joint.
      (i) Headings. The headings ofthe sections and subsections
of this Agreement are not binding and are for reference only
and do not limit, expand or otherwise affect the contents or
meaning of this Agreement.
      G) Amendment and Waiver. This Agreement may be
amended by a written instrument executed by all Participating
Manufacturers affected by the amendment and by all Settling
States affected by the amendment. The terms of any such


                                 90
                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
is not a signatory to such amendment. The waiver of any
rights conferred hereunder shall be effective only if made by
written instrument executed by the waiving party or parties.
The waiver by any party of any breach of this Agreement
shall not be deemed to be or construed as a waiver of any
other breach, whether prior, subsequent or
contemporaneous, to be or construed as a waiver by any
other party.
      (k) Notices. All notices or other communications to nor.
shall such waiver be deemed any party to this Agreement
shall be in writing (including, but not limited to, facsimile,
telex, telecopy or similar writing) and shall be given at the
addresses specified in Exhibit P (as it may be amended to
reflect any additional Participating Manufacturer that
becomes a party to this Agreement after the MSA Execution
Date).
      Any Settling State or Participating Manufacturer may
change or add the name and address of the persons
designated to receive notice on its behalf by notice given
(effective upon the giving of such notice) as provided in this
subsection.
      (1) Operation. Each Settling State and each Participating
Manufacturer agrees to use its best efforts and to cooperate
with each other to cause this Agreement and the Consent
Decrees to become effective, to obtain all necessary
approvals, consents and authorizations, if any, and to execute
alr'documents and to take such other action as may
appropriate in connection herewith. Consistent with the
foregoing, each Settling State and each Participating
Manufacturer agrees that it will not directly or indirectly assist
or encourage any challenge to this Agreement or any Consent
Decree by any other person, and will support the integrity
and enforcement ofthe terms of this Agreement and the
Consent Decrees. Each Settling State shall use its best efforts
to cause State-Specific Finality to occur as to such Settling
State.
     (m) Designees to Discuss Disputes. Within 14 days after
the MSA Execution Date, each Settling State's Attorney
General and each Participating Manufacturer shall provide
written notice of its designation of a senior representative to
discuss with the other signatories to this Agreement any
disputes and/or other issues that may arise with respect to this


                                  91                   Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
      Each Settling State's Attorney General shall provide such
notice of the name, address and telephone number of the
person it has so designated to each Participating
Manufacturer and toNAAG. Each Participating
Manufacturer shall Provide such notice of the name, address
and telephone number of the person it has so designated to
each Settling State's Attorney General, to NAAG and to
each other Participating Manufacturer.
       (n) Governing Law. This Agreement (other than the
Escrow Agreement) shall be governed by the laws ofthe
relevant Settling State, without regard to the conflict oflaw
rules of such Settling State. The Escrow Agreement shall be
governed by the laws of the State in which the Escrow Court
is located, without regard to the conflict of law rules of each
State.
       (0) Severability. (1) Sections VI, VII, IX, X, XI, XII,
Xill, XIV, XVI, XVill(b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (0), (P),
(r), (s), (u), (w), (z), (bb), (dd), and Exhibits A, B, and E
hereof ("Nonseverable Provisions") are not severable, except
to the extent that severance of section VI is permitted by
Settling States pursuant to subsection VI(i) hereof. The
remaining terms of this Agreement are severable, as set forth
herein.
       (2) If a court materially modifies, renders unenforceable,
or finds to be unlawful any of the Nonseverable Provisions,
theNAAG executive committee shall select a team of
Attorneys General (the "Negotiating Team~') to attempt to
negotiate an equivalent or comparable substitute term or
other appropriate credit or adjustment (a "Substitute Term")
with the Original Participating Manufacturers. In the event
that the court referred to in the preceding sentence is located
in a Settling State, the Negotiating Team shall include the
Attorney General of such Settling State.
       The Original Participating Manufacturers shall have no
obligation to agree to any Substitute Term. If any Original
Participating Manufacturer does not agree to a Substitute
Term, this Agreement shall be terminated in all Settling States
affected by the court's ruling. The Negotiating Team shall
submit any proposed Substitute Term negotiated by the
Negotiating Team and agreed to by all of the Original
Participating Manufacturers to the Attorneys General of all of
the affected Settling States for their approval. If any affected


                                 92
                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
Tenn, this Agreement in such Settling State shall be
tenninated. (3) If a court materially modifies, renders
unenforceable, or finds to be unlawful any tenn of this
Agreement other than a Nonseverable Provision:
      (A) The remaining tenns of this Agreement shall remain in
full force and effect.
      (B) Each Settling State whose rights or obligations under
this Agreement are affected by the court's decision in
question (the "Affected Settling State") and the Participating
Manufacturers agree to negotiate in good faith a Substitute
Tenn.
      Any agreement on a Substitute Tenn reached between the
Participating Manufacturers and the Affected Settling' State
shall not modify or amend the tenns of this Agreement with
regard to any other Settling State.
      (C) If the Affected Settling State and the Participating
Manufacturers are unable to agree on a Substitute Tenn, then
they will submit the issue to non-binding mediation. If
mediation fails to produce agreement to a Substitute Tenn,
then that tenn shall be severed and the remainder ofthis
Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.
      (4) If a court materially modifies, renders unenforceable,
or finds to b~ un~awful any portion of any provision of this
Agreement, the remaining portions of such provision shall be
unenforceable with respect to the affected Settling State
unless a Substitute Term is arrived at pursuant to subsection
(0)(2) or (0)(3) hereof, whichever is applicable.        '
      (p) Intended Beneficiaries. No portion of this Agreement
shall provide any rights or be enforceable by, any person or
entity that is not a Settling State or a Released Party. No
Settling State may assign or otherwise convey any right to
enforce any provision of this Agreement.
      (q) Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in
counterparts. Facsimile or photocopied signatures shall be
considered as valid signatures as of the date affixed, although
the original signature pages shall thereafter be appended.
      (r) Applicability. The obligations and duties of each
Participating Manufacturer set forth herein are applicable only
to actions taken (or omitted to be taken) within the States.
This subsection (r) shall not be construed as extending the
territorial scope of any obligation or duty set forth herein
whose scope is otherwise limited by the terms hereof.


                                93             Automated Records Management System
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
      Agreement or any Consent Decree, and no act required to be
      performed pursuant to this Agreement or any Consent
      Decree, is intended to constitute, cause or effect any waiver
      (in whole or in part) of any attorney-client privilege, work
      product protection or common interest/joint defense privilege,
      and each Settling State and each Participating Manufacturer
      agrees that it shall not make or cause to be made in any
      forum any assertion to the contrary.
            (t) Non-Release. Except as otherwise specifically
      provided in this Agreement, nothing in this Agreement shall
      limit, prejudice or otherwise interfere with the rights of any
      Settling State or any Participating Manufacturer to pursue any
      and all rights and remedies it may have against any
      Non-Participating Manufacturer or other non-Released
      Party.
            (u) Termination. (1) Unless otherwise agreed to by each
,     of the Original Participating Manufacturers and the Settling
      State in question, in the event that (A) StateSpecific Finality in
      a Settling State does not occur in such Settling State on or
      before December 31, 2001; or (B) this Agreement or the
      Consent Decree has bee disapproved by the Court (or, in the
      event of an appeal from or review of a decision of the Court
      to approve this Agreement and the Consent Decree, by the
      court hearing such appeal or conducting such review), and
      the time to Appeal from such disapproval has expired, or, in
      the event of an Appeal from such disapproval, the Appeal
      has been dismissed or the disapproval has been affected by
      the court oflast resort to which such Appeal has been taken
      and such dismissal or disapproval has become no longer
      subject to further Appeal (including, without limitation, review
      by the United States Supreme Court); or
            (C) If this Agreement is terminated in a Settling State for
      whatever reason (including, but not limited to, pursuant to
      subsection XVIII(o) of this Agreement), then this Agreement
      and all of its terms (except for the non-admissibility provisions
      hereof, which shall continue in full force and effect) shall be
      canceled and terminated with respect to such Settling State,
      and it and all orders issued by the courts in such Settling State
      pursuant hereto shall become null and void and of no effect.
            (2) If this Agreement is terminated with respect to a
    . Settling State for whatever reason, then (A) the applicable
      statute of limitation or any similar time requirement shall be


                                       94
                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
until the later of the time permitted by applicable law or for
one year from the date of such termination, with the effect
that the parties shall be in the same position with respect to
the statute of limitation as they were at the time such Settling
State filed its action, and
      (B) the parties shall jointly move the Court for an order
reinstating the actions and claims dismissed pursuant to
sections XIII and XIV hereof, with the effect that the parties
shall be in the same position with respect to those actions and
claims as they were at the time the action or claim was stayed
or dismissed.
      (v) Freedom of Information Requests. Upon the
occurrence of State-Specific Finality in a Settling State, each
Participating Manufacturer will withdraw in writing any and all
requests for information, administrative applications, and
proceedings brought or caused to be brought by such
Participating Manufacturer pursuant to such Settling State's
Freedom of Information law relating to the subject matter of
the lawsuits identified in Exhibit D.
      (w) Bankruptcy. The following provisions shall apply if a
Participating Manufacturer both enters Bankruptcy and at any
time thereafter is not timely performing its financial obligations
as required under this Agreement:
      (1) In the event that both a number of Settling States equal
to at least 75% of the total number of Settling States and
Settling States Allocable Shares equal to at least 75% of the
total aggregate Allocable Shares assigned to all Settling
States deem (by written notice to the Participating
Manufacturers other than the bankrupt Participating
Manufacturer) that the financial obligations of this Agreement
have been terminated and rendered null and void as to such
bankrupt Participating Manufacturer (except as provided in
subsection (A) below) due to a material breach by such
Participating Manufacturer, whereupon, with respect to all
Settling States:
      (A) all agreements, all concessions, all reductions of
Releasing Parties' Claims, and all releases and covenants not
to sue, contained in this Agreement shall be null and void as
to such Participating Manufacturer. Provided, however, that
(i) all reductions of Releasing Parties' Claims, and all releases
and covenants not to sue, contained in this Agreement shall
remain in full force and effect as to all persons or entities


                                 95                  Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
any person or entity that, as a result of the Bankruptcy,
obtains domestic tobacco assets of such Participating
Manufacturer (unless such person or entity is itself a
Participating Manufacturer) who (but for the first sentence of
this subsection (A) would otherwise be Released Parties by
virtue of their relationship with the bankrupt Participating
Manufacturer; and (ii) in the event a Settling State asserts any
Released Claim against a bankrupt Participating
Manufacturer after the termination of this Agreement with
respect to such Participating Manufacturer as described in
this subsection (1) and receives ajudgment, settlement or
distribution arising from such Released Claim, then the
amount of any payments such Settling State has previously
received from such Participating Manufacturer under this
Agreement shall be applied against the amount of any such
judgment, settlement or distribution (provided that in no event
shall such Settling State be required to refund any payments
previously received from such Participating Manufacturer
pursuant to this Agreement);
      (B) the Settling States shall have the right to assert any
and all claims against such Participating Manufacturer in the
Bankruptcy or otherwise without regard to any limits
otherwise provided in this Agreement (subject to any and all
defenses against such claims);
      (C) the Settling States may exercise all rights provided
under the federal Bankruptcy Code (or other applicable
bankruptcy law) with respect to their Claims against such
Participating Manufacturer, including the right to initiate and
complete police and regulatory actions against such
Participating Manufacturer pursuant to the exceptions to the
automatic stay set forth in section 362(b) of the Bankruptcy
Code (provided, however, that such Participating
Manufacturer may contest whether the Settling State's action
constitutes a police and regulatory action); and
      (D) to the extent that any Settling State is pursuing a
police and regulatory action against such Participating
Manufacturer as described in subsection ( 1 )(C), such
Participating Manufacturer shall not request or support a
request that the Bankruptcy court utilize the authority
provided under section 105 ofthe Bankruptcy Code to
impose a discretionary stay on the Settling State's action. The
Participating Manufacturers further agree that they will not


                                 96                                 Management System
                                                  Automated Records
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
Agreement in any proceeding before any court of law
(including the federal bankruptcy courts) or an administrative
agency or through legislative action, including (without
limitation) by way of joinder in or consent to or acquiescence
in any such pleading or instrument filed by another.
      (2) Whether or not the Settling States exercise the option
set forth in subsection (1 ) (and whether or not such option, if
exercised, is valid and enforceable): (A) In the event that the
bankrupt Participating Manufacturer is an Original
Participating Manufacturer, such Participating Manufacturer
shall continue to be treated as an Original Participating
Manufacturer for all purposes under this Agreement except
(i) such Participating Manufacturer shall be treated as a
Non-Participating Manufacturer (and not as an Original
Participating Manufacturer or Participating Manufacturer) for
all purposes with respect to subsections IX(d)(2) and
IX(d)(3) (including, but not limited to, that the Market Share
of such Participating Manufacturer shall not be included in
Base Aggregate Participating Manufacturer Market Share or
Actual Aggregate Participating Manufacturer Market Share,
and that such Participating Manufacturer's volume shall not be
included for any purpose under subsection IX( d)(I)(D»;
      (ii) such Participating Manufacturer's Market Share shall
not be included as that of a Participating Manufacturer for the
purpose of determining whether the trigger percentage
specified in subsection IX(e) has been achieved (provided
that such Participating Manufacturer shall be treated as an
Original Participating Manufacturer for all other purposes
with respect to such subsection); (iii) for purposes of
subsection (B)(iii) of Exhibit E, such Participating
Manufacturer shall continue to be treated as an Original
Participating Manufacturer, but its operating income shall be
recalculated by the Independent Auditor to reflect what such
income would have been had such Participating Manufacturer
made the payments that would have been due under this
Agreement but for the Bankruptcy;
      (iv) for purposes of subsection XVIII( c), such
Participating Manufacturer shall not be treated as an Original
Participating Manufacturer or as a Participating Manufacturer
to the extent that after entry into Bankruptcy it becomes the
acquiror or transferee of Cigarette brands, Brand Names,
Cigarette product formulas or Cigarette businesses of any


                                 97
                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
Manufacturer shall continue to be treated as an Original
Participating Manufacturer and Participating Manufacturer for
all other purposes under such subsection); and (v) as to any
action that by the express tenns ofthis Agreement requires
the unanimous agreement of all Original Participating
Manufacturers. (B) In the event that the bankrupt
participating Manufacturer is a Subsequent Participating
Manufacturer, such Participating Manufacturer shall continue
to be treated as a Subsequent Participating Manufacturer for
all purposes under this Agreement except (i) such
Participating Manufacturer shall be treate<i as a
Non-Participating Manufacturer (and not as a Subsequent
Participating Manufacturer or Participating Manufacturer) for
all purposes with respect to subsections IX(d)(l), (d)(2) and
(d)(4) (including, but not limited to, that the Market Share of
such Participating Manufacturer shall not be included in Base
Aggregate Participating Manufacturer Market Share or
Actual Aggregate Participating Manufacturer Market Share,
and that such Participating Manufacturer's volume shall not be
included for any purpose under subsection IX( d)(l)(D);
      (ii) such Participating Manufacturer's Market Share shall
not be included as that of a Participating Manufacturer for the
purpose of detennining whether tbe trigger percentage
specified in subsection IX(e) has been achieved (provided
that such Participating Manufacturer shall be treated as a
Subsequent Participating Manufacturer for all other purposes
with respect to such subsection); and (iii) for purposes pf
subsection XVill(c), such Participating Manufacturer shall
not be treated as a Subsequent Participating Manufacturer or
as a Participating Manufacturer to the extent that after entry
into Bankruptcy it becomes the acquiror or transferee of
Cigarette brands, Brand Names, Cigarette product fonnulas
or Cigarette businesses of any Participating Manufacturer
(provided that such Participating Manufacturer shall continue
to be treated as a Subsequent Participating Manufacturer and
Participating Manufacturer for all other purposes under such
subsection).
     (C) Revision of this Agreement pursuant to subsection
XVill(b )(2) shall not be required by virtue of any resolution
on an involuntary basis in the Bankruptcy of Claims against
the bankrupt Participating Manufacturer.
     (x) Notice of Material Transfers. Each Participating


                                98
                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
least 20 days before consummating a sale, transfer of title or
other disposition, in one transaction or series of related
transactions, of assets having a fair market value equal to five
percent or more (determined in accordance with United
States generally accepted accounting principles) of the
consolidated assets of such Participating Manufacturer.
      (y) Entire Agreement. This agreement (together with any
agreements expressly contemplated hereby and any other
contemporaneous written agreements) embodies the entire
agreement and understanding between and among the Settling
States and the Participating Manufacturers relating to the
subject matter hereof and supersedes (1) all prior agreements
and understandings relating to such subject matter, whether
written or oral, and (2) all purportedly contemporaneous oral
agreements and understandings relating to such subject
matter.
      (z) Business Days. Any obligation hereunder that, under
the terms of this Agreement, is to be performed on a day that
is not a Business Day shall be performed on the first Business
Day thereafter.
      (aa) Subsequent Signatories. With respect to a Tobacco
Product Manufacturer that signs this Agreement after the
MSA Execution Date, the timing of obligations under this
Agreement (other than payment obligations, which shall be
governed by subsectionII(jj) shaH be negotiated to provide
for the institution of such obligations on a schedule not more
favorable to such subsequent signatory than that applicable to
the Onginal Participating Manufacturers.
      (bb) Decimal Places. Any figure or percentage referred to
in this Agreement shaH be carried to seven decimal places.
      (cc) Regulatory Authority. Nothing in section III of this
Agreement is intended to affect the legislative or regulatory
authority of any local or State government.
      (dd) Successors. In the event that a Participating
Manufacturer ceases selling a brand of Tobacco Products in
the States that such Participating Manufacturer owned in the
States prior to July 1, 1998, and an Affiliate of such
Participating Manufacturer thereafter and after the MSA
Execution Date intentionally sells such brand in the States,
such Affiliate shaH be considered to be the successor of such
Participating Manufacturer with respect to such brand.
Performance by any such successor of the obligations under


                                 99
                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
be subject to court-ordered specific performance.
      (ee) Export Packaging. Each Participating Manufacturer
shall place a visible indication on each pack of Cigarettes it
manufactures for sale outside of the fifty United States and
the District of Columbia that distinguishes such pack from
packs of Cigarettes it manufactures for sale in the fifty United
States and the District of Columbia.
      (f) Actions Within Geographic Boundaries of Settling
States. To the extent that any provision of this Agreement
expressly prohibits, restricts, or requires any action to be
taken "within" any Settling State or the Settling States, the
relevant prohibition, restriction, or requirement applies within
the geographic boundaries of the applicable Settling States,
including, but not limited to, Indian country or Indian trust
land within such geographic boundaries.
      (gg) Notice to Affiliates. Each Participating Manufacturer
shall give notice of this Agreement to each of its Affiliates.
      IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each Settling State and
each Participating Manufacturer, through their fully authorized
representatives, have agreed to this Agreement.




       Copyright ©1998 ABCNEWS and Starwave Corporation. All
       rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast,
       rewritten or redistributed in any form.




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                100
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 040 - FOLDER -009


[11/17/1998 - 11/18/1998]


