RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-NOV-1998 14:12:12.00

SUBJECT:    recoupment

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
STATES FUMING OVER FEDS'
                                    SMOKE $IGNALS

                         By MARILYN RAUBER

                         WASHINGTON - States from New York to
                         California yesterday hailed a $206 billion
                         crackdown on cigarette makers - but Uncle
                         Sam might try to grab some of the states' booty.

                         Under the deal carved out by New York and
                         seven other states, tobacco firms would have to
                         cough up billions of bucks every year to the
                         states, with $24 billion going to the Empire
                         State during the next 25 years alone. The Big
                         Apple would get a $6 billion-plus bite.

                         The agreement, which kills off cartoon
                         characters like Joe Camel - but not the "real"
                         Marlboro Man - bans cigarette ads on
                         billboards and buses, prohibits giving away
                         logo T-shirts and forces the tobacco industry to
                         set up a $2 billion foundation to "tell the truth"
                         about the perils of smoking.

                         "This plan will get Big Tobacco off the backs of
                         our kids," said New York state Attorney General
                         Dennis Vacco.

                         The deal, which any state can sign on to, was
                         described by advocates as merely a first step -
                         and is weaker than a $368 billion agreement
                         snuffed out by Congress last summer, which
                         would have required federal regulation of
                         nicotine.

                         "When it comes to protecting our children from
                         tobacco, ultimately it's up to Congress to finish
                         the job," President Clinton said, adding: "Every
                         day we fail to act, more than 3,000 children start
                         to smoke."

                         Even as Clinton praised the pact, his
                         spokesman told reporters, "The federal
                         government is under some obligation to claim


                         'some of this money" as reimbursement for its
                          share of smoking-related Medicaid costs.

                         In Medicaid fraud awards, for example, Uncle
                         Sam gets 50 percent of any payout.

                         "We look forward to working with the states to
                         figure out the best way to do that or ... to make
                         sure the money is' used for children and the
                         reduction of teen smoking," the spokesman,
                         Joe Lockhart, told reporters.

                         That got Albany fuming.

                         "We don't believe the feds have a claim to the
                         money and ... we think we'll prevail," said Vacco
                         spokesman Chris McKenna.

                         McKenna also pooh-poohed Lockhart's hint of
                         a compromise in which Uncle Sam would try to
                         impose spending conditions on the no-strings
                         money going to the states.

                         The deal includes:

                         *$1.7 billion for a five-year national media
                         campaign to'stop teen smoking.

                         *A ban on the use of cartoon characters (but not
                         on human characters like the Marlboro Man)
                         and ads that target youth.

                         *An end to billboard ads, and paid tobacco
                         promotions in movies, on TV and at music
                         concerts, and a ban on brand-name logo items,
                         such as caps, T-shirts and backpacks and on
                         tobacco brand names at stadiums and arenas.

                         *A ban on the industry lobbying against
                         proposed state laws aimed at curbing teen
                         smoking.

                         Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco, Brown
                         and Williamson Tobacco and Lorillard
                         Tobacco, which account for 97 percent of the
                         market, all agreed to the deal negotiated by
                         New York, California, Washington state,
                         Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Colorado,
                         Oklahoma and North Dakota.
.,

