RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 18-NOV-1998 10:23:50.00

SUBJECT:   bulldog

TO: Cynthia A. Rice    ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Eleria Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
                     Lawyer Tenacious in Tobacco Talks

                     By Hunter T. George
                     Associated Press Writer
                     Wednesday, November 18, 1998; 3:02 a.m. EST

                     OLYMPIA, Wash.   (AP)    When Mississippi settled its
lawsuit against
                  Big Tobacco last year, Christine Gregoire was left as
the chief negotiator
                  across the table from a powerful special interest.

                     Been there, done that.

                     The attorney general from Washington state, who was back
in the national
                  spotlight Monday as a principal architect of the
proposed $206 billion
                  tobacco settlement, knows all about tough talk.

                  "She's very tenacious, -" said Sid Snyder, the
Democratic minority leader
                  of the state Senate. "She's like a bulldog with
lockjaw. ' ,

                     Before she helped cobble together what would be the
biggest civil
                     settlement in U.S. history, Mrs. Gregoire had teamed up
with Mississippi
                     Attorney General Mike Moore to broker the landmark 1997
tobacco
                     deal that later faltered in Congress.

                     She also negotiated a 30-year agreement with the federal
government to
                   clean up the World War II-era Hanford nuclear
reservation in eastern
                   Washington, as well as the settlement of a lawsuit that
set state salaries
                   based on "comparable pay for comparable work. ' ,

                     So most observers weren't surprised to see that Mrs.
Gregoire was able
                     to broker a second deal with the tobacco industry after
five months of


                     talks and endless flights to the East Coast.

                     Teresa Olson, Mrs. Gregoire's campaign ,manager, said the
attorney
                  general feels strongly about preventing children from
smoking. Also, Mrs.
                  Gregoire's mother is a chain-smoker.

                     "She's a gutsy lady. She goes after what she firmly
believes in,"     said Mrs.
                     Olson, whose husband, Fred, serves as a top deputy to
Mrs. Gregoire.
                  The two families vacation together and their eldest dau
ghters go to college
                  together.

                    In response to criticism that the proposed deal
. represents a capitulation to
                    Big Tobacco, Mrs. Gregoire has said she felt "duty
  bound" to proceed
                    with efforts to settle. Even if each state won in a jury
  trial, she said,
                    appeals and further litigation would likely drag on for
  years.

                     Mrs. Gregoire, a 51-year-old Democrat, ranks among
Washington's most
                     popular politicians. Women's groups love her, and an
admirer in the
                     Legislature once referred to her as "our Colin
Powell, "    a reference to the
                     ever-popular retired general.

                     Paul Berendt, chairman of the state Democratic Party,
considers Mrs.
                     Gregoire among the party's top attractions, noting that
she is often
                     considered a top potential candidate for governor and
u.S. Senate.

                     The governor's office was within her reach in 1996 when
Democratic
                     Gov. Mike Lowry was still trying to decide whether he
could overcome
                     allegations of sexual harassment and win re-election.

                     When Lowry finally decided not seek a second term, Mrs.
Gregoire
                     already had decided to seek re-election as the state's
top law enforcer.

                     Mrs. Gregoire said at/the time that she was "no
different from any
                     working mom, "   and she feared the toll that' running for
governor -- and
                    winning -- would take on her husband, Mike, and their
two daughters.

                     She was particularly concerned about missing her eldest
daughter's senior


                          soccer season. The older daughter is now a college
     sophomore; the
                          younger one is in eighth grade.

                        It's too soon to tell if she missed her chance.
     Demo~ratic Gov. Gary
                        Locke will be difficult to unseat in 2000. And she used
     to work for Sen.
                        Slade Gorton, a Republican facing re-election in two
     years, when he was
                        attorney general.

                       Mrs. Olson said Mrs. Gregoire --really, truly loves"
     being attorney general
                       and would be perfectly content to seek re-election to a
     third term.

                          --She could be making big bucks as a private attorney, ' ,
     Mrs. Olson said,
                          --but she truly is a public servant."


