RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey M. Smith ( CN=Jeffrey M. Smith/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP I )

CREATION DATE/TIME~18-NOV-1998 09:09:35.00

SUBJECT:   FYI -- Senate stem cell heaings

TO: Holly L. Gwfn ( CN=Holly L. Gwin/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP I   )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Rachel E. Levinson ( CN=Rachel E. Levinson/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP I    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Anthony J. Gibson ( CN=Anthony J. Gibson/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Clifford J. Gabriel ( CN=Clifford J. Gabriel/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Neal Lane ( CN=Neal Lane/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP I    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
From 11/18/98 Washington Fax:


SENATE SET FOR HEARINGS ON BREAKTHROUGH STEM CELL RESEARCH
BIOETHICS COMMISSION WILL ALSO DELIBERATE THE ISSUES

The Senate Appropriations Labor, Health and Human Services, Education and
Related Agencies (L/HHS) subcommittee plans to hold a hearing the first
week in December to examine issues raised by recent research breakthroughs
in which scientists have reported success in using human embryos and fetal
tissue to isolate and grow human stem cells.

Witnesses at the hearing, tentatively scheduled for either December 1 or 2,
are expected to include the two scientists who headed teams that, working
independently of each other and entirely with private funds, recently
reported that they had isolated and then grown stem cells in the
laboratory: James Thomson of the University of Wisconsin, who obtained stem
cells from donated embryos, and John Gearhart of Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, who extracted stem cells from aborted fetuses.

Others likely to testify include Harold Varmus, director of the National
Institutes of Health, representatives of Geron Corp., a California
biotechnology company that owns the commercial license for Thomson's and
Gearhart's discoveries, and biomedical ethicists.

Thomson and Gearhart's achievements are considered a major advance. Stem
cells are human cells at their earliest stage of development. The ability
to isolate and grow them in the laboratory could, theoretically, allow them
be manipulated to perform a variety of regenerative activities, such as
replacing tissue in a defective heart or repairing the neurological damage


suffered by Parkinson's patients.

But other potential uses--and the techniques required for their
isolation--raisequestions in some of the most ethically sensitive areas of
biology: research involving human embryos and fetal tissue, cloning, and
genetic manipulation.    .

In addition, the ramifications of Thomson and Gearhart's work were further
clouded by reports from company called Advanced Cell Technology that its
scientists have isolated human stem cells by fusing human cells with a cow
egg. (Some scientists have criticized the announcement as unnecessarily
complicating the issue since the reported discovery happened almost three
years ago, was never published in a scientific journal and the scientists
did not offer conclusive proof that they created stem cells.)

An aide to Sen. Tom Harkin, D-IA, the L/HHS panel's highest ranking
Democrat, said the hearing is mainly aimed at learning more about stem cell
research and its implications. He said Harkin, in particular, wants to
"send a signal that we should not just shut the door on research because
some view it as controversial, since that is not always in the best
interest of public policy or good health."

Lawyers at the National Institutes of Health are already reviewing whether
the ban on federal funding for research involving human embryos prohibits
scientists from studying stem cells derived from embryos. A key issue is
whether the ban was intended to stop federal funding for research on
something with the potential to grow into a human. Some scientists argue
that stem cells don't have that potential.

Rep. Jay Dickey, R-AR, one of the authors of the ban, has said that the
restriction should apply to work involving stem cells.

Varmus, speaking last week to the Ad Hoc Group for Medical Research
Funding, said he hoped to have a legal opinion on the issue by the time of
the hearings.

While he has not taken a position on whether stem   cell research should be
eligible for federal funds, Varmus, responding to   a reporter's question,
did say that it was "extremely important that the   larger scientific
community be engaged in the process" and that "we   are looking at the
legalities of whether we can do that."

Varmus also noted that while many scientific problems must be resolved
before stem cells can be used in practical applications, "the prospect of
having human cells that can be grown in large numbers (and) differentiated
into specific tissues that might be used for a wide variety of diseases
represents, to me, a remarkable advance."

President   Clinton has. responded to the discoveries by asking his National
Bioethics   Advisory Commission (NBAC) to review the implications of the
research.   The commission discussed the issue yesterday at a previously
scheduled   meeting in Miami.

NBAC Chairman Harold Shapiro described the President's request during a
press conference as two-part. First, Clinton wants an immediate response on
the issue of the appropriateness of "human and non-human species
intermingling." Shapiro said the commission may respond to that request as
early as today: "I think we may be able to come to at least a temporary
conclusion on this."


But the second part, looking at the controversy surrounding stem cell
research in general, may take some six months, Shapiro predicted. He said
the commission will be discussing today how to mobilize that study.
Meanwhile, Congressional involvement in the debate--should it lead to
legislation--is something that makes the biotech industry uneasy, said
Carol Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO).

"We have absolutely no reservations when it comes to talking about the
implications of these developments," said Fe ldbaum , who had urged Clinton
to refer the issue to his bioethics panel. "What happens next is fraught
with some trepidations and some difficulty. Once rules and regulations get
into the legislative arena, the fact is that anything can happen. Many
members of Congress are not well versed in science and the kind of
precision these developments need may not always be there when legislative
language is drafted."

--Matthew Davis




Compiled and Published by: WASHINGTON FAX: AN INFORMATION SERVICE
Publisher: Bradie Metheny
Executive Editor: Shirley Haley
Phone: 508-999-6097     Fax: 508-994-9366
E-mail: subscriptions@washington-fax.com
All material (c) 1998 by Washington Fax, Inc.


