RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Dennis K. Burke ( CN=Dennis K. Burke/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-FEB-1997 13:57:04.00

SUBJECT:     Juvenile Justice Qs&As from Peter Jacoby

TO: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.    ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
        Attached are the q and a on the Youth Violence Bill.   They are
basically the ones I wrote for the last press conference and WH Leg
Affairs tinkered w/ them and sent them in through Hilley.
---------------------- Forwarded by Dennis K. Burke/OPD/EOP on 02/25/97
01:56 PM ---------------------------



           Elisa Millsap
           02/25/97 01:08:57 PM

Record Type: Record

To: Dennis K. Burke/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject: Juvenile Justice Qs&As from Peter Jacoby

Juvenile Justice


Q: What does the AdrninistrationD,s juvenile justice proposal do?


A: The legislation that President Clinton announced last Wednesday is part
of his overall Anti-Gang and Youth Violence Strategy. The strategy seeks
to break the back of violent gangs, reduce youth violence, and provide our
kids with positive alternatives to steer them away from gangs, guns, and
drugs.

 Among many other measures, the strategy provides critical resources for
state and local prosecutors to target, prosecute and convict violent youth
gangs.  It permits Federal prosecutors to prosecute juveniles in adult
court when they commit violent crimes.

 It also creafter schoolchool initiatives to keep kids off the streets and
give them positive alternatives.  It will give communities the resources
and support to establish comprehensive curfews, anti-truancy efforts,
create youth violence courts, and effective prevention initiatives.

 It requires safety locks for handguns to prevent accidents and thefts and
extends the Brady Law check so that violent juveniles can never own a
handgun.


Q: Can the Federal government actually have any impact on crime?



A: Yes.  Police chiefs, sheriffs, and rank-and-file officers from across
the country will tell you that the Clinton anti-crime agenda has made a
difference in their efforts --- putting more cops on the streets, longer
sentences for violent offenders, and taking guns out of the hands of
criminals.

 Local prosecutors also know we can help them.  That is why the nationD,s
primary and largest organization of prosecutors, the National District
Attorneys Association, has enthusiastically endorsed President ClintonD,s
proposal to launch a massive attack on gangs and violent crimes by
juveniles.


Q: During the campaign, you were able to neutralize the Republicans on the
issue of crime -- an issue that they had traditionally dominated.    Do
you expect to continue to focus on this issue in this Administration and
if so, in what respect?

 I am very proud of our anti-crime record.  We are almost at the midway
point of funding 100,000 new police officers, the Brady Bill has prevented
over 60,000 felons, fugitives and stalkers from buying handguns.  For the
first time since 1960, the violent crime has fallen four years in a row.
We are moving in the right direction but we have a long way to go.   That
is why we are going to continue to put more police officers on our streets
and take guns, drugs, gangs off the streets. We are also going to
continue our focus on youth violence.   My Anti-Gang and Youth Violence
legislation, which I announced last week will fulfill that mandate.  That
legislation is designed to keep kids drug-free, keep them away from guns
and make the juvenile justice system tougher and smarter.

 Additionally, I will continue to fight to expand the Safe-and-Drug-Free
Schools program which puts anti-drug counselors in our nationD,s schools.
Finally, the Department of Justice, working with Members of Congress and
criminal justice experts will be examining and developing additional
proposals to address juvenile crime during the coming months.


Q: What are the bipartisan Congressional task forceD,s chances for
successfully enacting consensus juvenile justice reform legislation?

 I believe the chances are good. While there are some areas of initial
disagreement, there are many more areas where the Congressional Democrats,
the Congressional Republicans and our Administration are in agreement.   I
look forward to working closely with Congress to develop a package that
will make real progress in combating juvenile crime.


