RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/Ou=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-NOV-1998 09:18:11.00

SUBJECT:   Summary of 75 WTW grants

  TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
. READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHOjO=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This is DOL's paragraph on each of 75 -- some pretty interesting projects.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D30]MAIL43806142D.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504335050000010A02010000000205000000D637010000020000DBA3C51485E028FCF391F8
12012958EEOB59D6D736A104BA162F3A14774D388EC8A584DBBED451EEA386E122D09D8F03928D
9BB7F7E300B344B7FCE33E97E4A5083BCC28707074C2BD977B8FAD39AB8B99192DF3169B32EF07
4A36915F9264308B0416879DEA3E75897AD7347D7D850B541170F2DD510CF7D7AA380D584525A9
                              Round Two Awardees - By State

ALABAMA

Stillman College, Tuscaloosa, AL
Dr. Ernest McNealey (205) 366-8808           Proposed Award Amount:          $3,723,620

Stillman College has developed a comprehensive strategy entitled "Work First ... Lasting Work"
for moving the hardest-to-employ welfare recipients, nO'ncustodial parents and public housing
residents of Tuscaloosa County into permanent employment. The approach targets the total life
situation, not just employability. Individual assessments will result in a specific plan that will
address job development, family management, education programs and vocational skills.
Welfare recipients will be placed into entry level jobs, followed by support and retention services
through family development centers.


ALASKA

Nine Star Enterprises, Inc., Anchorage, AK
David Alexander     (907) 279-7827       Proposed Award Amount: $1,279,499

This project in Anchorage, AK, will coordinate the efforts of a variety of local service
providers. The project will work with a Business Advisory Council to get commitments from
employers to hire, train and promote Welfare-to-Work participants, including getting work time
for skills training of participants. Basic education, GED preparation, and
English-as-a-Second-Language training, in addition to employer-based skill training, will be
provided after the participant gets ajob. Supportive services will include transportation, .
mentoring and case management.


ARIZONA

Pima County Community Services, Tucson, AZ
Charles Casey   (520) 740-5205       Proposed Award Amount: $3,180,776

This project will prepare welfare recipients to gain public and private sector employment in six
industry clusters identified by local economic development planners, including aerospace,
environmental technology, software, optics, teleservices, and bio-industry. Participants in rural
areas, where there are few jobs, will be matched with jobs in urban areas. This project will
utilize a case management approach to help participants retain employment by upgrading both
their educational and vocational skill levels.


CALIFORNIA                                                   Automated Records .'<fanagement System
                                                             Hex-Dump Cgm-mion
Ray Worden (562)570-3811         Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

This project located in Long Beach California, will provide employment, post-employment, and
supportive services will be provided to participants of the Family Self-Sufficiency program and
noncustodial parents. The Housing Authority of the City of Long Beach will provide funding
for individual development accounts. In addition, local partners will support and be involved in
providing employment and other supportive services.                   .

Goodwill Industries of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
Margaret O'Brien (213)-223-1211 ext. 105 Proposed Award Amount: $4,098,265

The services provided through Goodwill's Employment Readiness Project in Los Angeles, CA,
will be a work-first subsidized work experience program, coupled with support· services focused
on removing the individual's employment barriers. Support services may include sobriety
support, parenting skills, basic skills remediation, English-as-a-Second-Language training, job
accommodation and employment preparation.

Beyond Shelter, Los Angeles, CA
Tanya Tun    (213) 252-0772           Proposed Award Amount:        $1,199,700

Beyond Shelter, based in Los Angeles, CA, will serve long-term welfare recipients who have
histories of substance abuse and homeless ness. The program will concentrate its efforts in
Central Los Angeles, South Central Los Angeles and the East San Fernando Valley. Each
individual will be evaluated to identify housing, social services and employment needs.      Each
participant will also meet with a job developer who will create an in-depth profile of the
individual's needs. In addition, each participant will be given a $500 clothing certificate to buy
appropriate work clothes. The program will provide on-going support for one full year after
placement in full-time, unsubsidized employment.

African American Unity Center, Los Angeles, CA
Curtis Owens (213) 789-7300      Proposed Award Amount: $1,357,885

This project, entitled MARCH II ( Making a Realistic Career Happen), is located in South Central
Los Angeles, and will provide Welfare-to-Work participants with full-time, subsidized work
experience, followed by placement in unsubsidized employment. The project has a strong
emphasis on noncustodial parents, the learning disabled and public housing residents.

Catholic Charities of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA
Rev. Monsignor Gregory A Cox (213) 251-3400           Proposed Award Amount: $3,037,423

Catholic Charities of Los Angeles will serve those hardest-to-employ welfare recipients in 11
communities throughout Los Angeles County. The Archdiocese has extensive relationships with

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
interim subsidized employment.· The program offers an innovative mentoring plan where
Catholic Charities will work with local parishes and pastors to recruit volunteer mentors.
Participants will be referred to local community colleges for English-as-a-Second-Language
training, basic skills or other training. Additional support services include counseling,
emergency services, parenting classes, tuition reimbursement, clothing, and child care and
transportation subsidies.

Jobs for Homeless Consortium, Oakland, CA
Michael Daniels       (510) 251-6241      Proposed Award Amount:             $1,365,336

The Jobs for Homeless Consortium will serve homeless welfare recipients and noncustodial
parents in Alameda County. This program is an innovative partnership between the Jobs
Consortium and RelyAble Choices, and concentrates on service to the whole family. The Jobs
Consortium will use leveraged funds to provide job preparation services to help homeless
participants become job ready and to stabilize their housing situation. RelyAble Choices will
use Welfare-to-Work funds to place participants in subsidized temp-to-hire positions. After 13
weeks of on the job training, the participant will be hired as an unsubsidized employee in
occupations such as carpentry, warehousing, and bus drivers.

San Diego Workforce Partnership, Inc., San Diego, CA
Lawrence G. Fitch (619) 238-1445 Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

This project in San Diego, CA will develop permanent employment opportunities for
Welfare-to-Work participants in the areas of child care and transportation. The project calls for
a strong collaboration with local and state partners. The project will also develop a Community
Resource Center which will serve as the One-Stop neighborhood center for Welfare-to-Work
activities.

County of Tulare Private Industry Council, Inc., Visalia, CA
Kathy Johnson (209) 737-4246          Proposed Award Amount:         $3,824,201

This project is to develop services to help the hardest-to-employ welfare recipients in Tulare
County, CA, to overcome personal and environmenta:l barriers to employment. In an
environment that will stress work-first and learning by doing, participants will receive intensive,
traiing and support services while earning a work experience wage. The Work-First Complex
will provide participants the job skills and support services they need to overcome existing
barriers to employment.


COLORADO                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
United Cerebral Palsy of Colorado, Denver, CO

The Aurora Community Employment Program will serve 200 individuals in Arapahoe County,
Colorado. The project is focused on developing a supportive, post-employment structure so that
individuals keep their current jobs and/or increase their earning potential by partnering with key
community entities who will provide educational and technical training services to develop long
term job security. The program plans to provide post-employment services to retain 160
individuals in long term employment; to assist 80 individuals find higher-paying jobs; and to
re-employan additional 35 individuals.

City and County of Denver, Denver, CO
Sue Boyd    (303) 376-6730       Proposed Grant Amount:              $3,598,915

This project will emphasize employer-focused targeting strategies to move the hard-to-employ
into area targeted industries (e.g., long-term and home health care industry). The program will
fund pilot demonstrations that use innovative techniques to put welfare recipients into the
workplace. Identifying and serving employers' workforce needs will be the centerpiece of the
program. Welfare-to-Work participants will receive integrated work and leaming opportunities ..


CONNECTICUT

Community Action Agency of New Haven, Inc., New Haven, CT
Marcial Cuevas    (203) 387-7700     Proposed Award Amount: $2,923,000

This project is a labor force attachment program bringing together a variety of agencies,
neighborhoods and employers to create multiple pathways for employment and career
opportunities in neighborhoods with high concentration of welfare recipients. These activities
include job readiness, family case management, child care, transportation and other support
services. Use of computer technology will increase access to information to identify
employment opportunities.

The Access Agency, Inc., Willimantic, CT
Ingrid Walker (860) 450-7446      Proposed Award Amount: $1,000,750

The Access Agency's Eastern Connecticut Welfare-to-Work Job Link is a community action
program geared toward meeting the needs of welfare recipients residing in rural communities.
Through an array of public and private partnerships and community resources, The Access
agency will provide transportation, child care, basic skills training and substahce abuse treatment.
 Participants will receive extensive personal and group counseling, job development and family
skills mentoring, training in innovative work and learning models and post-placement services.


DISTRICT of COLUMBIA
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dwnp Conversion
 Henry A. Burnett     (202) 526-8755          Proposed Award Amount:        $5,000,000

This project is modeled on 4 successful work-first job placement and post-employment training
programs in the Washington, D.C. area. The program will employ a professional case
management approach based on individual needs, a comprehensive quality management plan and
defined specific performance goals.

 FLORIDA

 Goodwill Industries of North Florida, Inc" Jacksonville, FL
 Robert Thayer       (904) 384-1361        Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

The project's design is based upon the "Goodwill Model" work-first strategy. Goodwill will
open new "Job Junction" centers in Jacksonville Beach, Gainesville, Palatka and Lake City, FL,
where services do not currently exist or where services are otherwise inaccessible due to a lack of
transportation. The neighborhood focus of the centers will direct clients to nearby employment,
thus reducing the need for intensive transportation services. The centers will help clients
address their neecl' for initial employment, a short-terin career plan and a long-term self-reliance
plan. The centers will be co-located with Goodwill retail stores and donation centers, which will
provide clients with opportunities for immediate employment, job training and a source of
clothing for interviews and employment.

 Miami-Dade County, Miami, FL
 Sergio Gonzalez   (305) 375-2041             Proposed Award Amount: $4,470,000

This project will serve participants who reside in four targeted public housing developments or
who are homeless. The project will provide expanded transportation services, child care,
family-focused assistance, integrated work and learning, job creation, self-employment, and
non-traditional careers for women. This project will place participants injobs in construction,
maintenance, lighting, painting and landscaping. Homeless participants will have access to
Homeless Assistance Centers that will provide additional support services.

  Latin Chamber of Commerce of USA, Miami, FL
. Anselmo Alliegro   (305) 374-8236    Proposed Award Amount: $2,100,000

  This project will target low-income Hispanic residents of Miami-Dade county who have limited
. English speaking ability and require GED completion education, personal finance management,
  counseling, employer/employee problem solving, job skills training, and parenting classes to
  retain employment and gain self-sufficiency. mUltiple barriers to employment. The project
  will place participants in employment while providing support services and post-employment job
  skills training.


GEORGIA
                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
Lois J. Burns (404) 292-2166  Proposed Award Amount: $2,224,375

This project will place noncustodial parents in sububan Atlanta, GA, in permanent jobs over a
three-year period. The Fatherhood Connection will provide educational training, employment
services and substance abuse services. The program will promote a holistic, and family oriented
approach.
City of Savannah, Savannah, GA
Freda Rutherford (912) 651-4280               Proposed Award Amount: $4,067,000

The program, to be operated in Savannah, GA, targets welfare recipients multiple barriers to
employment. By creating a Work Activity Center, the project plans to expose participants to an
environment of work and work supportive services. Non-traditional child care and
transportation services, including a car donation program, will be provided to enable participants
to work. Participants will be encouraged and trained to start their own small businesses.


HAWAII

. Hawaii County Economic Opportunity Council, Hilo, HI
  George Yokoyama (808) 961-2681       Proposed Award Amount: $4,200,000

A substantial portion of this project in Hawaii county will focus on microenterprise development.
 One group of participants will be targeted for business ownership by creating new enterprises in
various agricultural products. The other group will moved into permanent, unsubsidized
employment in various fields such as carpentry, teacher assistance, transportation, renewable
energy projects, and teleservice.


ILLINOIS

Chicago Housing Authority,Chicago, IL
Denise Eligan (312) 674-4405 ext. 10  Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

This project will focus specifically on providing employment opportunities for public housing
residents. The service strategy involves two program tracks - services will be targeted to
public housing resident participants and also to the project's employer partners. Employers will
be involved in all phases of the project in identifying skill needs, making hiring commitments
and supporting placed participants with job retention and career advancement. Innovative
post-placement employer supports include employer specialists, tax credit assistance, and
workplace mentoring.

Community and Economic Development Association of Cook County, Inc., Chicago, IL
Patricia Doherty-Wildner (312) 795-8884      Proposed Award Amount:
                                                                      Automated Records t,,1anagement System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                             000

The Community & Economic Development Association of Cook County, Inc., the nation's
largest community action agency, and the Cook County President's Office of Employment and
Training (POET), have formed a partnership to create the W.O.R.K.S. (Work Opportunities &
Responsibility Kindle Success) program. This program ensures a comprehensive approach to
unemployment by securing entry-level jobs and the services necessary to transition the
hardest-to-employ welfare recipients into these jobs. The focus of the project will be finding the
appropriate jobs for the participants rather than the appropriate participants for the jobs.
Employment coaches will be key to helping participants transition into work and learn worksite
coping skills.


INDIANA

City of Gary, Department of Health & Human Services, Gary, IN
Jewell M. Ross-Brown (219) 881-5724 Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

The FUTURES Program format is modeled in part on many school-to-work programs,
strategically advancing participants from practical work and life skills development through
detailed career planning, to specific occupational skills training or on the job training. The
service strategy, focusing on work-first, incorporates numerous job readiness and support
services in order to provide participants with a continuum of assistance. The FUTURES
Program will require participants to select an on-the-job training program, entrepreneurial
training program, or short-term specific vocational training program in an occupational area
consistent with their interest, aptitudes, abilities, and the labor market demand.


IOWA

Labor Institute for Workforce Development, Des Moines, IA
Twila M. Glenn       (515) 253-2626    Proposed Award Amount: $2,118,235

Participants, in and around Des Moines, IA, will participate in Lifestyles Seminars, which
provide an orientation to the construction trades. Participants will be placed with contractors in·
a range of occupations from concrete and pipe laying to demolition and hazardous waste
removal. Local employers and labor organizations will partner to teach necessary job skills and
safety techniques. Participants will be placed with mature workers who are employed along side
them and who act as mentors. Post-employment training will be individualized using
computer-based skill modules.


KANSAS
                                                      Automated Records \fanagement System
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
    Joan Wagnon      (785) 368-3895      Proposed Award Amount: $1,999,917

    This program, based on a work-first approach, seeks to take advantage of worker shortages in
    local industries in Topeka, KS, and move participants into these jobs. By addressing the barriers
    to employment such as mental illness, substance abuse and lack of transportation services, the
    program design includes extended transportation during evening, night and weekend hours as
    well as transportation to child care providers. Substance abuse and mental health treatment are
    also integral parts of the program.


    KENTUCKY

    Community Action Council, Lexington, KY
    Mark B. Hundley (606) 244-2211        Proposed Award Amount: $2,833,736

    Participants, including welfare recipients and noncustodial parents in Lexington, KY, will choose
    between two program tracks, either on-the-job training or immediate employment with support
    services such as off hours child care, work tools and clothing. The program will coordinate with
    an innovative local transportation program, developed by a consortium of car dealerships, that
    promotes car pooling and eventual car ownership. The Lexington Local illvestment
    Commission will be responsible for coordination of community resources for the project.


    LOUISIANA

    City of New Orleans, New Orleans, LA
    Thelma H. French (504) 565-6414              Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

    The New Orleans Welfare-to-Work Collaborative is an organization made up of more than 60
    businesses, service providers and consumer representatives. This project emphasizes pay for
    performance and family self-sufficiency and will provide specialized services for substance
    abusing mothers and noncustodial parents of children receiving welfare benefits. An
    information and rapid response line will serve to keep employers aware of the incentives
    available to those who hire participants and to address any workplace problems that may arise.


    MAINE

    Workforce Development Centers, Augusta, ME
    Stephen R. Duval  (207) 287-3378      Proposed Award Amount: $3,212,516

    This project will provide the hardest-to-employ welfare recipients in a 12-county rural area of
    Maine with a comprehensive array of services designed to help them get and keep jobs. The


                                                             Automater, P,pcnrds Management System
\
                                                             Hex-Dump i."VII\~rsion
will be seamlessly coordinated with those offered by community action agencies and other
organizations.


MARYLAND

The Baltimore City Office of Employment Development, Baltimore, MD
Linda A. Harris (410) 396-1910 Proposed Award Amount: $3,330,199

This project, in Baltimore MD, will be used to develop a community saturation employment
support model for residents of Gilmore Homes, an economically distressed public housing
community. Heads of Welfare-to-Work households and noncustodial parents will work in a
supported enviroment for up to six months while concurrently enhancing life skills. Participants
will be placed into unsubsidized employment in such industries as health, human services,
construction and customer service/retail. Once successfully implemented, this model will be
replicated in two other housing developments.

Prince Georges Private Industry Council, Landover, MD
Joseph Puhalla    (301) 386-5522 Proposed Award Amount: $4,976,254

The Marylanders Working and Learning Work First initiative is a multi-jurisdictional program
serving welfare recipients, in areas of high poverty in Baltimore City and Prince georges County,
MD. The program will place participants in private sector on-the-job internships and provide
basic and remedial education services. Following their internships, participants will be placed in
unsubsidizedjobs and will receive an extensive array of services to encourage job retention. A
key element of the program is the involvement of employers in the planning, development and
implementation of the program. The project stresses work experience, learning and support, and
basic work-related education.


MASSACHUSETTS

Boston Technology Venture Center, Inc., Boston, MA
Mark Ferri (617) 424-3888       Proposed Award Amount: $1,139,388

This project, located in Boston, MA, will develop a business incubator for emerging technology
firms who will link employers to long-term welfare recipients. The project is a comprehensive
work-first model with numerous public/private partnerships. Launched initially by Boston
Edison, the program is designed to hire participants for production/assembly jobs at the Boston
Technology Venture Center (BTVC). The project's focus is high tech and has components that
include job-readiness and job retention.

Action for Boston Community Development Inc., Boston, MA
Mark Isenburg (617) 357-6000 x219    Proposed Award Amount: $1,139,388

                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dwnp Conversion
recipients. Through active employer involvement, Action for Boston Community Development,
Inc. and Goodwill's Work Pathways Project will place participants in one ofthree
Welfare-to-Work pathways: direct placement, paid transitional employment, or enriched
community service employment. Program participants will receive one-stop access to support
services, ongoing job placement, career advancement and re-employment services.


MICHIGAN (Detriot will be served by the Marriot International Multisite Project - see below)


MINNESOTA

City of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, MN
Chip Wells (612) 673-2630             Proposed Award Amount: $1,860,000
The Fostering Actions To Help Eaming and Responsibility (FATHER) Program focuses on
achieving self-sufficiency for noncustodial fathers in Northside, Camden, Phillips, Central, and
Powderhorn Park, MN. The program integrates both family services and employment services
for non-custodial fathers. Participants will have access to job counselors, a database of job
openings and transportation that will help participants from the city reach jobs in the suburbs.
Additionally, child support enforcement officials will work to create a flexible child support .
payment plan and encourage fathers to develop and maintain strong emotional bonds with their
children.

Rise Incorporated, Spring Lake Park, MN
John J. Barrett (612) 783-2812 Proposed Award Amount: $3,099,779

Rise, Inc. will lead a consortium of public and private agencies to serve long-term welfare
recipients in Hennepin and Anoka Counties and Minneapolis, MN, through a program called
Work in Progress. The program will feature a work-first philosophy which encourages
immediate employment. In coordination with the local workforce centers, Work in Progress will
sponsor six business to business networking events. These marketing events, which will create
job opportunities for program participants, will feature employers, successful project participants
and workforce center counselors.


MISSISSIPPI

Hinds County, Jackson, MS
Dr. Roy DeBerry    (601) 968-6501            Proposed Award Amount: $3,294,191

Participants of the Remedial Employment Opportunity Program (REOP) face a variety of barriers
to employment, including inadequate transportation, lack of child care services, substance abuse,
inadequate job skills, low educational attainment and poor work histories. The project seeks to



                                                          Autom~ted Records Management System
                                                          Hex.-Dump Conversion
these new workers and their need for economic self-sufficiency to area employers. In addition,
local substance abuse treatment centers, housing and other community organizations will
participate in implementing this program. Private employers will be consulted to maximize job
training design, as well as job placement and retention.


MISSOURI

Advent Enterprises, Inc., Columbia, MO
Russell Doumas          (573) 474-8560        Proposed Award Amount:           $3,435,301

This project is a collaborative effort which incorporates a range of community organizations into
its service model. The project will mobilize county service providers to create a continuum of
care from prevention of unemployment through post-employment support. The Community
Support Teams will represent seven critical areas of need: child care, education/training, food,
health care, mentoring housing, and transportation. Key partners will work with participants to
pursue employment and enhance their experience with training, education, job skills, and
post-employment support. A 24 hour Mentor Program and Volunteer Peer Network of
Graduates will also enhance employee retention.

Full Employment Council, Inc., Kansas City, MO
Clyde McQueen     (816) 471-2330 ext. 256     Proposed Award Amount: $4,420,558

The Full Employment Council (FEC) project plans to move non-custodial parents, substance
abusers and other welfare recipients into sustainable employment through extensive job training
and job readiness services. The program has secured the participation of local employers and
various social service agencies as well as faith-based and community-based organizations.
Substance abuse treatment, child care and transportation will be provided to ease the transition to
work.


MONTANA

S & K Holding Company, Inc., Polson, MT
Joe Durglo (406) 883-4317        Proposed Award Amount: $2,542,700

The project will serve 200 residents of the Flathead Indian Reservation who experience multiple
barriers to employment, including a shortage of culturally appropriate employment opportunities.
 The program will expand local economic development through the start-up of small businesses
and will provide transportation, child care, integrated work and skill development, and
family-focused assistance to the residents of the reservation. The local community college,
service providers and state agencies will provide job readiness, retention, life skills and substance
abuse services for Welfare-to-Work participants.


                                                           Automated "R~('Mr1S \1anagement System
                                                           Hex-Dwnp COII~~r~lon


NEW HAMPSHIRE

Southwestern Community Services, Inc., Keene, NH
William A. Marcello  (603) 357-6510 Proposed Award Amount: $1,000,000

This project, serving Cheshire and Sullivan Counties, and the City of Keene, NH, will offer a
comprehensive array of services through a network of more than 50 community-based service
providers. This support structure will allow participants to address issues of substance abuse
and unstable housing, while working and learning technical skills. Economic development and
changing employer bias a~ainst welfare recipients is an important long-term goal of the project.


NEW JERSEY

Mercer County Office of Training & Employment, Trenton, NJ
Virgen Velez (609) 989-6824      Proposed Award Amount: $4,219,582

This project, which serves Mercer County, NJ, will provide welfare recipients and noncustodial
parents with intensive case management, individualized job matching, targeted job development
and transportation assistance. Once the client gets ajob, the project will provide intensive case
management and related services to both the clients and their employers to help the person keep
the job. and their families to become self-sustaining.

County of Essex, Newark, NJ
Stephen Cornman (973) 621-4740               Proposed Award Amount: $4,900,000

The EssexWorks Partnership formed under this project will aim to move long-term welfare
recipients and noncustodial parents into permanent jobs with local employers. Central to this
project is the specialized approach to each recipient's needs through job coaching, individual
development accounts and transportation between urban centers and suburban job opportunities.


NEW MEXICO

Santa Fe SER-Jobs for Progress, Inc., Santa Fe, NM
Alex A. Martinez   (505)-473-0428        Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

Project SST (Survive, Strive, Thrive) is designed to assist participants with acquisition of job
skills/habits, management capacity, and start-up capital to start microenterprises in Santa Fe,
NM. Child care, transportation, adult basic education, life skills training, substance abuse and

                                                             Automated Records Management System .
                                                             Hex.-Dwnp Convel>ion
family-focused case management model. The principal goal ofthe program is to provide
services to hard-to-employ welfare recipients to help them comply with the requirements ofthe
New Mexico Works Act, eliminate debilitating socioeconomic conditions, and provide
education, training and the work experience necessary for the transition to lasting unsubsidized
employment.


NEW YORK

New York City Partnership & Chamber of Commerce, New York, NY
Sandra K. Mancini    (212) 493-7442  Proposed Award Amount:   $5,000,000

This project is an innovative public-private partnership of employers, public agencies and
non-profit providers in New York City. The programs will mobilize jobs and meaningful work
experience at the city-wide level and provide work experience, training and case management
services at the neighborhood level. From the moment a candidate enters the program, slbe will
be involved in an innovative curriculum of intensive, industry specific skills training, work
experience program and directed job search activity.

City of New York Human Resources Administration, New York, NY
Jason A. Turner    (212) 274-2664   Proposed Award Amount: $2,934,705

This project will provide special job-training and post-employment activities, support services
and job placement and development activities for hard-to-employ welfare recipients in Bushwick
(Brooklyn, New York) and immediate surrounding areas. This project will focus on helping
individuals suffering from alcohol and substance abuse become part of the workforce. Family
focused service will also be provided.

Wildcat Service Corporation, New York, NY
Jeffrey Jablow (212) 219-9700 x5151    Proposed Award Amount: $2,007,017

This project in New York City offers demand driven, industry specific employment preparation
for jobs that pay self-sufficiency wages and offer career opportunities. The project will build
and expand on the Private Industry Partnership program, developed by Wildcat and Solomon
Smith Barney, to meet the needs of employers in the financial services, telecommunications and
banking industries. The program provides 32 weeks of subsidized employment, including
concurrent work and training components. Post-placement support services will be provided
for two years or more. The project is based on strong employer commitments to hire
Welfare-to-Work participants.

Buffalo & Erie Private Industry Council, Buffalo, NY
Marie Kaczmarek (716) 885-9840           Proposed Award Amount: $4,917,903

This project, located in Erie County, NY,including the city of Buffalo, will serve welfare

                                                               Automated ~ ecords Management system
                                                               Hex-D\,IIl'k' "''''i~eIj;ion
design is based on the methods that vocational rehabilitation providers use in working with
people with disabilities.


NORTH CAROLINA

UDI Community Development Corporation, Durham, NC
R. Edward Stewart (919) 544-4597    Proposed Award Amount: $3,728,134

This project, Welfare-to-Work Through Economic Development and Response to Labor Market
Demands, will utilize existing community resources to serve public housing residents, substance
abusers and others through private employment and training programs. This program
incorporates work-first and Work-To-Learn strategies to integrate participants into the local
workforce in jobs in construction and janitoriaVservice occupations.

Bennett College, Greensboro, NC
Jean Humphrey       (336) 370-8659           . Proposed Grant Amount:       $5,000,000

This project, operated by Bennett College, will address barriers of access to child care and public
transportation by offering round-the-clock services tailored to the needs of the participants in
both urban and rural parts of Guilford County, NC. The project is also designed to address the
negative stereotypes and perceptions of welfare recipients that may otherwise disrupt their
transition into wage-earning, self-supporting citizens.


OKLAHOMA

Eastern Workforce Development Board, Inc., Muskogee, OK
Luther R. Sowder (918) 683-8553       Proposed Award Amount: $2,848,115

The project will target noncustodial parents in and around Muskogee, Oklahoma. The project
will develop an intensive job retention and employer incentive program which will include
upgrade training and employer education. Team case management will help participants and
their families to access services from a number of other programs. The program also works with
staff from East Harlem STRIVE program to implement a similar model in Oklahoma. The
project hopes to establish an Employee Assistance Program for employers to help retain new
workers.


OHIO

Private Industry Council of Columbus and Franklin County, Inc., Columbus, OB
Frankie L. Coleman (614) 228-3907            Proposed Award Amount: $4,997,630


                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              HeK.Dwnp CIJnversion
Alcohol, Drug Addiction and Mental Health Services Board will serve long-term welfare
recipients who have substance abuse problems. The program will focus on drug treatment and
stabilization and employment and jobs skills training. Participants in the program will have
access to a wide array of services including life skills coaching, job readiness, work experience
and post-placement services such as intensive retention services, training, assistance in locating
housing and structured drug and alcohol dependence aftercare. The local transit authority will
operate special bus routes with off hours drop off and pick up points.

Columbus Urban League, Columbus, OR
Sandra Cephas    (614) 257-6300 ext. 120              Proposed Award Amount:          $3,149,984

This project, located in Columbus, Ohio (Franklin County), is designed to be an employer-driven
vocational training program. The Day One program is a collaboration between the Columbus
Urban League, Columbus State Community College, and the Workforce Development Agency
Group .. The project emphasizes employment retention through strong program support services
such as case management, transportation, child care and continuous job coaching.


OREGON         (State will be served by the Johns HopkinsUniversity and The Enterprise
               Foundation Multisite Projects)


PENNSYL VANIA
District 1199C Training and Upgrading Fund of the National Union of Hospital and Healthcare
Employers, Philadelphia, PA
James T. Ryan          (215) 735-5555           Proposed Award Amount: $4,449,928

The National Union of Hospital and Healthcare Employers in cooperation with two large
for-profit nursing home chains and a smaller nursing home, will serve hard-to-employ welfare
recipients and noncustodial fathers from the metropolitan Philadelphia area. Employers will be
involved in every aspect of the program. All participants will take part in work readiness and
nurse aide training programs that will result in State certification. Upon successful completion
of the program, participants will be hired, generally into unionized jobs with healthcare, pension
and training benefits. In order to overcome transportation barriers, the grantee will work with
employers and participants to create an extensive transportation system.


PUERTO RICO

Centro de Capacitacion y Asesoramiento, Caguas, PR
Elier J. Rodriguez (787) 745-4430       Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

This project will serve welfare recipients in 'the Arecibo region of Puerto Rico using a One-Stop
                                                               AlitOmat~d Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
and mentoring. The project will provide teenage participants with group experiences to develop
skills and attitudes for responsible parenting through educational and personal development
activities. .In addition, the project will include counseling and workshops to promote
responsible sexual behavior to prevent teenage pregnancy. The project will also address the
needs of long-term welfare recipients.


RHODE ISLAND

Providence/Cranston Private Industry Council, Providence, RI
Richard Andrade       (410) 861-0800          Proposed Award Amount:          $3,859,284

The Providence/Cranston Private Industry Council will serve 400 welfare mothers in federally
assisted and public housing complexes in transitioning to full-time jobs through the provision of
an innovative, supportive employment program. The World of Work (WOW) program
addresses the significant barriers to employment faced by the target group through a structured,
yet flexible system which features a work-first strategy combined with supportive employment
opportumtles. The World of Work will provide services on-site at public housing facilities,
thereby eliminating transportation barriers and offering a built-in network of peer support.


SOUTH DAKOTA

Oglala Lakota College, Kyle, SD 57752-0490
Thomas Shortbull (605) 455-2321         Proposed Award Amount: $2,293,326

The project, Wauna Wowasi on Wakanyeja (Work Now for our Children), will serve the Lakota
Sioux by placing Welfare-to-Work enrollees into employment and providing support services
such as GED tutoring, world of work training and child care. The project will set up a local
employment agency, target area employers, support entrepreneurial activities and provide
telephone service. In addition, the project will incorporate Lakota values to emphasize the
importance of employment for program participants for future generations of Lakota.


TENNESSEE

Tennessee Urban League Affiliates, Chattanooga, TN
Warren E. Logan    (423) 756-1762        Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

This project, located in Chattanooga, Knoxville, Memphis and Nashville, the four largest cities in
Tennessee, will utilize an integrated approach to obtain the commitment of employers to hire the .
hardest-to-employ inner-city welfare recipients by focusing on employer needs. Participants will
receive intensive support, employment and post-employment services through a service delivery
process based on close coordination of resources among the Private Industry Council, Urban

                                                             Autom~tect Re~l)rds Management System
                                                             He,,-Dl.IIIlp Conversion
 outreach and recruitment and serve as mentors for the participants.

 NashvillelDavidson County Private Industry Council, Nashville, TN
 Bill Tharp   (615) 880-2492     . Proposed Award Amount: $4,016,694

 This project will assist welfare recipients in Davidson County and Nashville, TN, to find and
 keep jobs with three major Nashville employers. The project will use the Pathways Model to
 provide a framework to broker support services needed for individuals to enter and remain
 successful at work. A keystone ofthe project will be the use of case managers and job coaches
 in career centers located at the work sites.


 TEXAS

 Dallas County Local Workforce Development Board, Dallas, TX
 Laurie Bouillion Larrea (214) 290-1000 Proposed Award Amount:                       $5,000,000

  The philosophy of the project, in Dallas and Garland County, TX, is to provide access to
  employment and support where the participants live; creating a village cluster concept to mentor,
  coach and educate them. The project provides participants with case management, job readiness
  classes, job placement, community support teams, child care, transportation, job coaching, basic
  education, English-as-a-Second-Language and GED classes and occupational training skills.
  The project uses a holistic process to help participants integrate all aspects of their lives with
  their employment. The program will encourage participants to build a community for positive
  change in their lives.
  Tarrant County Workforce Development Board, Fort Worth, TX
. Jann Miles (817) 531-6755              Proposed Award Amount: $3,254,864

 This program begins with extensive efforts on the part of local government, cornmunity based
 organizations and workforce development boards to encourage participation in this program.
 Participants are trained and placed in jobs that offer opportunity for upward mobility and
 wagesthat will lead to self-sufficiency. Participants will be placed in jobs in the service support
 sector with employers such as Sprint, Southwestern Bell, and GTE, and in the warehousing and
 freight transit industry with employers such as Federal Express, United Parcel Service and the
 Alliance Airport.      fucreased licensing for home child care and van pooling are targeted to
 reduce these barriers. Homeless noncustodial parents with substance abuse problems will also
 be served.

 County of Webb, Laredo, TX
 Juan Vargas (956) 718-8602         Proposed Award Amount: $1,000,000

 This project located in Laredo, TX (Webb County), will focus on moving the hardest-to-employ
 welfare recipients into unsubsidized employment. The project will partner with Americorp's
 VISTA Volunteers, the national Welfare-to-Work Partnership and the South Texas Workforce

                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


UTAH

Five County Association of Governments, St. George, UT
John S. Williams    (435) 673-3548      Proposed Award Amount: $3,000,000

Strategies in Project GROW are designed to integrate state-sponsored welfare goals and activities
including securing sustainable employment which will eliminate the need for subsidized
employment.' This grant will focus on individuals with muitiple barriers, people living in public
housing and noncustodial parents.


VERMONT

Central Vermont Community Action Council; Barre, VT
Hal Cohen (802) 479-1053       Proposed Award Amount: $3,120,140

The project, known as the Central Vermont Community Commitment, will operate out of the 12
Career Resource Centers (One Stop Centers) across the State and will create 200 new child care
slots in 35 home-based businesses. On-the-job training and subsidized employment with public
agencies will be the main work-first strategies, with some limited microbusiness training.
Participants will have workplace mentors to coach them on workplace skills. The project will
mobilize an array of resources including a full-time Mental Health Coordinator, an accelerated
and expanded van service and legal aid.


VIRGINIA

Alexandria Redevelopment and Housing Authority, Arlington, VA
Dr. Beverly Howard (703) 549-7115 ext. 215   Proposed Award Amount: $1,090,000

The Alexandria Redevelopment and Housing Authority (ARHA) project seeks to move its
residents into long-term, economic self-sufficiency through a range oftraining and employment
approaches. Participants will be trained to enter the home-building and construction trades
which offer high entry-level wages, as well as other industries seeking workers. Program
participants be mentored at the job site. In addition, job placement services and computer skills
training will be provided as well as support servie such as child care, transportation and
substance abuse treatment.

Richmond Private Industry Council, Richmond, VA
Charles G. Tetro (207) 469-6385        Proposed Award Amount:                $4,993,775

This project will move the hardest-to-employ Richmond residents, (including noncustodial

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
management. Job training services will be made available in the neighborhoods where
recipients live and work. Apprenticeships, workplace literacy and training in nontraditional
occupations for women are among the planned services. Professional interns and volunteers will
provide additional support to this work-first program.


WASHINGTON

Washington State Labor Council (AFL - CIO), Seattle, WA
Raymond E. Mason (206) 281-8901        Proposed Award Amount: $4,619,684

Washington State Labor Council's (WSLC) Recovery and Work Retention project is designed to
provide services to assist substance abusers to initiate and maintain an alcohol and drug-free
recovery lifestyle. Through life-long skill building, personal empowerment training, job
preparation and support services, WSLC and its partners will assist welfare recipients achieve
and maintain life-long self-sufficiency.

Seattle-King County Private Industry Council, Seattle, WA
Alfred L. Starr     (206) 448-0474      Proposed Award Amount: $5,000,000

This project represents a collaboration among Seattle's employment, training and welfare
systems that will move the hardest-to-employ Seattle and King county welfare recipients into
permanent employment. The project will focus on placing participants clients into jobs with a
career ladder, and providing intensive case management, providing
English-as-a-Second-Language training and job retention services. The project will expand
transportation services and expand child care options through the development of culturally
relevant child care options. The project will supply a variety of supportive services to place and
retain WtW enrollees, many of whom have limited English speaking ability.

WEST VIRGINIA

Human Resources Development Foundation, Morgantown, WV
Homer R. Kincaid (304) 296-8223     Proposed Award Amount: $4,934,876

The Human Resources Development Foundation (HRDF) will operate a Comprehensive
Employment Program (CEP) in rural West Virginia. Six offices will be set up around cities in
the service area. Participants be provided work experience, job readiness, mentoring,
occupational skills, apprenticeship training, enhanced supportive services, and job retention and
advancement skills. New programs and services will be created to fill the gaps in the current
employment, social service, and training systems including in-depth assessment and case
management, and recruitment efforts to reach noncustodial parents. In addition the project
plans to extend bus routes in contiguous counties and contract with the local Board of Education
to provide transportation services.

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

Johns Hopkins Univer;sity, Baltimore City, MD
Dr. Arnold H. Packer (410) 516-4556 Proposed Award Amount: $4,996,535

Serving: MD, IL, ME, lA, CT, CA, OR, R1, FL, AZ. The project will serve long-tenn
welfare recipients and noncustodial fathers in ten diverse communitiesin 10 States. Local
community colleges, government agencies and community-based organizations will combine
efforts to place Welfare-to-Work participants in employment that offers learning opportunities.
Program participants will be provided with intensive skills development and will receive
documentation and certification of their skills acquisition. The project will establish an
illternet-based learning network to benefit employers and WtW participants.

The America Works Partnership, Washington, DC
Edward J. Gorman III (202) 639-8811 Proposed Award Amount: $7,872,505

Serving:      CA, NJ, FL, AK, & IN. Traditional apprenticeship programs are more
accommodating to individuals with learning disabilities than other classroom-based training
programs. This project plans to focus on placing eligible public housing residents in
construction and other apprenticable trades, with supportive services to help them move up to
self-sufficiency. funovative aspects of the project include technology-based distance learning,
and interactive software to develop English-as-a-second-Ianguage skills, virtual One-Stop service
centers, mobile learning labs, employer coaching and mentoring programs. The project also
seeks to improve recruitment, hiring and training practices oriented towards low-income
individuals in construction and other related industries.

The Enterprise Foundation, Columbia, MD
Patrick Jackson         (410) 772-2751        Proposed Award Amount: $8,000,000
Serving: MD, CO, TX, MO, DC, and OR. The Enterprise Foundation, in conjunction with
more than 200 service providers and business partners, will help 2,525 welfare recipients in
Baltimore, MD, Denver, CO, San Antonio, TX, St. Louis, MO, Washington, DC, and Portland,
OR, to move into sustained employment with a focus on career development and advancement
for each person. The Enterprise Foundation will collaborate with a number of partners who will
provide direct work preparation as well as supportive services upon referral.   ill each city, the
coalition will focus on serving welfare recipients and non-custodial parents who reside in
particularly distressed neighborhoods.

International Association of Jewish Vocational Services, Philadelphia, PA
Arlene D. Cohen      (215) 854-0235       Proposed Award Amount: $4,204,777

Serving: MN, NJ, P A & two sites in MA. This project will be operated by affiliate agencies
ofthe illternational Association of Jewish Vocational Services in six urban areas. The project
will provide pre- and post-employment services and ongoing case management to welfare


                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           HeK-uump Con\'ersion
The goal ofthe project is to help people on public assistance find entry-level jobs with career
growth potential in the health care industry. Ongoing case management, mentoring and
post-employment skills training will also be an important element in developing participant's
careers.

Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities, San Antonio, TX
Antonio Flores      (210) 692-3805       Proposed Award Amount: $4,321,269

Serving: AZ, CA, TX. The Hispanic Associations of Colleges and Universities (HACU) will
conduct post-employment occupational and basic skills training for eligible participants through
state-of-the-art interactive computer technology. This training will occur at the worksite, with
education counseling provided by mentors and employers supervising the program on-site. This
unique proj ect will add to the continuum of s'ervices provided by Welfare-to-Work formula or
other funds. Specific occupations include building maintenance, customer service, home care
worker, office worker and security guard.

Marriott International Community Employment & Training Programs, Washington, DC
Fred Kramer (301) 380-8583      Proposed Award Amount: $3,536,250

Serving: Multisite in serving 20 cities in CA, CO, FL, GA, IL, KY, LA, MD, MI, MO, NY,
NC, OH, PA, TX, and V A. Marriott's work first model is designed to target hard-to-employ
Welfare-to-Work participants across twenty cities in 15 States. Through Marriott's integrated
work and learning environment, which focuses on job retention, participants will receive
customized job training and supportive services to address employment and community barriers.
In addition, the program will facilitate a mentor and protege component to assist protege's in
making a successful transition from welfare to economic self-sufficiency.




                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 040 - FOLDER -011


[11/20/1998]
