RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-NOV-1998 15:07:46.00

SUBJECT:   Family report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
CEA has attached an explanation of the changes we made that did not
conform to the comments CEA got from DPC.



==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D96]MAIL46142532U.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504380070100010A020100000002050000008D1C0200000200004060A49932AAEOCD20AA69
DB352153A9039A4B7FC965F4321BOBA7BC6688541EDC837FEFA04DC906D21CF71F84DD8798084F
BC4DE8B2761789103ADC60B09499452F93E9ED0910E29B9F576309ClAC24A6C5F48A74BC16C9F7




o




    Families and the Changing Labor Market


                  An analysis by the
             Council of Economic Advisers

                   November 1998




                             Automated Records Management System
                             Hex-Dump Conversion

                          Families and the Changing Labor Market

                                     Executive Summary

       American families have been in the midst of change in the last three decades - changes in
time worked for pay; changes in income and by whom it is earned; changes in family size; and
changes in how child care and household tasks are accomplished. This report assesses these
changes and the challenges and opportunities they create.

и      The hours American parents work in paid jobs have increased enormously since 1969,
       due to a dramatic shift of mothers' time from the household to the labor market. In
       1969, 38 percent of married mothers worked for pay; in 1996, 68 percent did so. Both
       married mothers and single parents are working more for pay today than 30 years ago.

и      Average family income has increased as a result of the increase in paid work hours, so
       that families can purchase more goods and services than in the past. The average
       American family is better off economically today than in 1969, but has less time for.
       activities other than work.

и      Not everyone has gained by working harder, however. Since 1969, the top quarter of
       families gained, while the lower quarter lost and the middle has remained nearly constant
       in per-capita income, adjusted for inflation. The situation oflower-income families has
       been improving, however, in the strong economic expansion of the 1990s.

и      At the same time, the share of families with a single parent has grown dramatically since
       1969. The typical single parent has less than half as much potential income and only half
       as much total time as two parents have. The rising number of single parents has
       increased the proportion of families who are "cash-strapped" and "time-poor."

и      The increase in work among women appears to have produced some reduction in the time
       parents spend with their children, although the evidence on time use within families is
       limited. Most of the extra time spent earning income has come at the expense of
       housework, not child care or leisure activities.

и      Increased time in market work among parents raises a key set of policy issues, including
       the need for flexibility in paid work hours; the need for available and affordable child
       care; effective ways to support the earnings of families with low-wage earning parents;
       and the need to encourage two-parent families to form and stay together. In all of these
       areas, the Clinton Administration has actively worked to improve the situation of
       American families.


                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

                              Families and the Changing Labor Market


I.     Introduction

        Dramatic changes have occurred over the last thirty years in how families combine work
and family life. During the last three decades, women have devoted more and more time to
market work. Combined with hourly earnings increases among women, this means women's
earnings have gone up substantially, while their time available for work in the home has
declined. In contrast, men's average hours of paid work and earnings have remained relatively
stable. As a result, families have higher incomes, but they have less time for other activities. In
short, American families have been in the midst of change - changes in time worked for pay;
changes in income and by whom it is earned; changes in family size; and changes in how child
care and household tasks are accomplished. This
report assesses these changes since 1969 for
families with children under age 18.

         Two other trends in family life are also
                                                     ..и '" и. , , , ., " . , ,
                                                         : ::

                                                       I: ~ ~ ~
                                                                 ~
                                                                        D
                                                                                        m




                                                                                             D
                                                                                               nn
                                                                                             "','      "     и   ,   ,.,   ии ,           "   ,   ,   m   "', ,



                                                                                                                                                            I



likely to affect the well-being of families with          .и      . ии и   ,. , и  ,...     . ...
children, occurring along with changes in their income and time allocations. First, the share of
families with children that are headed by a single parent has increased significantly (see figure 1).
 Since single parents typically have both lower incomes and less total adult time available for
work in the home than married-couple families, this trend tends to increase the proportion of
families who are "cash-strapped" and "time poor." Second, families have decreased in size as
the average number of children in families with children has declined (see figure 2).

       This paper will examine how families with children are faring in the face of all these



                                                                                                                           un '"
changes. Key questions to be addressed include:

и      How much have hours of market work
       increased for families?
                                                         1,'["''00" 'nO""
                                                           I.'          , иии    ,...              '.1. ,1.1               , иии ,., и
                                                                     .. и ,tI"   ииии   1.     и   , ии "   ииииии         . . " . , ..   " ...



и      How have the extra hours worked by families
       affected family incomes? How have these trends differentially affected families that differ
       in skill level, minority status, and number of parents in the household?

и      How have these changes in market work and income affected how families use their time
       in the home? In particular, how have these changes affected parental time available for
       children?

       Some have argued that Americans are facing more and more of a "time bind" as they
work longer and longer hours in order to attain an increasing standard of living. 1 Others have

       1   Hochschild (1998); Schor (1991).
                                                                 Automat~d Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                 1

argued that, even with increases in hours of paid work, families are not realizing significant
income gains, or that families are working harder and harder "just to stay in the same place.,,2
No such "one size fits all" characterization adequately captures the variety of experience in
different segments ofthe population. Different types offamilies have experienced different
changes in paid work time and income.

        Overall, we find that parents today are spending more time in paid work. Time available
for children has declined, but parents have protected child-rearing time by spending less time on
household chores. For most groups, family income has increased. With fewer children, parents
are able to buy more goods and services for themselves and their children. The average
American child - particularly ifhe or she is living in a family headed by a married couple - is
better off economically today than in 1969.

        There are some groups for whom the picture is not as rosy, however. The continuing
increase in the share of children living in single-parent families has substantially diminished the
economic progress that families with children would otherwise have made, limiting both their
income and their time. Less educated parents, who have not experienced the wage gains of
other families, are working more hours without an increase in income. It is encouraging to note,
however, that most of these families have experienced income gains in recent years during the
strong economic expansion of the 1990s, making it easier for them to effectively combine work
and family life.                              .

        Underlying and reinforcing the trends toward more paid work time and smaller families
has been the long-term growth of women's wages. Rising wages pull women into the labor
market by making it more expensive for them to stay at home, in terms of foregone income.
Higher wage levels for women in the labor market, combined with other changes in attitudes
toward market work among women, make it unlikely that families will ever return to the way
they were in 1969. With both mothers and fathers in the labor market, we have no realistic
alternative but to help parents balance paid work and family life as effectively as possible.

II.    Trends in Hours of Market Work

       The most dramatic change in the time allocation of families has been in time spent at
work for pay. Since 1969, both married-couple and single-parent families have substantially
increased their annual hours of paid work. These increases have come almost entirely from the
women in these families, who are working more outside the home - more weeks in the year and
more hours in the week - than they did thirty years ago. However, while the increase in paid
work time has been widespread, the size of the increase has varied considerably across families,
depending on the number of parents, their education, whether they have a preschool-age child,
and their race or ethnicity.



       2
           Bluestone and Rose (1997).                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                 2

        The estimates of annual hours of work presented in this section are based on the March
Current Population Survey (CPS), a large representative survey of over 50,000 households each
year. 3 While the CPS is the only large-scale representative s'ample which consistently measures
hours of work and family incomes on an annual basis and is therefore the standard data set u~ed
for labor market analyses, some have argued that the CPS may be inaccurate because individuals
may not"be able to recall accurately their usual hours of work during the last year. 4 In section
IV of this report we discuss alternative estimates of paid work time based upon "time diaries,"
which require individuals.to maintain detailed accounts of how they spent their time during a
day.

        For purposes of this analysis, we use the same definition of a "family" as the Census
Bureau: all related individuals living together in the same household. We restrict the analysis
to families whose head is at least eighteen years old and where there is a child under age 18. A
mother (or couple) and her (their) children living in a household headed by another family
member are part of the head's family, and an unmarried parent co-habiting with a domestic
partner is classified as a single parent. Throughout this paper, unless otherwise specified, the



  иI::::.iи ~ ~
      . ,.. ~
                                                 terms ''wives'' and "married women" refer only to
 l.Ann~.'Ho\lr.              olW   o,k,'"   ии ,I.d-Coupl.   Fern   III и и


            [z"'"'1   H   ииииии




                                                                                      : : !0 0 I I[ [
                                                                      !



                                                                                                                         I

those with children.
        As shown in figures 3 and 4, annual hours of paid work have increased substantially for
both married-couple and single-parent families. (All families with children under 18 are
included in figures 3 through 6, including parents with zero hours of paid work.) A person who
works forty hours a week for 50 weeks a year (a traditional "full-time" job) will work 2,000
hours in a year. For two-parent families (figure 3) annual hours of paid work increased by 496
hours (18 percent) from 1969 to 1996; for single-parent households (figure 4) they increased by
297 hours (28 percent).




          3 We are using the March 1970, 1980, 1990, and 1997 CPS data sets. The data collected each March refer
to the previous calendar year. Thus we refer to data for 1969,1979,1989, and 1996. We chose those years
because they represent peak years (or upswing, in 1996) in the business cycle and thus permit valid historical
comparisons. For 1979, 1989, and 1996, information on annual hours of work was derived from two questions
which ask how many weeks each individual worked in the previous year and how many hours they "usually worked"
in the weeks they worked. Multiplying weeks worked by usual hours worked per week provides a measure of
annual hours of work. The 1969 data are not strictly comparable to later years due to differences in data reporting.
We have developed an imputation procedure to make these data more comparable to information in later years.

        4   Juster and Stafford (1991); Robinson and Godbey, chapter 4 (1997).
                                                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                              3

      Virtually all of the increase in families' market hours of work has come from increases in
women's hours. Conceptually, the increase in women's hours can be divided into three
components: more women are employed, employed women are working more hours per week,
and employed women are working more weeks per year.

       The most dramatic change has been in the percentage of women employed. In 1969,38
percent of married women with children worked for pay, while in 1996, 68 percent did so - a 79
percent increase in employment. The increase in employment for single parents has been less
dramatic: 53 percent worked for pay in 1969 and 66 percent in 1996.

        Average annual hours worked by those who worked for pay also increased over time,
showing that not all of the increase in hours came simply from more women entering the labor
force. This increase was much greater for wives
(who experienced a 24 percent increase) than for
single parents (who experienced an 8 percent
increase). This is not surprising since on
                                                      и. , и. " ,., иииии (I,. """, и "" w . . . . , I. , и и и и и и


                                                          . __
                                                                 и


                                                                  "'l
                                                              i :::
                                                                    '" '""".,
                                                                           ~ " ......... ..
                                                                   1]. = ::':::::':::"'JTI'.'
                                                                      ~~__ ~~       ____
                                                                                    .~=,~
                                                                                          f




                                                                                                   _
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                              ~ ииии ,




                                                                                                      m1j
                                                                                                          ии ~ иии и




                                                                                                     ~L-~LAL-~




average, single parents in 1969 worked more                L-~~--~~~ии~.~~ ~.~~            ..и .и       ~~.7.~~~
                                                                                                         7 ..   .и. . и и".. ...   .. ии и.

hours per year for pay than wives did in 1996.
Both hours worked per week and weeks worked per year increased for wives and single parents,
among those who worked for pay. Each of these components of annual hours, like the total,
increased more for wives than for single parents. Increases in hours worked per week were
more dramatic than increases in weeks worked per year.

         While annual hours of paid work by all wives increased greatly - by 576 hours, or 93
percent - husbands' hours of paid work decreased slightly from 1969 to 1996. This is the result
of husbands working fewer weeks per year, without significantly changing their usual number of
hours worked per week. These trends are consistent with estimates reported elsewhere in the
literature, based on a variety of data sources. s

        The increase in families' hours of paid work has been widespread throughout the.
population. All types offamilies - whether defined by the head's education level, spouse's
education level, presence of young children, or race or ethnicity of the household head - have
experienced substantial increases in hours of paid work from 1969 to 1996. In virtually every
case, the increase in family hours of paid work reflects increases by wives and by single parents,
rather than by husbands.

        While the basic tJ;'ends have been similar, however, the magnitude of the increase in hours
of paid work has differed substantially across different demographic groups. In part, this is


        5
           Rones, Ilg and Gardner (1997) and Leete and Schor (1994) used CPS data, Bluestone and Rose (1997)
used data from the Panel Study ofIncome Dynamics, and McGrattan and Rogerson (1998) used decennial Census
data. All of these studies show increases in hours of work for women and decreasing or stable hours of work for
men when nonemployment is taken into account.
                                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                         4                   Hex-Dump Conversion

because some groups, such as women with preschool-age children, had lower hours to start with
and therefore more room for expansion than others.

и        Families whose head had gone to college have increased their hours ofpaid work much
         more than those whose head had less education (see figure 5). For married couples with
         a college-educated husband, annual hours of paid work increased by 644 hours (23
         percent) - more than twice the increase for couples in which the husband had a high
         school diploma or less. The difference was due to the wives' hours increasing more and
         the husbands' hours decreasing less in the college-educated families. For single parents
         with a college degree, hours of paid work increased by 322 hours (20 percent), compared
         to 165 hours (16 percent) for single parents with a high school diploma or less.




и        Families with a young child increased their hours ofpaid work more than those with only
         school-age children (see figure 6). For single parents with a child under age five, hours
         of paid work increased by 400 hours (50 percent), compared to 246 hours (21 percent) for
         single parents without a young child. For married couples, hours of paid work
         increased by 537 hours (20 percent) for families with a child under age five, compared to
         457 hours (15 percent) for families without a young child.

и        Married couples with a white or black husband increased their hours ofpaid work nearly
         twice as much as married couples with a Hispanic husband. By contrast, single Hispanic


        :y:::::::::~;:::::::;
         parents increased their hours slightly more



paid work? Trends in wages and trends in paid
                                                          и. , и. "и. '" , "" .. , , .... w . . . . . . , , и , ., и

                                                                  .~,~.:. rf- - - 'IJ"'~i'- l."_..._и ~.=.',--'-, ,_, _., -"~ :и_ и:'_и ~
                                                                        t
                                                                        ""LJ   .......................... .
                                                                                                                           :и':...J'::L';
                                                                                                                       I J.... , ;
                                                                                                                         ; ",               ib,,-:_;и
                                                                                                                                            ...     ;L::_:'-I"



work hours influence each other. Rising wages
tend to draw more individuals into the labor force, while falling wages tend to reduce
participation. In turn, more work experience leads to faster wage growth, and vice versa. As a
result, wages and paid work time tend to move up (or down) together, in a virtuous (or vicious)
cycle.

         Trends in hours of paid work for both men and women have roughly paralleled the trends
in their wages since 1969, discussed below (in section III-A). 7 However, the magnitudes ofthe


        . 6 Trends for Hispanic families are difficult to interpret because changing immigration patterns resulted in
significant chang.es in the composition of the Hispanic population over this time period.
         7                             .
             Blank, chapter 3 (1997); Juhn & Murphy (1997).
                                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                          5                             HexиDump Conversion

changes in paid work time are still not completely understood, as they are not easily "explained"
by changes in key economic variables. 8 The increases in paid work among women seem to be
much more closely related to increases in their own wages than to the changes in their husband's
wages over this period. Declining male wages do not appear to be the main reason why women
are increasing their market work. 9 Increased work among women may also be affected by such
hard-to-measure factors as changes in assumptions about women's role in the family, diminished
discrimination against women in the workplace, or falling barriers to women entering
non-traditional occupations. Highly educated women have benefitted more from diminished
discrimination than have women with less education, as higher-level professional and
management jobs have opened up to them. Whatever the reason, large increases in market work
hours among women have substantially changed the time allocation and income of families.

        Are there constraints in the labor market that have led workers to choose more work -
hours than they would want? For instance, perhaps some full-time workers would rather work
part-time. A worker's decision about how many hours to work on ajob is determined by a
number offactors. When workers accept ajob, they are agreeing to a formal contract of hours
and wages as well as to an implicit contract about career development. They are jointly
choosing the type of work they do, the environment in which they do it, the wages and benefits
they earn, the job's future prospects, and th~ hours they work. It is possible that employees are
working more hours than they would like, but that they value the other characteristics of their
jobs sufficiently to work those extra hours.


III.   Trends in Family Income

        The upward trend in hours of market work raises questions about trends in family
well-being. A family's economic well-being is typically measured by its income. Earnings are
the largest part of family income, which also includes transfer payments such as welfare and
unemployment insurance, interest, dividends, and other unearned income such as child support.
Earnings, in tum, are equal to hours worked for pay multiplied by the hourly wage. Rising
work hours should lead to rising incomes, but the magnitude of this effect depends on changes in
wages and other income sources that might be occurring at the same time.


A.     Wages




       8   Blau (1998), Danziger and Reed (1997).

       9
           Juhn and Murphy (1997).
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                    6

         During the same period in which women's hours of paid work have increased,
inflation-adjusted wages have been increasing for women on average .. Female college
graduates' wages have risen more than wages arnong the less educated. In fact, female high
school dropouts' wages have stagnated or even declined slightly. Men's wages have grown very
little on average. They have fallen for men without college degrees and remained virtually
constant for men with at least a BA. 1O Because fringe benefits have grown since 1969, workers'
hourly compensation (including the value of fringe benefits) has improved more than their wages
alone.

        As we discussed above, these wage changes are positively related to changes in hours of
work. More educated women have shown the largest increase in their market work, and their
earnings have gone up even faster as wages and hours of work rose together. Less educated men
have experienced both declining wages and declining hours of work (due to decreased labor force
participation and increased unemployment), leading to earnings reductions.


B.      Total Family Income




         10 Blau (\998). These are the trends in mean weekly earnings of full-time workers aged 25-64. Other
wage measures such as average hourly earnings or median weekly earnings show slightly different trends, but all
show a sirnilar relationship between education levels.                      Automated Records Management System

                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                     7

          Putting the trends in wages and hours together, to what extent have increases in hours of
  paid work within families translated into increases in family income - the measure we ultimately
  care about? To answer this question, we present estimates of average family incomes, by
  income component, to provide one assessment of how the changes in hours have affected the
  standard of living of families in the United States. 11 Our income measure, as described earlier,
  is based upon before-tax cash income only, including cash benefits such as welfare and
  unemployment insurance benefi.ts, and does not include other family resources, such as fringe
  benefits, food stamps, and the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). While these other resources
  and taxes are important, they are difficult to measure accurately or consistently for individual
  families.    Because food stamp use grew rapidly in the 1970s and the EITC expanded greatly in
  the 1990s, the income measure we use omits more of the resources available to low"income
  families today than in the 1960s. Our estimates therefore understate the gains made by
  low-income families since 1969. 12

          Trends in income and in the various components of income (earnings, government
  transfers, other sources of income) have varied across different types of families. 13

  1.      Trends in Income by Family Structure

          Both married-couple families and single-parent families achieved increases in
  inflation-adjusted income from 1969 to 1996 (see figures 7 and 8). However, even though
  single parents had substantially higher rates of growth in paid work hours, married-couple
  families experienced a much larger average increase in income.




I ..                                                   и       The incomes of married-couple families
I ..                                                   increased by more than their increase in paid work
i"                                                     time. Their average family income increased by
                                                       almost a third from 1969 to 1996 ($14,800 in 1996
                                                       dollars), while their annual hours of paid work
           increased by less than a fifth.

           11 To adjust for changes in prices over time, these estimates use the CPI-U-Xl price index measure, which
  is commonly used in federal statistics such as the current poverty threshold. Some have argued that this measure
  overestimates the actual rate of change in price levels over time. Estimates that assume a lower rate of inflation
  produce higher estimates of inflation-adjusted income growth over time.

           12   For estimates of changes in family incomes using a broader defmition of income, see Levy (1996).

           13 Throughout the following analysis we use mean (that is, average) income, rather than the median or
  another indicator of the distribution. Changes in mean income can be decomposed into changes in means of the
  components of income, whereas changes in the median cannot. There has been a more positive change in mean
  income than in median income, as disproportionate growth in the upper tail of the income distribution pulls up the
  mean without affecting the median.

Automated Records Management System                       I ..
                                                          I
Hex-Ownp Conversion                                       i~


и      For single-parent families, incomes increased by much less than paid work time. They
       also increased much less than the incomes of married-couple families over this period,
       after adjusting for inflation. Average income of single-parent families increased by less
       than ten percent ($1,900 in 1996 dollars) from 1969 to 1996, while their paid work hours
       increased by more than a quarter.

        Increases in the earnings of wives and single parents generated most ofthe income
growth from 1969 to 1996. Single parents' earnings increased more than their total family
incomes did, as earnings increases were offset by a forty percent decline in average government
cash transfer payments. For two-parent families, increases in the wives' earnings represented
two thirds of the increase in family income, with the remainder attributable to an increase in the
husbands' earnings and an increase in unearned income from sources other than government
transfer payments.

         Among both wives and single parents, their increased earnings reflect an increase in
hours of work and an increase in hourly earnings rates. Rising earnings among wives reflected a
startling 93 percent increase in their hours and a 53 percent increase in their earnings per hour..
For single parents, hours of work increased by 28 percent, while hourly earnings increased by 18
percent.

2.     Trends in Income by Other Demographic Characteristics

       As with hours of paid work, trends in average family incomes differ substantially across
groups of families classified by education, race or ethnicity, or presence of young children.
Income growth has been greater for families whose head is highly skilled, for families headed by
a white person, and for families with preschool-age children.

и      More-educated families had greater income growth from 1969 to 1996. Married
       couples' income grew by almost a third if the husband had a college education, but less
       than ten percent if the husband had a high school diploma or less. For single parents,
       inflation-adjusted incomes grew by eight percent if they had a college degree, but
       incomesfell by five percent for single parents with a high school diploma or less. Much
       of this difference in income growth reflects larger earnings increases for highly skilled
       wives and single parents, and larger earnings deClines for low skilled husbands. Erosion
       of the purchasing power of cash welfare benefits also helps explain why the
       inflation-adjusted incomes ofless-educated single parents fell.

и      Average income growth for whites was substantially higher than for blacks or Hispanics.
        Among families headed by a white person, average incomes grew by almost twenty
       percent for both married couples (19 percent) and single parents (17 percent) from 1979
                14
       to 1996.    For blacks, average incomes grew by less than ten percent for both two-parent

       14   Our race and ethnicity comparisons begin in 1979 because the CPS did not identify Hispanics in 1969.

                                                                     Automated ~pr"rds Management System
                                                        9
                                                                     Hex-Dump \",olly.:r.ion

         families (9 percent) and single-parent families (6 percent). Finally, for Hispanics,
         average incomes fell by almost five percent for married couples (4 percent) and single
         parents (3 percent). These results are striking, given the relatively large increases in
         hours worked for pay by Hispanic single parents over this period. An increasing share of
         recent immigrants with lower education and wage levels in the Hispanic population helps
         explain why Hispanics' incomes fell. In addition, wages and cash welfare benefits
         declined.

и       Families with a child under age five had greater average income growth than families
        with older children. For married couples, average incomes increased by 38 percent for
        families with a child under age five, compared to 27 percent for families with only older
        children. For single parent families, mean incomes increased by 17 percent for those
        with young children, but by just 6 percent for families with only older children. 15

3,       Recent Trends in Family Income

        Trends in family income from 1992 to 1996 are considerably more favorable than the
longer term trend since 1969. Even families headed by single parents with a high school
diploma or less, whose income deteriorated from 1969 through 1992, made income gains from
1992 to 1996 during the sustained period of economic expansion under the Clinton
Administration.


C, The Distribution of Family Per Capita Income

        To assess the implications of income growth for families with children, we need to take
account of the increasing share of single-parent families, whose incomes are lower and grew
much less than the incomes of married-couple families (see section III-B above). We also need
to consider the decrease in family size, because a given family income provides more resources
per child when there are fewer children in the family. Moreover, because less-skilled,
lower-income parents have had slower income growth than highly skilled, higher-income
parents, it is important to consider the trends in income for lower-income and higher-income
families, not just the average family.

        Figure 9 presents estimates which incorporate the combined effects of the increasing
share of single-parent families and decreasing average family size, to assess changes in incomes
for families with children. To reflect changes in the share of single-parent families, the diagram


                                                                                                                   n
shows changes for the combined family income
distribution of single-parent and two-parent families.    ::::: " .,'" ',m '" '"" m, . , ' Co'
                                                                                             ..                               "'I
 In addition, as a crude way of adjusting for the                I :::::
         15
                                                                    '::::
                                                                        и
                                                                              00
                                                                             и ии   I   '   ии ,
                                                                                                    DO
                                                                                                   ' иии   ,...
                                                                                                                   _
                                                                                                                  '"'"' I.t

  .         Of course, having a younger child often implies being a younger pareiit." We           do' o.'ot controi lor 'the age
of the parent in this analysis.

                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        10              Hex-Dump Convel'iion

differences in family size between two-parent and one-parent families and for the decreases in
family size over time, family incomes are presented in per-capita terms. (This is a crude
measure because it does not cost twice as much to support two people as one. On the other
hand, two do cost more to support than one. The true measure of equivalent income for
different family sizes lies somewhere between per capita and total income.) The chart shows the
change in average income per person for the lowest quarter, the highest quarter, and the middle
half of the distribution of all families' per-capita incomes.

         These estimates indicate that while there has been substantial per-capita income growth
for high-income families, incomes have been either stable or decreasing for lower- and
middle-income families when 1996 is compared with 1969. During the economic expansion
from 1992 to 1996, however, lower-income families also experienced rising per-capita incomes.

и      Since 1969, the top quarter offamilies gained, while the lower quarter lost and the
       middle half remained nearly constant in per-capita income terms, after adjusting for
       inflation. The top quarter gained 20 percent ($4,400 in 1996 dollars) from 1969 to
       1996, while families in the lower quarter of the income distribution had declines of 11
       percent ($410). For families in the middle half of the family per-capita income
       distribution, average family incomes have remained relatively constant, with income
       gains of 4 percent ($452).

        Since family size has been decreasing, it follows logically that increases in mean income
are less dramatic, and decreases are more dramatic, when calculated on a family basis rather than
on a per capita basis.


IV.    How Do Families Respond? Implications for Family Time Use Outside the Job

        The trends in hours of paid work and family incomes described above have had a major
impact on family life. Increasing hours of paid work may mean higher incomes, which provide
more resources for parents and children. But increasing paid work time also means less time for
other activities. The evidence on time allocation to non-market activities is much more limited
than the data on hours of paid work and income and therefore conclusions must be more
tentative.
        The CPS, with its larger sample size, only allows us to examine hours spent on paid work
(and therefore hours available for other activities) along with changes in family size and
structure. We have limited data on what people actually do with the time they do not spend on
paid work,mainly from time-use diary studies. These studies have complete data only for a
small sample of people. We begin with the CPS data regarding basic trends and then discuss the
more detailed time-use diary data.


A. Trends in Current Population Survey Data                 Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

                                               11

        What can the CPS tell us about how the changes of the past several decades have affected
the number of home hours that families have available for caring for children and maintaining a
household? On the one hand, families may have less time available for child care because they
are spending more time in the labor market and because there is a growing share of single parent
families. On the other hand, the number of children per family has fallen, which would tend to
increase parental time per child.


time  th!i~;:o~~a~~:~~~;::~~iSa~~y~a:~v:~:~le
to spend with all their children, after subtracting
                                                         'I'          ::::.1"и'
                                                                       "'0' ..
                                                                             ,,,' D"     '.~ :D""'D~'"""""
                                                                                                      "0"     '0"""        I
time spent at paid work and allowing eight hours per
day for sleep. We emphasize the fact that this is            ' . ,"',j Ii......... . ,'...., '.',j:.. '.',,','.' rooи.и.
                                                                                           ...
only time potentially available in the home; there is no information in the CPS on how parents
actually spend their non-market work time. Figure 10 shows that from 1969 to 1996, both
married couple and single parent families experienced a decrease in time not spent on paid work.
 The overall decrease is greater than the decreases within either family type because the
proportion of single-parent families increased over this period.

        The other extreme is to assess changes in total parental time potentially available per
child. This measure is obviously misleading because it presumes that a single child who spends
two hours a day with her parent gets as much parental attention as two children who spend four
hours a day with their parents. While this assumption is clearly false, it gives us a lower bound
for the impact on children. Despite increases in paid work hours for each type of family, the
amount of non-market time available per child has increased for both married-couple and
single-parent families since 1969. When single-parent and married-couple families are added
together, however, the amount of family time per child has remained relatively constant. This
reflects the fact that a shift toward more single parents tends to decrease parental time available
to children, because it reduces the number of custodial parents available to spend time with
children.

       This extreme case suggests that, at best, parents have about as much time available to
spend with their children as before, while under more realistic scenarios, the time potentially
available for them to be at home with their children has declined. Interpreting what these
changes in potential time available at home mean for actual time spent with children is difficult,
however.


B.   Ti~e    Use in the Home Estimated from Time-use Diaries

        Fortunately, we have an alternative - and somewhat more informative - source of data:
time-use diary surveys, which ask respondents to keep a detailed diary recording how they spend
their time during a specific day. These surveys provide an alternative, more accurate method of
measuring paid work time, as well as time spent in various kinds of unpaid activities, such as
commuting, housework, child care, shopping, recreation, and personal care. The trends in hours


                                                           12              Automated Records !'-.fanagement System
                                                                           HeK-DIIIDp Conversion

of paid work time and non-market time described above are based on data which report
individuals' estimates of their usual hours worked per week in the previous year. Such estimates
may not accurately portray the actual hours worked for pay because the question is somewhat
ambiguous and respondents may not be able to report accurately on a "usual" week in the few
minutes allowed during the CPS interview. Time-use diary measures tend to show shorter paid
work hours and sometimes even different trends than the CPS.16

        Unfortunately, ~;uch time-use diary surveys are conducted much less frequently and with
much smaller samples than the CPS. The latest available data were collected in 1985; results of
a survey done in 1992-94 are not yet available. Because of the small samples, time-use diary
surveys CaTInot be used to examine trends for smaller subgroups of the population, such as single
parents or blacks. Moreover, the individuals who complete the diaries may not represent the
U.S. population as well as the CPS sample does. These surveys do, however, provide
informatiori about how much time is spent in different types of unpaid work at home, such as
child care and housework, in leisure pursuits, and sleep.




  Tи.'.и.:~и~.'.::и.. ~:и : и;~и.:.
 I: [: ~iii Ii
 !                                                            .....


                                                                         iii
                                                   !и..'ии.и'.: :.'.1'.........                    '..   I         Tiiji::..~ .' . . ~i1 iii.J
                                                                                                                   :
                                                                                                                                     .        ~::::~ ':!.': и..."....и :..' ..'...
     и   и .. ,'.!.'.'. '.','.. ',.   M   ии   '.':.',',.!:: ~ .и   II   ' . " ". . . .   ~   ии "и и              и   и .' ,',: .'. ~ '.' .~.     .. и ! : ! ~ ,! :........   и I ! ~, ~ : : и




1. Averages




         16 Robinson and Godbey (1997), chapter 4.
                                                                                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                              13

        Time-use diary surveys suggest that most of the increase in women's formal working
hours between 1965 and 1985 was offset by decreases in time spent on household chores (see
figure 11). These decreases were coupled with increases in time spent on household chores by
both employed and nonemployed men over this period (see figure 12). There was very little
reduction in time spent with children, and "free time" spent watching TV actually increased. 17
These trends are rather surprising, since they are not consistent with the widespread feeling that
leisure time has become less available.

         One possible way to reconcile these numbers with a general sense of "time stress" may be
~o  note that many women have moved from the "nonemployed" to the "employed" category,
 which dramatically changes their time-use pattems. In any single year, employed women spend
 about 45 percent less time on both child care and
 household tasks than women without paid jobs, but still



                                                             'n 8:rrn
 have less free time. 18 Time-use surveys conducted in the
 U.S. in 1965, 1975, and 1985 show that employed
 mothers spent virtually the same amount oftime taking
 care of children in 1985 (6.7 hours per week) as in 1965       ...... ,.w ..
                                                                     ,"~   0 .. , и . . . . . "   I............... ""1
                                                                                                                         I
 (6.3 hours per week). Mothers without paid jobs spent
 12 hours a week on child care in both years. (But note that nonemployed women are more likely
to have young children.) This is consistent with other analyses of these time-use slirveys, which
 show no decline in child care time within mothers' employment category.

       When the shift of women into employment (shown in figure 13) is taken into account,
however, mothers' time in child care declined by 10 percent overall, from ten to nine hours per
week (see figure 11). Fathers did not make up the difference; their child care time remained
about 2.5 hours per week from 1965 to 1985 (see figure 12). This suggests that the increase in
market work among women has reduced their time with children.

        Time spent in personal care and commuting to work did not change much. The time-use
diary estimates of commuting time are corroborated by Census department data. A Federal
Highway Administration survey found that the average commute time increased by 2.5 minutes
(14 percent) between 1983 and 1995. Surprisingly, "free time" activities increased by 4 to 5
hours per week for both men and women; due almost entirely to an increase in
television-watching (including watching TV with children). What "gave" for women was
household chores.

         The time-diary results above are from descriptions of adults' time. Recent time-diary
evidence sheds new light on how children spent their hours in 1997. The most striking finding
is that two-parent families on average spent remarkably similar amounts of time engaged with


       17 Robinson and Godbey (1997), chapters 6 & 8.


       18 Robinson and Godbey (1997), pp.102-3.            Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dwnp Conversion
                                                    14

  their children regardless of whether one or both parents were working. Dual earner couples
  spent an average of 21 hours per week engaged with their children, while single-earner
  two-parent families spent 22 hours per week, only slightly more time, engaged with their
. children.


2. Differences among families

        These estimates are based on average trends. They may miss important distinctions
between high- and low-income groups, or between single-parent and two-parent families. The
effect of women's increased hours in the labor market on families is likely to vary between
college-educated parents, whose incomes have been rising because their hours and wages both
increased, and less-educated parents, whose incomes may have fallen 4espite increased work
hours because of falling wages. It may be harder for families with more limited resources to cut
back on housework by buying time-saving services and appliances. The effect of women's
increased hours in the labor market on families is also likely to vary between married couples,
who can shift some housework and child care from working wife to husband, and single parents,
who cannot. Within married-couple families, moreover, there are likely to be differences across
education levels in this shifting of tasks, as child care time by fathers rises with their education.
Unfortunately, the time-use diary survey samples are too small to be broken down into these
subsamples.


v.        Key Policy Issues That Relate to These Changes in American Family Life

         The enormous changes in the ways American families function create new opportunities,
but also present new policy challenges, to private employers as well as to the government.
There are four key areas of policy that are important in helping families better balance work and
family life: improving access to high quality, affordable child care; increasing the flexibility of
market work; supporting income among low-income working families; and encouraging the
formation and maintenance of two-parent families.


A.      Increasing the Flexibility of Paid Work

       The effect of parents' market work time on children also depends on when and where it is
performed. By shifting from work in the home to work in the market, many women find
themselves with far less flexible schedules to respond to other family needs. Key employment
arrangements that affect hours flexibility include:

и       Flexible work arrangements (defined as allowing workers to vary the time they begin or
        end work) are an increasingly popular approach to decreasing the tension between work
        and family. In 1997, 28 percent of full-time wage and salary workers had flexible work

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                 15            Hex-Dump Conversion

       schedules. This was up sharply from 15 percent in 1991, the most recent prior year when
       data were collected. 19

и      Shift work may enable parents to share child care more easily by working different shifts.
       If shift work is to ease the task of combining paid work and child care, ho\yever, the
       choice of shifts must be voluntary. For those workers who cannot determine their own
       schedules, the combination of shift work and work in the home is a potential source of
       stress and expense. Non-standard working hours may make it difficult both to find time
       to spend with children when they are awake and not in school and to arrange for child
       care while working. In 1997, 83 percent offull-time wage and salary workers were on
       regular daytime schedules, 4.6 percent were on evening shifts, 3.9 percent were on
       employer-arranged irregular schedules, 3.5 percent were on night shifts, and 2.9 percent
       were on rotating shifts.

и      Working at home/or pay can sometimes increase parents' flexibility. In 1997,3.3
       percent of all wage and salary workers were doing work at home for pay, up from 1.9
       percent in 1991. An additional ten percent of all wage and salary workers in 1997 were
       doing work at home without receiving extra pay for it. Nearly 9 out of 10 wage and
       salary workers who were paid for work at home were in "white-collar" occupations.
       Single parents, particularly single mothers, had much higher work-at-home rates than
       single workers without children.

        Maintaining high productivity need not be inconsistent with allowing flexibility in work
arrangements, as many private sector employers have discovered. The Federal government has
led by example, instituting "flextime" which allows employees some discretion in when they
work their allotted hours. The President has proposed a flextime initiative that would allow all
workers to take "time-and-a-half' overtime compensation in the fonn of compensatory time
whenever they need it for family and medical leave purposes, instead of cash.

       This Administration has played a major role in increasing flexibility among families by
helping enact the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), which enables workers to take up to
 12 weeks unpaid leave to care for a new baby or ailing family member without jeopardizing their
jobs. Since its inception in 1993 millions of workers have taken advantage of the FMLA to
spend necessary time with their families. The President also proposed expanding FMLA to
allow workers up to 24 hours per year for parent-teacher conferences or to accompany a child,
spouse, or elderly parent for routine medical and dental care.




B.     Give All Parents, Especially Low-Income Parents, More Choices


       19   Data on alternative work arrangements comes from the 1991 and 1997 May supplements to the CPS.

                                                                     Automated Re~l)rds \fanagement System
                                                      16             Hex-DUllip CUll version


        While incomes have been rising for most people, families at the bottom of the income
distribution, particularly the less educated and single parents whose inflation-adjusted incomes
were lower in 1996 than in 1969, still face serious economic hardship. For many low-income
parents, working harder and spending less time with their families is not a choice but a necessity.
Recent policy changes that have helped these families cope include:

и      Expansions in the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC); to assure that persons who work
       hard on their jobs can take home enough money to support their families;

и      Providing a $500 per-child tax credit to help offset the expense of raising children;

и      Increases in the minimum wage from $3.35 in 1990 to $5.15 in 1997;

и      Expanded child support enforcement provisions, which help ease the economic burden on
       single mothers and enforce responsibility for economic support of children on both
       parents;

и      Major welfare reform legislation which has helped single mothers move from welfare to
       work;

и      Employer tax credits to help create jobs for welfare recipients;

и      Substantial expansions in support for vocational education, community college, and skill
       development among persons in lower-income families, including the creation of Hope
       Scholarships, an 80 percent increase in the maximum Pell Grant since 1993, and the
       passage of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998.

       In addition, it is hard to underestimate the importance of a strong economy and steady
economic growth, which creates jobs, reduces unemployment, and raises wages for all workers -
especially the less skilled who are most affected when jobs are scarce.


C. Improving Access to High Quality, Affordable Child Care

        Most parents adjust to an increase in their paid work time by increasing their use of child
care providers other than themselves. As mothers go to work, families have more income to
spend. Some of it can be spent on paid child care. The availability, cost, and quality of child
care which can be purchased in the market affects the employment decisions and financial status
of families.

         The primary child care arrangements for preschool-age children of employed mothers in
the fall of 1994 were divided roughly equally amongcare in the child's home (by a relative or
nonrelative), care in another home (by a relative or nonrelative), and care in an organized child
                                                                 Autom~t~1 R~~Nds Management System
                                                17              Hex-ullW}' i..,,,,,.ersion

care facility. Since comparable data were first collected in 1986, the trend shows a relatively
constant proportion of children receiving care in their own homes, relatively fewer children
receiving care in another home, and relatively more children receiving care in an organized
facility. The share of monthly income spent on child care by those purchasing this service rose
from 6.3 percent to 7.3 percent between 1986 and 1993?0

       This Administration has consistently emphasized the importance of child care availability
and quality. Since 1993, child care subsidies for low-income families have grown by 80 percent.
 In addition, the Administration's budget proposal for the 1999 fiscal year included $5.1 to
increase the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit for three million families eaming under
$60,000 a year.


D~      Encouraging Two-Parent Families

        When two-parent families form and stay together in a supportive relationship, many of
the economic and emotional stresses of balancing work and family are eased. Two-parent
families have greater eamings potential and more potential time to spend with their children than
do single-parent families. Among the recent policies which have helped maintain married
couple families, the eligibility rules for Medicaid and other programs have been changed so as
not to penalize two-parent families for staying together.


VI.     Conclusion

        A massive shift of women' s time from the home to the labor market has occurred in the
last generation. For most families, increasing incomes have accompanied mothers' increasing
paid employment, although the shift from married couple to single parent families has reduced
both income and time available for many children. While smaller family sizes have helped offset
the increase in market work, many parents still find it difficult to balance jobs and children.
Raising children is not easy; even in the past when more women stayed at home while their
children were young, many of them found full-time homemaking extremely stressful.

        Single parents face the most difficulties. They have only half as much total time
available as two parents, and they typically have less than half as much earning power as a
married couple because women's wages are lower than men's. Lackofincome limits most
single parents' ability to purchase time-saving goods and services and high quality child care.
Thus, they may face a severe time and money bind.


        20 The earliest comprehensive data on families' child care arrangements was collected by the Bureau of the
Census in 1977. The earliest data that are compatible with the most recent data are from fall 1986. We use the
1986 data for consistency.

                                                                        Autotnated Records Management System
                                                                        ltex-Dwnp Conversion
                                                       18

        Men without college educations have faced declining wages. Increases in work among
their wives has helped maintain their families' standard of living, but these increased hours of
market work have not resulted in income gains. This also limits the ability of these families to
afford child care. Moreover, less-educated workers are less likely to have jobs that permit
parents to arrange their hours to accommodate family needs.

        Better educated parents, whose increased time in the labor market has been rewarded with
considerably higher incomes than in 1969, can better afford to pay for high quality child care,
household help, and other time-saving goods and services. Married couple families, particularly
those where the husband has a college degree, have seen substantial improvements in their
economic situation over the last three decades. Yet, even these couples often express
dissatisfaction with the stresses involved in balancing work and family.

        It may be that changing social norms have increased the income requirements for raising
children, making even married women in families whose income has gone up over time feel that
they cannot afford to stay at home as their mothers did. Moreover, even high-income two-earner
couples may find that their jobs entail longer hours and a more demanding, stressful pace than
they would freely choose, although these jobs may also provide the income, long-term career
prospects, and personal fulfillment that they desire. But a job comes as a total package, and
these families cannot give up some income for more time at home without giving up the rest of
the package, which they find attractive on the whole. Therefore they, too, are looking for help in
balancing the demands of job and family.

        The changes in parents' paid work time and family size of the past three decades have
been driven by the long-terin increase in women's wages and job opportunities; hence they are
not likely to be reversed. These increases in women's earning power may have other long-term
positive effects besides their immediate effect on family incomes. As wives and husbands
become more able to earn similar amounts in the labor market, it encourages a more equal
balance between them in terms of responsibilities for earning money, household tasks, and child
care. Fathers are becoming more involved in child-rearing than in the past. Women are better
able to support themselves and their children in the event of widowhood or divorce. Moreover,
as women gain more (and more continuous) market work experience, their earning potential also
increases. Young women, expecting to spend more time in the labor market, increasingly
prepare themselves for more skilled and higher-paying jobs. These developments all work to
increase the long-term security of women and their families.

         In the meantime, both employers and public policy-makers need to continue to search for
creative ways to help productive workers also function as effective parents and responsible
family members. Iffamilies and children are going to withstand the stresses ofthese trends,
employers and public policy makers have a responsibility to do everything they can to help
parents balance work and family. Workplaces and work hours must become more flexible,
parents need more supports and more choices, and more children need to live with both parents
in their lives.

                                                          Automated R~cords \fanagement System
                                               19         Hex-DLIll1J! '-10101 ,sI.ion

                                          References


Blank, Rebecca (1997). It Takes a Nation. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Blau, Francine, "Trends in the Well-Being of American Women, 1990-1995," Journal of
Economic Literature, March 1998, pp.112-165.

Bluestone, Barry and Stephen Rose, "Unraveling an Economic Enigma: Overworked and
Underemployed," The American Prospect, March-April 1997, pp. 58-69.

Danziger, Sheldon and Deborah Reed, "Working Longer and Earning More: The Changing
Contribution of Wives' Earnings to Family Income," February 1997.

Hayes, Cherly, John Palmer and Martha Zaslow (eds). 1990. Who Cares for America's Children?
Child Care Policy for the 1990s. Washington DC: National Research Council Press.

Hochschild, Arlie Russell (1998). The Time Bind: When Work Becomes Home and Home
Becomes Work. New York: Henry Holt & Company, Inc.

Juhn, Chinhui and Kevin Murphy, "Wage Inequality and Family Labor Supply", Journal of Labor
Economics, 1997, vol 15(1), pt. 1 pp. 72-97.

Juster, F. Thomas and Frank P. Stafford, "The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings,
Behavioral Models, and Problems of Measurement," Journal of Economic Literature, Volume
XXXIX (June 1991), pp. 471-522.

_ _ _ _ _ (eds). 1985. Time. Goods. and Well-Being. Survey Research Center, Institute for
Social Research, University of Michigan.

Leete, Laura and Juliet Schor, "Assessing the Time Squeeze Hypothesis: Hours Worked in the
United States, 1969-1989," Industrial Relations, 33(1), January 1994, pp 25-43.

Levy, Frank, "Where Did All the Money Go? A Layman's Guide to Recent Trends in U.S.
Living Standards," MIT IPC Working Paper 96-008, July 1996.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and Richard Rogerson, "Changes in Hours Worked Since 1950", Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Quarterly Review, Winter 1998, pp. 2-19.

Robinson, John and Geoffrey Godbey, Time for Life: the Surprising Ways Americans Use their
Time, Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997.

Rones, Phillip L., Randy E. Iig, and Jennifer M. Gardner, "Trends in hours of work since the
mid-1970s", Monthly Labor Review, April 1997, pp 3-13.


                                               20             Automated Recl1rds Management System
                                                              Hex-DU1Ilp Conversion

Schor, Juliet B. (1991). The Overworked American: The Unexpected Decline a/Leisure. New
York: Basic Books.

Stinson, John F., Jr. (1997). "New data on multiple jobho1ding available from the CPS,"
Monthly Labor Review, March 1997, pp. 3-8.

Stone, Robyn 1. and Peter Kemper (l989). "Spouses and Children of Disabled Elders: How
Large a Constituency for Long-term Care Reform?" The Milbank Quarterly, 67(3-4), pp.
485-506.




                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion



                                             21

Exec Summ, 3rd bullet: We substituted DPC's suggested bullet and added the following
sentence, which we think makes an important point:
"The situation of lower-income families has been improving, however, in the strong economic
expansion of the 1990s."

Exec Summ, next-to-last bullet: We kept what we believe is an important point.

p. 1: We think both figures 1 and 2 need to be on the same page where they are referred to in the
text.

p. 14, last paragraph: We inserted the following sentence at the request of the VP's office:
"A Federal Highway Administration survey found that the average commute time increased by
2.5 minutes (14 percent) between 1983 and 1995."

Top ofp.15: We inserted the following paragraph in place of the bullets DPC asked us to
delete:
         "The time-diary results above are from descriptions of adults' time. Recent time-diary
evidence sheds new light on how children spent their hours in 1997. The most striking finding
is that two-parent families on average spent remarkably similar amounts oftime engaged with
their children regardless of whether one or both parents were working. Dual earner couples
spent an average of 21 hours per week engaged with their children, while single-earner
two-parent families spent 22 hours per week, only slightly more time, engaged with their
children."

p. 19, next to last paragraph: We deleted the sentence as requested and added the following:
        "As wives and husbands become more able to earn similar amounts in the labor market, it
encourages a more equal balance between them in tenns of responsibilities for earning money,
household tasks, and 'child care. Fathers are becoming more involved in child-rearing than in the
past. Women are better able to support themselves and their children in the event of widowhood
or divorce."


Addition in response to DPC requests:
p. 16, last 2 paragraphs: We split the paragraph about flextime and FMLA in two, added some
more sentences, and rearranged them.


Other additions:
p. 18, end of first full paragraph: We added a sentence:
 "In addition, the Administration's budget proposal for the 1999 fiscal year included $5.1 to
increase the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit for three million families earning under
$60,000 a year."             .
[Tom: We got these numbers from a Jan. 1998 Talking Points on the child care initiative that


                                                         AutoTT'O'o"! n   ""d<, \fanagement System

                                                         Hex-J.lloIUlp \,.gl\~5rsiQn

Finally, to answer DPC's questions about chart 11 and the statements about time use on p. 13:
Child care time did decrease for nonemployed women and therefore for all women, but it
decreased much less than housework time among all groups of women. Chart 11 portrays time
spent in each activity as a % of 168 hours. The change in child care time is hard to see, due to
the cross-hatching pattern. We are changing the shading patterns to make it easier to see the
change in child care time.
Here are the underlying data:
Child care time among employed women increased by 0.9 hour per week, among nonemployed
women decreased by 2.3 hours per week, and among all women decreased by 1.5 hours per week
Housework and shopping time among employed women decreased by 1.6 hours per week, among
nonemployed women decreased by 8.1 hours per week, and among all women decreased by 5.9
hours per week.
Working hours among employed women decreased by 6.0 hours per week, among nonemployed
women increased by 1.8 hours per week, and among all women increased by 2.8 hours per week.
One can see on the chart that the decreases in housework and shopping time are bigger than the
working hours increases.




                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
"
