RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jefferson B. Hill ( CN=Jefferson B. Hill/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB ) }

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-NOV-199B 16:09:2B.00

SUBJECT:   Family Assessments

TO: Robert G. Damus ( CN=Robert G. Damus/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ) }
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sally Katzen ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPO ) }
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Donald R. Arbuckle ( CN=Donald R. Arbuckle/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ) }
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) }
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The Omnibus Appropriations codified E.O. 12606, which directs agencies to
assess the impact of new policies and regulations on "the family".  The
statute took effect on October 21. Both OMB (subsection (d) (2)) and OPD
( (d) (3)) have statutory roles.

I have been working with agency attorneys (the Reg Working Group Seconds),
and we have come to a consensus on the approach taken in: the attached.

It is our plan to issue this as an OMB Memorandum.  Agencies are asking us
to issue this as soon as we can, to ensure that the agencies take a
uniform approach.

We seek your views and comments (and concurrence).  If you have questions
as to what this says and why, please give me a call (x53176) .==================== AT
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00: 00-: 00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D36)MAIL43404742M.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504369070000010A02010000000205000000A932000000020000C1E4BA49EOOFFEEEF20F07
C5EC533F7EC932B9537BECB7A5C53E6E541E570BCF55571BF037EEB2FA4A905AB6AOB016160457
10C9F9DD1B692F4B46FDF270BBE69F306CEBC34AEBDA1AD574B00640526A3916F97DF07091BBDA


 AGENCY ASSESSMENT OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS AND POLICIES ON FAMILIES


       All agencies need to be aware of the recently enacted provision regarding the
"Assessment of Federal Regulations and Policies on Families." This provision, Section 654 of
the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 1999, is reprinted in the attachment.
This government-wide provision applies to Executive departments, Government corporations,
and independent establishments (including the independent regulatory agencies covered by 44
U.S.C.3503(5». Section 654 went into effect on October 21,1998, at the time that the
Appropriations Act was signed into law. Accordingly, Section 654 applies to proposed policies
and regulations that are under consideration.

        Section 654 calls upon agencies to conduct an assessment of those proposed "policies and
regulations" that "may affect family well~being." A "family" is defined as "a group of
individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption, or other legal custody who live together in a
single household;" and any "related" individual over half supported by "such group." "Before
implementing" such a policy or regulation, the agency is to assess it in light of seven issues;
"submit a written certification" to OMB and to Congress "that such policy or regulation has been
assessed;" and provide an "adequate rationale" for implementing a policy or regulation that "may
negatively affect family well-being."

        Section 654 is not a new provision. It is intended to reinstate Executive Order 12606,
"The Family," that President Ronald Reagan signed on September 2,1987. In order to ensure
that agencies carry out Section 654 assessments in appropriate circumstances, it may be
beneficial for an agency to look back to the experience it gained in implementing E.O. 12606.

        It may also be beneficial for an agency to conduct an up-front review of its various
program areas to identify those areas that are most likely to involve, and are also likely not to
involve, policies and regulations that may affect the well-being of the family. Depending on the
particular program areas of an agency, it may even be possible to identify more specific
categories of policies and regulations for which an assessment would likely be appropriate and
those for which an assessment would not likely be appropriate. For example, a policy or
regulation that is directed at or regulates the family, the marital relationship, or subjects
involving the exercise of parental authority would be appropriate for a family assessment. An
existing example would be 29 C.F.R. Part 825, "The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993,"
which enables workers to take up to 12 weeks unpaid leave to care for a new baby or ailing
family member without jeopardizing their job.

        For those regulations for which a family assessment is appropriate, agencies should
discuss the family assessment in the preamble to both the NPRM and the final rule; a
certification is required only for a final rule that may affect the well-being of the family. As
agencies submit their final rules to Congress under the Congressional Review Act (5 U.S.C.


                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

Chapter 8), a statement of the certification in the preamble to the final rule should suffice in
satisfying the requirement in Section 654(d)(1)(A) for submitting the certification to Congress.

        Since OMB is required to submit to Congress each year copies of agencies' certifications
(together with any rationales for implementing a policy or regulation that "may negatively affect
family well-being"), we ask that you also prepare each certification as a free-standing document.
Certifications should be submitted to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA).
Please start with the title, "Family Assessment Certification," and then include with the
certification the name of the policy or regulation that is the subject of the family assessment, the
agency program with which the policy or regulation is associated, the name of the responsible
agency/component, and the name and telephone number of an agency contact. In the case of
regulations that are subject to review under Executive Order 12866, the certifications should be
included as part of the agency's regulatory package submission to OIRA. Other certifications
should be submitted directly to the OIRA desk officer for the agency.

         If your staff have any questions concerning Section 654, they may contact Mr. Jefferson
Hill at (202) 395-3176.


Attachment




                                                     Automated Records Management System.
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


Sec. 654. Assessment of Federal Regulations and Policies on Families.
    (a) Purposes.--The purposes of this section are to--
        (1) require agencies to assess the impact of proposed agency actions on family well-being;
            and
         (2) improve the management of executive branch agencies.
    (b) Definitions.--In this section--
        (1) the term "agency" has the meaning given the term "Executive agency" by section 105
of          title 5, United States Code, except such term does not include the General Accounting
            Office; and
        (2) the term "family" means--
          (A) a group of individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption, or other legal custody
                   who live together as a single household; and
                (B) any individual who is not a member of such group, but who is related by blood,
                   marriage, or adoption to a member of such group, and over half of whose support in
a
                   calendar year is received from such group.
    (c) Family Policymaking Assessment.--Before implementing policies and regulations that may
            affect family well-being, each agency shall assess such actions with respect to whether--
           (1) the action strengthens or erodes the stability or safety of the family and, particularly,
the
             marital commitment;
           (2) the action strengthens or erodes the authority and rights of parents in the education,
             nurture, and supervision of their children;
           (3) the action helps the family perform its functions, or substitutes governmental activity
for
             the function;
           (4) the action increases or decreases disposable income or poverty of families and
children;
           (5) the proposed benefits of the action justify the financial impact on the family;
           (6) the action may be carried out by State or local government or by the family; and
           (7) the action establishes an implicit or explicit policy concerning the relationship
between               the behavior and personal responsibility of youth, and the norms of society.
    (d) Governmentwide Family Policy Coordination and Review.--
           (1) Certification and rationale.--With respect to each proposed policy or regulation that
may
               affect family well-being, the head of each agency shall--
                  (A) submit a written certification to the Director ofthe Office of Management and
                     Budget and to Congress that such policy or regulation has been assessed in
                     accordance with this section; and
             (B) provide an adequate rationale for implementation of each policy or regulation that
        may negatively affect family well-being.
          (2) Office of management and budget.--The Director ofthe Office of Management and


                                                              Automate,;   ~,

                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                    -4-
            Budget shall--
            (A) ensure that policies and regulations proposed by agencies are implemented
    consistent
                  with this section; and
            (B) compile, index, and submit annually to the Congress the written certifications
                  received pursuant to paragraph (l)(A).



            (3) Office of policy development.--The Office of Policy Development shall--
                (A) assess proposed policies and regulations in accordance with this section;
                (B) provide evaluations of policies and regulations that may affect family well-being
    to
                   the Director of the Office of Management and Budget; and
                  (C) advise the President on policy and regulatory actions that may be taken to
    strengthen             the institutions of marriage and family in the United States.
       (e) Assessments Upon Request by Members ofCongress.--Upon request by a Member of
             Congress relating to a proposed policy or regulation, an agency shall conduct an
             assessment in accordance with subsection (c), and shall provide a certification and
             rationale in accordance with subsection (d).
       (t) Judicial Review.--This section is not intended to create '!fly right or benefit, substantive or
             procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, its agencies, its
             officers, or any person.




                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


RECORD·TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-NOV-1998 12:03:05.00

SUBJECT:   latest: 34 of 46, incl. Conn.

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
States Face Tobacco Deal Deadline

By SKIP WOLLENBERG
AP Business Writer

NEW· YORK (AP) -- More than two-thirds of the 46 eligible states had agreed
to the $206 billion
tobacco deal as today's midday deadline approached for taking a position
on the proposal.

Connecticut, Georgia, Indiana, Kansas and Maine announced their support
for the settlement today,
raising to 34 the total of states backing the deal.

The settlement calls for companies to make payments to 46 states over 25
years and finance
antismoking programs in exchange for resolving remaining state claims for
the cost of treating sick
smokers.

"Quite frankly, there are many things that this agreement accomplishes,
particularly in the public
health arena, that we could not achieve through our lawsuit in Georgia,"
state Attorney General
Thurbert Baker said today. Georgia would get about $4.8 billion over 25
years.

Maine Attorney General Andrew Ketterer announced· his state's plans and
said it would get about
$1.4 billion under the deal.

All eyes were on Massachusetts and Maryland, two states considered to have
strong cases and still
undecided going into the final hours.

·Michigan had also been in the group, but was among 11 states declaring
 Thursday they planned to
 sign the deal rather than fight on in court. No State has yet rejected the
 proposal.

Four states had reached settlements for a combined $40 billion before this
proposal was created.

The cigarette makers say they need a sufficient number of states to sign
if they are to proceed with
"

    what would be the biggest u.s. civil settlement. The industry has declined
    to be more specific on   .
    how many states would constitute a sufficient number.

    " I am optimistic that everyone will sign on, " said Christine Gregoire,
    the attorney general from
    Washington state who led a team of eight states through five months of
    negotiations with four big
    tobacco companies.

    But she told reporters in a conference call Thursday the industry "made
    clear to us that no one state
    or couple of states would have veto power over an agreement."

    Other states announcing support for the settlement on Thursday were
    Alaska, Kentucky, Missouri,
    Montana, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee,
    and West
    Virginia. Washington D.C. also announced its support late Thursday.

    In exchange for payments over 25 years starting in the year 2000, the
    states would drop suits that
    had posed an enormous legal and financial threat to the tobacco industry.

    In addition to paying the states, the tobacco companies will spend $1.7
    billion to study youth
    smoking and finance antismoking advertising and accept curbs on marketing
    practices that critics say
    appeal to children.

    Those practices include putting cartoon characters in ads, advertising on
    billboards and putting
    cigarette brand names on shirts, hats and other merchandise.

    Antismoking advocates were unhappy that the deal extracted fewer
    concessions from the industry
    than a broader $368.5 billion agreement reached in 1997 that later died in
    Congress. The American
    Lung Association released a copy of a letter from former U.S. Surgeon
    General C. Everett Koop
    urging Maryland's attorney general to reject the settlement.

    But some of them felt the latest proposal was a step in the right
    direction and began pushing
    Congress to enact legislation that would among other things give the Food
    and Drug Administration
    authori ty over cigar,et tes .

    For state attorneys general, the choice was to take the deal with the
    billions of dollars that would
    come with it or fight the tobacco companies in court for a better deal
    while risking the chance of
    losing.

    The companies waiting word from the states are Philip (NYSE:MO - news)
    Morris Inc., R.J.
    Reynolds Tobacco Co., Brown and Williamson Tobacco Corp. and the Lorillard
    Tobacco Co.

    Other states that already have agreed to the terms are Alabama, Arizona,


Arkansas, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Nebraska, New York, North Carolina, North
Dakota, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. States that settle
d earlier are Florida,
Minnesota, Mississippi and Texas.
     '-"


