RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-NOV-1998 15:05:59.00

SUBJECT:   Work-Site Schools memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP.@ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD']     )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. MayS   ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a draft memo that lays out a proposal for work-site schools.

Under the "Funding" section, two options are presented for how a tax
credit might be structured for businesses providing facilities for
work-site schools. On option is to give a credit to all businesses that
open qualifying facilities.  Another is to limit the overall number of
credit available each year.

Treasury needs to do some analysis in order to develop a cost estimate for
this intiative and prefers to limit the number of credits available in
order to more accurately produce a cost estimate.  Chuck Marr has asked
Treasury to complete the cost projections for all of the tax-side
initiatives by early next week.

Treasury needs some immediate direction as to how we would like to
structure these tax credits.==================== ATTACHMENT   I ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:     0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D39]MAIL45077642S.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750433FOB0000010A020100000002050000009035000000020000BBEDE9763DD22301810452
153DEA40CDA67025FC6F6EOF637A93773EA22220DA86562F29A2443E952F26DFC36CAA8C31C006
82A1B8602F452FA42FAB29DE652D2856AC745B4B4593A2B750043A85C287743F3535EA93997943
34474E98B39BEE13C6AFB59B61DDA6DA2F4DE4CCDDCDODD691FFAB65B759907CBOFE4C5202E725




    *DRAFf* MEMORANDUM

    FROM:

    SUBJECT:               Work-Site Satellite School Design Issues

            The purpose of this memo is to provide you with some detail about the critical design
    issues in the Work-Site Satellite Schools.

    I. Background

              The purpose of this initiative is to broaden the choices available in the public school
    system by increasing the number of satellite public elementary schools located at work sites.
    About 30 of these schools have been constructed since 1987, and most operate as public-private
    partnerships. Typically, the employer pays for the school facility, utilities, and maintenance. The
    district provides the teachers, curriculum and instructional materials. The work-site schools are
    paired with "host" neighborhood elementary schools that provide administrative support and
    often share art and music teachers. Through such arrangements, districts can increase parent
    involvement leading to higher academic achievement, relieve overcrowding, promote diversity (as
    workplaces are often more diverse than neighborhoods), offer smaller class sizes and save on
    facilities and transportation costs. Companies can enjoy greater productivity and offer the school
    as a family-friendly employee benefit.

    More specifically, this initiative will provide tax credits to participating businesses and planning
    grants to school districts in order to increase the number of satellite work-site schools. Much as
    the charter schools initiative offered start-up assistance to school developers and led to an
    increase in the number of charter schools from 1 to nearly 1,000 (and to 3,000 by 2002), this
    initiative will increase the number of work-site satellite schools from 30 to 1,000 by early in the
    next century. In designing it, we have been guided by several considerations.

           First, research evidence suggests that a primary benefit of work-site satellite schools is an
    extraordinary increase in the levels of parental involvement leading to higher levels of academic
    achievement for students across varying racial and socio-economic backgrounds. This parental
    involvement is facilitated by the high number of parents working at the same location at the
    school site. Although some enrollment is drawn from the surrounding neighborhoods, a large
    majority of the children should have parents working at the sponsoring company. This also
    ensures that businesses have an incentive to donate facilities, maintenance and upkeep.

             Second, while enrollment has been, and should be, primarily geared to the children of
    employees of the participating business(es), the schools should reflect the racial and
    socio-economic diversity of the company and surrounding district. In order to avoid the creation
    of elite company schools, it is critical that these schools be racially balanced and accessible to all
    levels of employees from exec~tive to clerical and including contractor employees.

                                                      1                  Automated Records lfanagement System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Convllliiion
maintain close relationships with the "host" neighborhood schools are mutually beneficial: costs
are kept low since the satellite shares administration with the main - or neighborhood campus,
satellites can take advantage of special education and bilingual resources at the host school and
the enhanced parental involvement at the satellite school can lead to increased parental
participation at the neighborhood school.

       Fourth, planning for these schools must make provisions to accommodate changes in
corporate management structures (mergers, takeovers, large-scale downsizing) with the least
possible disruption to students and teachers in the satellite school.


II. Funding Issues

         The budget will include tax credits for businesses that provide school facilities to be used
as work-site satellite schools: two options on the structure of those credits are described below.
The FY 2000 budget will also include $20 million for grants to be distributed to local school
districts for planning and start-up costs.

A. Tax Credits for Business

         Businesses that provide facilities for use as a public school or operate existing
facilities will be eligible for a tax credit covering 25% of qualified costs, not to exceed
$150,000 per year. 1 Qualified costs include: the value of property that the business has
built, leased, or donated for use as a public school. In order to be eligible for this credit
the work-site school must be open to children of all employees of the company (or contractor of
that company), allow students from surrounding districts to fill remaining slots in school and
allow all students to complete the academic year regardless of changes in their parents
employment. Businesses that provide the school facility as part of a consortium will also be
eligible for this credit. 2

         There are two options for how this credit would be distributed:

         (1) Credit available to all business that request credit and have qualified costs:
         Under this option, any business providing facilities for a work-site school, that met
         the above criteria, would be eligible for a 25% credit of qualified costs up to

     IModeled on the tax credit for businesses that provide daycare facilities. The cost was
estimated at $500 million over 5 years. This would presumably cost less because there are far
fewer businesses with work-site schools, as compared to those with daycare centers.

     2   (We are still determining how this would work, but each business would probably be
eligible for its pro rata share ofthe first $150,000 in qualified expenses.) .

                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 2
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion




             $150,000.

                     Pros:
                     -Growth is not limited. Incentive is provided for as many businesses as are
                     interested.
                     -Doesn't require new administrative mechanism, businesses that are eligible
                     simply take the credit as part of their tax filing.

                     Cons:
                     -It is difficult to predict the likely number of participants and, therefore,
                     estimate the cost of this proposal.


             (2) Credits available to a limited number of businesses (up to 1,000 in 5 years):
             Under this option, a limited number of business that provide facilities for a
             work-site school, that met the criteria above, would be eligible for the 25% credit of
             qualified costs up to $150,000. In year 1 up to 60 businesses would be able to take
             this credit. In subseqent years, the limits would be as follows: Year 2 -120; Year 3
             - 240; Year 4 - 480; Year 5 - 1,000.

                    Pros:
                    -It is easy to calculate the cost of providing this credit because the maximum
                    number of applicants is known.

                    Cons:
                    -Puts limits on what could be a very popular initiative.
                    -An agency (Ed/Treasury) would have to develop mechanism to distribute
                    the credits.


      B. Planning Grants

               Grants of up to $500,000 will be distributed competitively to 20-40 school districts.
      These grants will support planning and start-up activities for the development of work-site
      satellite schools, including: staff training, coordination between the district, employers,
      work-site and neighborhood host schools, and coordination between districts for satellite
      schools drawing students from mUltiple districts, staff planning with businesses on changes to
      facilities prior to service as public school, information meeting with affected neighborhood
      schools and .potential business partners, transfers of meal and resource (artlmusic) services
      between satellite and main host school and other start-up costs.

      Grants may be used to support planning and start-up activity with businesses that agree to: (1)
      provide the facility to be used; (2) make enrollment equally available to all students whose


                                                      3
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex·Dump Conversion




           parents work at the participating business and its contractors; (3) allow remaining spaces to be
           used by students in the surrounding school districts; and (4) allow all students to complete the
           academic year regardless of changes in their parents employment status.

           School districts must also show how the school(s) will achieve a racial/ethnic balance reflective
           of the community it serves or within the racial/ethnic range of other public schools in the same
           school district. 3

           D. Accountability

                   Local districts will be required to report on the number of satellite schools created and to
           provide data on the achievement at satellite schools for research and evaluative purposes.
           Because these schools will actually be part of an existing elementary school, they should be
           required to follow whatever reporting requirements (including Title I assessments) that are
           applicable at the main campus. Any assessment information should be broken out to reflect
           scores at the satellite school.




                3 This is a requirement in Florida (which has the largest number of work-site schools).
           Schools report the diverse make-up of the workforce enables the work-site schools to be easily
           meet this requirement.


                                                            4
                                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dwnp Conversion


