RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-NOV-1998 12:50:03.00

SUBJECT:   Now AP says 36 states

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
More than three-quarters of
                  eligible states sign on to
                  tobacco deal

                    NEW YORK (AP) -- More than
                    three-quarters of the 46 eligible
                    states had agreed to the $206 billion
                    tobacco deal as a deadline
                    approached Friday for taking a
                    position.

                  As of late morning, 36 states were
                  backing the proposal, including
                  seven that announced their support
                  today -- Indiana, Kansas, Virginia, South Carolina,
Georgia, Connecticut
                  and Maine.

                  The settlement calls for tobacco companies to make
payments to 46 states
                  over 25 years and finance antismoking programs in
exchange for resolving
                  remaining state claims for the cost of treating sick smo
kers.

                   "Quite frankly, there are many things that this
 agreement accomplishes,
                   particularly in the public health arena, that we could
 not achieve through our
                   lawsuit in Georgia," state Attorney General Thurbert
,Baker said. Georgia
                   would get about $4.8 billion over 25 years.

                    Maine Attorney General Andrew Ketterer announced his
state's plans and
                  said it would get about $1.4 billion under the deal. In
Connecticut, Attorney
                  General Richard Blumenthal said the deal will mean more
money -- $3.6
                  billion    and more public health benefits than a state
lawsuit alone could
                  achieve.

                    All eyes were on Massachusetts and Maryland, two states
considered to


                    have strong cases and still undecided going into the
final hours.

                    Michigan had also been in the group, but was among 11
states declaring
                   Thursday they planned to sign the deal rather than fight
on i.n court. No state
                   has yet rejected the proposal.

                  Four states had reached settlements for a combined $40
billion before this
                  proposal was created.

                  The cigarette makers say they need a sufficient number
of states to sign if
                  they are to proceed with what would be the biggest u.s.
civil settlement.
                  The industry has· declined to be more specific on how
many states would
                  constitute a sufficient number.

                  "I am optimistic that everyone will sign on," said
Christine Gregoire, the
                  attorney general from Washington state who led a team of
eight states
                  through five months of negotiations with four big tobacco
 companies.

                                            But she told reporters in a
conference call
                                            Thursday the industry "made
clear to us that
                                            no one state or couple of states
would have
                                            veto power over an agreement."

                    Other states announcing support for the settlement on
Thursday were
                    Alaska, Kentucky, Missouri, Montana, New Hampshire, New
Jersey,
                    Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee and West Virginia.
Washington,
                    D.C., also announced its support late Thursday.

                  In exchange for payments over 25 years starting in the
year 2000, the states
                  would drop suits that had posed an· enormous legal and
financial threat to the
                  tobacco industry.

                    In addition to paying the states, the tobacco companies
will spend $1. 7
                    billion to study youth smoking and finance anti-smoking
advertising. They
                    will also accept curbs on marketing practices that criti
cs say appeal to
                    children.

                  Those practices include putting cartoon characters in
ads, advertising on


                    billboards and putting cigarette brand names on shirts,
hats and other
                    merchandise.

                    Anti-smoking advocates were unhappy that the deal
extracted fewer
                    concessions from the industry than a broader $368.5
billion agreement
                   reached in 1997 that later died in Congress. The
American Lung Association
                   released a copy of a letter from former U.S. Surgeon
General C. Everett
                   Koop urging Maryland's attorney general to reject the
settlement.

                   But some of them felt the latest proposal was a step in
the right direction and
                   began pushing Congress to enact legislation that would
among other things
                   give the Food and Drug Administration authority over
cigarettes.

                   For state attorneys general, the choice was to take the
deal with the billions
                  of dollars that would come with it or fight the tobacco
companies in court for
                   a better deal while risking the chance of losing.

                    The companies waiting word from the states are Philip
Morris Inc., R.J.
                    Reynolds Tobacco Co., Brown and Williamson Tobacco Corp.
and the
                    Lorillard Tobacco Co.

                  In addition to the new states, the states that already
have agreed to the terms
                  are Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California,Colorado,
Hawaii, Idaho,
                  Iowa, Nebraska, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota,
Ohio,
                  Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin.
States that
                  settled earlier are Florida, Minnesota, Mississippi and
Texas.

                 Copyright 1998 The Associated Press. All rights
reserved. This material
                      may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or
redistributed.




Bruce N. Reed
11/20/98 12:00:36 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:       Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP, Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP


cc:
Subject:        latest: 34 of 46, incl. Conn.

States Face Tobacco Deal Deadline

By SKIP WOLLENBERG
AP Business Writer

NEW YORK (AP) -- More than two-thirds of the 46 eligible states had agreed
to the $206 billion
tobacco deal as today's midday deadline approached for taking a position
on the proposal.

Connecticut, Georgia, Indiana, . Kansas and Maine announced their support
for the settlement today,
raising to 34 the total of states backing the deal.

The settlement calls for companies to make payments to 46 states over 25
years and finance
antismoking programs in exchange for resolving remaining state claims for
the cost of treating sick
smokers.

--Quite frankly, there are many things that this agreement accomplishes,
particularly in the public
health arena, that we could not achieve through our lawsuit in Georgia, ' ,
state Attorney General
Thurbert Baker said today. Georgia would get about $4.8 billion over 25
years.

Maine Attorney General Andrew Ketterer announced his state's plans and
said it would get about
$1.4 billion under the deal.

All eyes were on Massachusetts and Maryland, two states considered to have
strong cases and still
undecided going into the final hours.

Michigan had also been in the group, but was among 11 states declaring
Thursday they planned to
sign the deal rather than fight on in court. No State has yet rejected the
proposal.

Four states had reached settlements for·a combined $40 billion before this
proposal was created.

The cigarette makers say they need a sufficient number of states to sign
if they are to proceed with
what would be the biggest u.S. civil settlement. The industry has declined
to be more specific on
how many states would constitute a sufficient .number.

--I am optimistic that everyone will sign on, " said Christine Gregoire,
the attorney general from
Washington state who led a team of eight states through five months of
negotiations with four big
tobacco companies.

But she told reporters in a conference call Thursday the industry --made
clear to us that no one state


or couple of states would have veto power over an agreement."

Other states announcing support, for the settlement on Thursday were
Alaska, Kentucky, Missouri,
Montana, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee,
and West
Virginia. Washington D.C. also announced its support late Thursday.

In exchange for payments over 25 years 'starting in the year 2000, the
states would drop suits that
had posed an enormous legal and financial threat to the tobacco industry.

In addition to paying the states, the tobacco companies will spend $1.7
billion to study youth
smoking and finance antismoking advertising and accept curbs on marketing
practices that critics say
appeal to children.

Those practices include putting cartoon characters in ads, advertising on
billboards and putting
cigarette brand names on shirts, hats and other merchandise.

Antismoking advocates were unhappy that the deal extracted fewer
concessions from the industry
than a broader $368.5 billion agreement reached in 1997 that later died in
Congress. The American
Lung Association released a copy of a letter from former u.s. Surgeon
General C. Everett Koop
urging Maryland's attorney general to reject the settlement.

But some of them felt the latest proposal was a step in the right
direction and began pushing
Congress to enact legislation that would among other things give the Food
and Drug Administration
authority over cigarettes.

For state attorneys general, the choice was to take the deal with the
billions of dollars that would
come with it or fight the tobacco companies in court for a better deal
while risking the chance of
losing.

The companies waiting word from the states are Philip (NYSE:MO - news)
Morris Inc., R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco Co., Brown and Williamson Tobacco Corp. and the Lorillard
Tobacco Co.

Other states that already have agreed to the terms are Alabama, Arizona,
Arkansas, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Nebraska, New York, North Carolina, North
Dakota, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. States that settle
d earlier are Florida,
Minnesota, Mississippi and Texas.


