RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-NOV-1998 17:59:16.00

SUBJECT:   Food Safety and OMB issues

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @   ~OP   [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  Here are the agencies' cross cut and how they want to pitch its utility
-- there are a couple of other OMB budget issues that may bump up to your
level:

 1.    Food Safety. We!ve conceptualized it as a policy to create a
seamless national system which the agencies are enthusiastic about.
However, USDA says that if they get user fees for their budget again, the
Secretary will not want to do a food safety initiative this year.   (OMB is
saying there will be some user fees in the passback.)  The other proposed
actions are: moves to encourage full adoption of the model Food Code for
restaurants; developing performance standards for food service workers;
and legislation that will give USDA the authority to issue mandatory
recalls and impose civil penalties for unsafe meat and poultry.


 2. Equal Pay.   We asked for $30 million. OMB sources say they want to
keep focusing on reducing the backlog of cases. When pressed in a meeting
with Sylvia, EEOC said if they had to choose they'd rather have the
backlog reduced.  I don't think $30 million is enough to force them to
choose, and that equal pay is popular enough that the Hill would add it to
the on-going backlog reduction effort.  I am making that argument but, if
you agree, contacting folks on your level would be helpful.

3.  Imported Food Reg. at FDA.  I discussed with Elena the idea of doing
our legislation on imported food standards as an agency regulation -- FDA
thought they could get 75% done without a bill. Schultz at FDA now feels
that Senator Collins is sympathetic to this as a bill, doesn't want to
alienate Collins, and would rather try and get it as a bill.  Should we
push him?

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D73]MAIL429810527.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043AOC40300010A02010000000205000000173306000002000010D48962D541DD12607E75
91D5CB77065DFB09DD8BF2B176D025FF11BBD4D78C6C511F05408724C8E817ECEECD7A4AB4EE68
E8E89F16C2C2C931B365AEEBOE9D17F57C9DCBEOOE96F1DBC637AF797F770D886837FOB30CE35D

   JointBudgetSubm~don


               FY2000




   Depanment Of Health And Human Services
                    and

          Depanment Of Agriculture




                   Automated Records Management System
                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                            FY 2000 Budget Request
                              Executive Summary
Introduction

This document represents a joint effort among CDC, FDA, and USDA to coordinate agency
budget requests for the President's Food Safety Initiative. The document is structured as
follows: A) An Executive Summary that provides an overview of the importance of this initiative,
highlights major accomplishments to date, including establishment of the President's Council on
Fooq Safety, and summarizes the fiscal year 2000 budget requests for each agency. It also
highlights the three integrated components essential for a strong and effective food safety system:
1) sustained progress toward a seamless, science-based food safety system; 2) enhanced public
health surveillance, and increased speed and efficiency in responding to outbreaks of foodborne
illness; and 3) greater emphasis on the control of foodborne hazards in the pre-harvest phase of
the farm-to-table continuum; B) An integrated budget table showing dollars for fiscal years 1998,
1999, and 2000, by agency, and by food safety category (surveillance, coordination, inspections,
education, research, and risk assessment); and C) Narrative descriptions of activities planned with
the requested funding for fiscal year 2000, including specific budget tables for each.

Overview

For the third consecutive year, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the
Department of Agriculture (USDA) have coordinated a multi-agency effort to protect the health
of the American public by improving the safety of the Nation's food supply. Through joint
planning, agencies can maximize the use of their resources and achieve the greatest improvements
in food safety. This process began with the May 1997 report to the President, entitled, Food
Safety from Farm-to-Table: A National Food Safety Initiative. The report recognized foodborne
illness as an emerging public health hazard that required aggressive government action, identified
critical gaps in the food safety system for controlling or eliminating foodborne pathogens from
the food supply, and proposed a strategy for closing those gaps.

The 1998 and 1999 budgets included additional funding to address the need for critical new
investment in the food safety system as identified in the May 1997 report. The 1998 budget
initiative brought much"needed new resources to enhance surveillance of foodborne disease and
outbreaks and better coordinate our response to outbreaks, improve inspections and compliance,
target important new research and risk assessment to critical scientific gaps, and expand education
and training especially of those who handle food at critical points from the retail setting to the
home.


                                                2        Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
Research were created through two Executive Orders to develop strategic plans for coordinating
food safety activities. The Secretaries of HHS and USDA play a major role in both of these
organizations.
The 1999 initiative builds on gains made in these areas, and places increased emphasis on
ensuring the safety of domestic and imported fresh produce and imported foods; targets retail
food safety education; transforms traditional meat and poultry inspection systems to science-based
HACCP systems; and develops scientific information and tools to control a greater range of food
safety hazards. These activities have laid the foundation for building a strong, scientific base for
a farm-to-table food safety system that protects public health by monitoring and addressing a
broad range of food safety hazards.

For the 2000 budget, the agencies are requesting an increase of $86.2 million of the fiscal year
1999 President's Budget for the Food Safety Initiative. These funds will be used to build on the
foundation established in 1998 and 1999 and will target resources to: (1) further develop a
nationally integrated food safety system by expanding and strengthening the partnership between
Federal, state, and local agencies; (2) continue enhancing surveillance for foodborne diseases and
increasing the speed and efficiency of responses to outbreaks of foodborne illness; and, (3) put
greater emphasis on the control of foodborne hazards in the pre-harvest phase of the
farm-to-table continuum. Only through continued investment can the Administration realize the
President's goal of establishing a seamless, science-based food safety system.

President's Council on Food Safety

Through the ongoing process of working together under the President's Food Safety Initiative,
the agencies (FDA, CDC of HHS, USDA, and EPA) have identified new opportunities to
improve food safety, avoid duplication, and leverage agency resources. This process will be
greatly enhanced by the President's Council on Food Safety (the Council) and the Joint Institute
for Food Safety Research (JIFSR). By creating the Council and JIFSR, the President has
re-emphasized the importance of establishing a seamless, science-based food safety system. This
represents an efficient and effective way to ensure the implementation of a farm-to-table food
safety strategy that reduces the level of foodborne illness in the most effective way possible. The
definition of an effective system is embodied in the principles and goals of the Food Safety
Initiative and the mission statement of the Council:

        "One that is based on an integrated system of government regulatory oversight;
        oper~ted in collaboration with the industry and public; based on the best
        knowledge of risk and its mitigation that current science can provide; that keeps
      . the numbers of injuries and illnesses from food as low as feasible."



                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                 3
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
  "Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption," that an effective food safety system is an
  interdependent system composed of Government agencies at all levels, as well as other
  stakeholders. NAS found that the successful integrated operation of a food safety system
  requires officials at all levels of Government to work together in support of common goals of a
  science-based system.

  Throughout 1999, the Council will work to meet the President's goal of developing a
  comprehensive food safety strategy and coordinating food safety budgets that will result in further
  improvements in the safety of the food supply and ensure the most effective use of Federal
  resources. The strategic plan will take into consideration the findings and recommendations of
  the NAS report and input from the public. Upon completion of its evaluation of the current
  food safety system, the Council will make additional recommendations on how to advance the
, efforts identified in the President's Food Safety Initiative.

  Accomplishments to Date

  In the first two years of the President's Food Safety Initiative, HHS and USDA have focused on
  building a strong, scientific foundation for a farm-to-table food safety system. The coordinated
  activities have greatly enhanced the capacities of the states and Federal government to monitor the
  incidence of specific foodborne diseases; rapidly respond to outbreaks of foodborne illness and
  prevent future outbreaks; identify foodborne hazards that pose the highest public health risks and
  direct resources to minimize those risks; and develop safe food practices education programs
  aimed at improving food safety for Americans.

  Significant gains have already accrued with direct benefits to the public health:

  More rapid identification of foodborne illness and containment of outbreaks

         PulseNet (DNA fingerprinting) and FoodNet (monitoring of foodborne illness) together
         strengthen the ability of the nation's public health officials to rapidly detect and limit the
         health consequences of foodborne illness and make it possible to estimate more accurately
         the true magnitude of foodborne illness in the United States.

         This technology has already been used in several instances to reduce outbreaks.
         PulseNet data were used several times to detect and limit the size of foodborne illness
         outbreaks, e.g. for alfalfa sprouts, mesclun lettuce mix, ground beef, cheese curds, and
         Salmonella Agona in cereal. While we cannot quantify the number of illnesses
         prevented, by identifying and stopping pathogens much earlier than we otherwise would
         have, we have definitely reduced the number of potential illnesses in these particular cases.


                                                                     Automated Records Man,agement System
                                                    4
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                ,
of foodborne disease, although it has rarely caused outbreaks of illness since the
1980s.     These findings led to new interagency efforts in          research and
surveillance to better understand how this pathogen enters the food chain and how
to control it. Within FoodNet,there are now special studies to determine which
foods and behaviors are associated with Campylobacter, E coli 0157:H7, and
some Salmonella.

PulseNet, data allowed for the rapid identification and subsequent traceback from
two independent E coli 0157:H7 outbreaks to a common source of alfalfa sprouts
  in Michigan. In another incident E coli 0157:H7 contaminated mesclun lettuce
mix implicated in illnesses in two different states was identified as having the same
pathogenic fingerprint and quickly traced back to the common packer.. Because
of the PulseNet data FDA was able to more rapidly identify, respond, and
effectively limit the extent of illness.

In Wisconsin, epidemiological and PulseNet data were used to confirm that
approximately .50 cases of E coli 0157:H7 were attributed to cheese. curds
manufactured by a specific facility. Initial follow-up inspections by the state did
not reveal the source of contamination. However, because DNA fingerprints of
isolates from the curd matched DNA fingerprints of isolates from ill individuals,
the state, with FDA, pursued the investigation at the firm and found inadequate
separation of raw and pasteurized milk products. FDA is currently conducting
research on cheese fermentation at the National Center for Food Safety and
Technology to determine the survivability of pathogens, including E coli
0l57:H7 in cheese.

PulseNet and epidemiological data were used to correlate E coli 0157:H7
outbreaks from ground beef to particular processors. USDA then did further
sampling and was able to identify other processors and their products. The
processors voluntarily recalled their products from the market, preventing illnesses.

PulseNet data combined with epidemiological data were able to differentiate
several discrete outbreaks among multiple clusters of E coli 0157:H7 that
occurred in June, 1998, in the Northeast United States. The majority of the
clusters were associated with ground beef consumption, however, many of the
clusters have an unknown vehicle and are still being investigated.

In the recent Salmonella Agona outbreak associated with toasted oat cereal,
FoodNet detected an increase in the number of Salmonella Agona cases across the
United States. PulseNet determined that the majority of the Salmonella Agona

                                  5
                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
       associated with a common vehicle. Without the FoodNet and PulseNet data,
       linking of the outbreaks across the U.S. and identification of the source of the
       pathogen would have taken far longer and been complicated by the other,
       non-associated S. Agona outbreaks at the time. With FoodNet and PulseNet,
       public health officials were able to quickly focus on the outbreaks associated with
       the cereal and its removal from the market, presenting additional illnesses.

       FDA, CDC, USDA/ARS and USDA/APHIS collaborated in response to an
       outbreak of salmonellosis among residents of a Vermont dairy farm. This illness
       was caused by SalmoneUa Typhimurium DTI04, a multi-resistant pathogen, on
       the farm and in the surrounding area. The National Antibiotic Resistance
       Monitoring System (NARMS) facilitated the recognition that SalmoneUa
       Typhimurium DTI04 was widespread in the U.S. which prompted CDC to warn
       state health departments of its presence and provide preventive steps to minimize
       its spread. Expansion of NARMS under the NFSI and better coordination
       between the agencies provided this resource.

Collection of better, more reliable surveillance data on the occurrence and source of major
foodborne disease through FoodNet, PulseNet, and the National Antimicrobial Resistance
Monitoring System (NARMS), providing a baseline for measurement of public health
benefits of food safety activities and improved early warning of outbreaks.     .

FoodNet has provided, in addition to better more reliable data about foodborne illness in
the population in general, specific information about the prevalence of certain pathogens
that is being used to put preventive measures in place, e.g., for Campylobacter.

A new tool for modeling the behavior of SalmoneUa in raw and cooked poultry products.

Systematic surveillance for antibiotic resistance in foodborne pathogens to identify new
resistant strains and comparison of resistance in strains isolated from ill humans with those
isolated from animals and foods.

Prevention of SalmoneUa contamination in food products from poultry with the
development and commercialization of a competitive exclusion culture (CEC) to control
SalmoneUa on commercial broiler farms. Advances were also made in methods to
reduce Salmonella levels in the air with electrostatic ionization during times when birds
are highly susceptible to the spread of the pathogen, such as, shortly after hatch and
during an induced molt.


                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                         6                 Hex-Dump Conversion
      numbers of bacteria, inexpensive, and user-friendly. Also, advances in irradiation
      technology that offers opportunities to significantly reduce pathogens in certain food
      commodities, which increase shelf life and maintain freshness -- all major consumer
      demands.

      New techniques for the rapid detection of Camplyobacter.

Better Coordination Among Food Safety Agencies/Benefit of Faster Response to Foodborne
Outbreaks

      Definition of core capacItIes for all state health departments for the surveillance and
      investigation of foodborne diseases, and efforts to assure those capacities are in place, to
      facilitate rapid and uniform response to outbreaks ..

      Development and utilization of uniform procedures for more rapid containment of
      foodborne illness outbreaks. The establishment of FORCe to review and suggest
      improvements in actions of federal and state representatives in response to outbreaks.

      Coordination of an interagency food safety research plan for fresh produce and work on
      an interagency food safety research inventory and plan for all food safety research among
      the federal agencies developed under auspices of the Office of Science and Technology
      Policy.

      Foundation for a consistent, uniform approach to developing microbial risk assessment
      techniques in the U.S. and internationally by the Risk Assessment Consortium.

      Within the framework of the initiative, additional funds helped establish the successful
      working relationships for implementing FoodNet, PulseNet, NARMS, FORCe, the Risk
      Assessment Consortium, the Joint Institute for Food Safety Research, and the Partnership
      for Food Safety Education.

      Creation of the President's Council on Food Safety and the Joint Institute for Food Safety
      Research.

Seamless Food Safety System

      A meeting of representatives of federal food safety agencies with state and local
      departments of health and agriculture 50 states, Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia
      to develop recommendations and implementation plans for a national, integrated food
      safety system encompassing all levels of government.

                                               7
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                    lex-Dump Conversion
       to the ability of Federal food safety agencies to leverage resources, avoid duplication, and
       provide the basis for an integrated and seamless food safety system. Further improvements
       will be made in 1999 with funds provided for the distribution of computers and technical
       assistance to State meat and poultry inspection programs.

Preventive Controls/Allows for Better Targeting of Resources

       Implementation of science-based preventative systems for foods associated with foodborne
       illness, including Hazard Analysis and Critiql Control Point (HACCP) systems for
       seafood, meat, and poultry, voluntary Good Agricultural/Good Manufacturing Practices
       guidance for fresh fruits and vegetables, warning labels on fresh packaged juices, and
       proposed HACCP for juices.

       Enhanced State public health and regulatory laboratory capabilities, State and local
       epidemiologic capabilities, State inspector HACCP training, and automated systems in the
       25 State meat and poultry inspection programs to ensure uniform Federal and State
       implementation of HACCP regulations.

       Development of rapid detection methods and technology for the control of foodborne
       hazards, including methods for E Coli 0l57:H7, a competitive exclusion spray to prevent
       SalmoneUa in chicks, and antimicrobial treatments for poultry.

       Completion of the first farm-to-table quantitative risk assessment for a pathogen --
       SalmoneUa -- in eggs.

       A measurable decline in the prevalence of SalmoneUa contamination in pork and broiler
       chickens as a result of implementation of HACCP in large meat and poultry
       establishments.

       Research to develop fundamental knowledge of pathogens, expand available predictive
       microbiology models to account for additional microbiological attributes, develop food
       handling and preservation technologies for reducing or eliminating foodborne
       contamination from the farm to the table.

       Research that indicates decreased E coli numbers in cattle hay. Additional studies will
       be conducted to determine whether feeding hay to cattle prior to slaughter will
       significantly reduce post harvest contamination by pathogenic E coli.

       An instrument to assure levels of chlorine in disinfection water are proper.

                                                8
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 !-lcx-Dump Conversion
      animal carcasses.

      Research that has found naturally occurring food additives that block the attachment of E
      coli to bovine meat tissue.

      Increased ability to detect emerging pathogen and identify relationships between animal
      and human isolates.

      Approval of irradiation for certain commodities, such as red meat.

      Research begun to validate the effectiveness of various interventions techniques, such as
      washing, antimicrobial rinses, and non-thermal processes, on pathogens in juices.

Outreach to Consumers

      These activities have already resulted in measurable, positive changes      In   consumer
      behavior with regard to food safety issues.

      Improved consumer and food service worker awareness of safe food preparation practices
      through the Partnership for Food Safety Education and the Food Service Training and
      Education Alliance, respectively.

      Increased information for producers on safe food production practices and how to reduce
      the risks of pathogenic organisms during production ..

      Workshops that will teach farmers the principles of safe food production and how to
      reduce the risks of pathogenic organisms on the fruits, vegetables, meat, and poultry.

      Development of the national "Fight BAC!" campaign to promote consumer use of safe
      food practices.

      Life-size "BAC" character and puppets to deliver messages to adults and school age
      children.

      30-second television public service announcements, New web site (www.fightbac.org)
      where consumers, health professionals, educators, and the media can learn the latest news
      about preventing foodborne illness, and information kits for supermarket consumer affairs
      professionals (e.g., Wegman's) and community action groups.


                                              9                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                      .
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
       consumer and industry sectors have agreed to support the "FIGHT BAC!" campaign and
       disseminate educational materials. These "BAC Fighters" will maximize the campaign's
       national outreach and provide important links into thousands of communities nationwide.

Outreach to Industry

       A national food safety database containing educational materials and resources for use by
       a variety of audiences and the Food Animal Residue Avoidance Databank (FARAD).
       FARAD is a central and unique source of residue avoidance information for producers,
       veterinarians, and regulatory agencies working with food animal products.

       Created an industryJNational Center for Food Safety and Technology task force on sprout
       safety and research plans to validate the effectiveness of interventions such as antimicrobial
       nnses.

       Publication of the Annual Report "FDA/USDA/CDC National Antimicrobial
       Susceptibility Monitoring Program- Veterinary Isolates, April 1, 1998," has provided the
       animal production industry with national salmonella susceptibility data from food animals.
       The publication of this report has initiated activities between producers, the A VMA,
       veterinarians and the pharmaceutical industry. Producers are increasingly aware of the
       food safety issues associated with antimicrobial resistance and as a result are developing
       studies to identify prudent and judicious antimicrobial use practices, interventions and
       mitigations for extant resistance in organisms of concern, and determine other husbandry
       practices that reduce the need for antimicrobials in food animal production. An effective
       response on the part of industry will ensure that drugs necessary for the treatment of food
       animals will remain effective longer and that foodborne pathogens will be less likely to be
       resistant to antimicrobials.

These accomplishment, taken as a whole, point to significant gains for public health from just
this initial investment. The fiscal year 2000 request, builds upon 1998 and 1999 and seeks to
establish the next segments needed for improving the overall safety of the food supply.

Progressing Toward A Seamless. Science-Based Food Sqfety System

Only through stronger partnerships among Federal, State and local food safety agencies can the
goal of reducing foodborne illness to the fullest extent possible be realized. First, as identified in
the farm-to-table strategy, steps must be taken at each point of the farm-to-table continuum where
hazards can occur to improve the safety of foods. Because the States are involved in all facets of
food production, Federal agencies must work closely with the various State agencies that have the
authority, and the responsibility, for food safety. Second, partnerships enable food safety

                                                 10

                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion




  agencies to use scarce resources more efficiently and to avoid duplication. Third, food safety
  officials are becoming increasingly more aware that one level of the farm-to-table chain affects
  another. For example, the requirements being set within meat and poultry plants under the
  HACCP rule have repercussions at the animal production level, where producers must be
  prepared to supply animals that meet HACCP system requirements for incoming raw materials.
  Fourth, distinctions between the segments of the farm-to-table chain are becoming
. indistinguishable. For example, many retail food operations, such as supermarkets, are now
  engaged in food preparation like smoking fish or roasting chickens, but are not subject to Federal
  inspection. For these reasons, it is clear that Federal agencies must work more closely with all
  involved State agencies.

From the outset of the President's Food Safety Initiative, the Administration has recognized the
need for strengthening partnerships between Federal agencies and State and local public health
agencies. In the first two years of the Food Safety Initiative, additional funds were provided to
improve coordination between all agencies involved in the food safety system. Within the
framework of the initiative, additional funds helped establish the successful working relationships
for implementing FoodNet, PulseNet, NARMS, FORCG, the Risk Assessment Consortium, and
the Partnership for Food Safety Education. In addition, Food Safety Initiative funds have
enabled food safety agencies to provide training and materials to State and local agencies for
expanding and improving their on-going inspection. and compliance capabilities, food safety
education efforts, and foodborne illness surveillance capabilities.

 Great progress has also been made by cooperative Federal agencies in implementing HACCP
'systems for seafood, meat, and poultry and a comprehensive initiative for ensuring the safety of
 fruits and vegetables. Other efforts include the coordination of activities for ensuring the safety
 of food during transportation and at the retail level. These are complex issues involving
 numerous Federal, State, and local officials. The partnerships established and strengthened
 under the President's Food Safety Initiative have contributed to the ability of Federal food safety
 agencies to leverage resources, avoid duplication, and provide the basis for an integrated and
 seamless food safety system. Further improvements will be made in 1999 with funds provided for
 the distribution of computers and technical assistance to State meat and poultry inspection
 programs. Additional partnerships will be formed with the states to increase the number of high
 risk, non-meat and poultry, food inspections and to enhance the capabilities of states to improve
 food safety at the retail level.

In September, 1998, representatives of food safety agencies from of all 50 states, Puerto Rico,
and the District of Columbia met with HHS and USDA in Kansas City to discuss how federal,
state, and local food safety activities could be better integrated to provide a more effective and
efficient food safety system. The State representatives strongly support the concept of a
nationally integrated food safety system building on the current Federal-State partnerships. The
2000 budget proposal includes funds for HHS, with USDA, to accelerate their planning with the

                                                 11
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
such a system. To further foster progress toward a seamless, science-based food safety system,
the 2000 budget includes funds to enable USDA and HHS to develop stronger ties with State
food safety agencies.

USDA is currently providing the training and equipment necessary to State personnel in the 25
State meat and poultry inspection programs to assure that State programs implement meat and
poultry HACCP requirements that are 'at least equal to' the Federal program of continuous
inspection. Providing the 25 State meat and poultry inspection programs access to Federal
computer networks will facilitate the coordination of inspection coverage between the two
programs and ensure a consistent approach to inspection and an efficient allocation of resources.
In addition, legislation will be proposed to authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to enter into
Federal-State cooperative agreements that provide for State meat and poultry inspection programs
to enforce Federal meat and poultry inspection laws and regulations with their State as part of a
seamless national inspection program.        Products shipped under such new Federal-State
cooperative agreements would be permitted to enter interstate commerce.

Another major aspect of the 2000 budget proposal is to significantly increase HHS efforts to
coordinate its Federal inspection responsibilities with State and local agencies. Through grants,
contracts, and other mechanisms, FDA will utilize State-conducted inspections to increase the
frequency of coverage for domestic firms. With the additional resources, HHS estimates that a
combination of Federal and State inspectors will be able to reduce the existing inspection cycle
from once seven years for any· particular establishment to a risk-based approach that enables
highest risk operations to be inspected once a year.

Encouraging the use of preventive control measures, such as HACCP and the Food Code, by the
retail food industry will be the third major focus of cooperative federal-state activity. HHS and
USDA, have worked, through the Conference for Food Protection (a forum for all stakeholders
to have input into the code development process), with the states to promote use of safe practices
in retail food operations and adoption of Food Code provisions, including HACCP. The Food
Code is a model that provides scientifically sound technical and legal basis for regulating the retail
segment of the food industry. It is the Federal government's best advice on a comprehensive
system of regulation to ensure food in restaurants, retail food stores and. institutional
establishments is safe. The target audience of the Food Code is the 75 State and territorial
agencies and over 3,000 local agencies directly regulating over one million retail operations. In
2000, the agencies will continue to work with and provide training, assistance, and resources to
improve the safety of food products at retail.

HHS, with the assistance of USDA, will also work cooperatively with foreign governments to
evaluate foreign food production and inspection systems. Under the initiative, HHS and USDA
will increase the number of international arrangements for assuring food safety to facilitate the

                                                 12            Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
and the control measures necessary to reduce those risks. FDA will also follow-up on foodborne
illness outbreaks associated with imported products and work toward equivalence determinations
for other countries.

Enhancing Surveillance and Increasing the Speed and Efficiency or Responses to Foodborne Illness
Outbreaks

Foodborne surveillance data are critical for both USDA and HHS to define the burden of
specific foodborne diseases on the public health, to detect outbreaks rapidly so they can be
brought under control, and to monitor the success of long-term control measures. The 2000
budget proposal will continue to enhance surveillance, harnessing new biotechnologies and
electronic communications to protect the public health. Surveillance data on foodborne diseases
will continue to improve, by promoting better surveillance in all states, and by more detailed
investigations through FoodNet.          Collaborative epidemiologic investigations conducted in
FoodNet sites will expand to include outbreaks of unknown cause, and will continue to define
the principal sources, and likely control points for the major foodborne infections. PulseNet, the
molecular sub-typing network, will be expanded to more pathogens providing rapid detection of
outbreaks. Guidelines for its efficient use will be developed and made available. CDC. is
establishing the critical core capacities needed in all states to conduct surveillance of foodborne
illness; the 2000 budget proposal will enhance these capacities nationwide. Foodborne outbreak
reports will be made electronically. The results will then be made available quickly by tracking
the trends on sources of outbreaks, the effectiveness of existing prevention measures, and the
need for any new preventive controls.'

As foodborne illness surveillance data becomes more timely and accurate, more outbreaks will be
identified that require a rapid response, including emergency epidemiologic and traceback
investigations to identify the food source. These epidemiologic investigations are critical to
identify and control the source of the outbreaks rapidly, and also can provide invaluable
information to prevent future outbreaks. New tools can greatly enhance these investigations.
For example, PulseNet can quickly link apparently disparate outbreaks so that common sources
can be identified, investigated, and controlled. We have successful examples of this in 1998 with
the result that outbreaks were shortened. Most initial investigations are conducted by teams of
epidemiologists, microbiologists, and sanitarians employed by local and state health departments.
When needed, CDC provides additional ·epidemiologic and diagnostic assistance and
coordination, and FDA and USDA provide technical assistance, traceback support, and
implementation of emergency national control measures. Public health departments and food
safety agencies at the federal, state, and local levels must have the capacity to respond rapidly and
in a manner that provides consistent, high quality epidemiologic investigations to guide decision
making about disease control. CDC is defining, with state partners, the critical capacities needed
in all states to respond to outbreaks of foodborne illness. HHS is developing training materials to

                                                 13              Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
FORCG is in the processing of refining, with States, the uniform procedures developed for all
agencies to follow in coordinating outbreak investigations.

Continued enhancements to surveillance are needed because new foodborne diseases continue to
be identified for which control measures remain unclear. Activities supported by the 2000
budget will continue to focus on achieving full utilization of State health laboratories, Federal
food laboratories, and epidemiology departments to improve the accessibility and rapid analysis
of surveillance systems now in place, and to expand the scope of these systems to be more
comprehensive in the· array· of pathogens tracked~ It will be critical· to identify new and
emerging foodborne contaminants, measure the risk they pose to the public, determine possible
points of control, evaluate the effectiveness of prevention and control efforts, ·and target needed
research and education efforts.

Global comparison of national surveillance data for SalmoneUa will mark the beginning of an
international 'preparedness' strategy, providing early warning about potential outbreaks related to
food in international trade. In another area of increasing public health concern, access to
international databases linking veterinary and human databases will provide a basis for
comparison that can guide strategies prolong the usefulness of antibiotics.

HHS and USDA will work with state health departments and other partners to further address
the need for detailed information on the human illness impact of pathogens at varying doses.
This dose-response information is critical to conduct quantitative risk assessments. Better
information about the proportion of persons who become ill after eating food contaminated with
different concentrations of pathogens can be obtained in several ways. . Volunteer feeding trials
are being conducted, as are animal model studies. Extremely useful information can also be
generated in the occasional outbreak setting where the implicated food can be collected and
analyzed meaningfully. Under these activities, food specimens would be collected as quickly as
possible from patients with foodborne illness. These specimens would be sent immediately to
appropriate laboratories for quantitative analysis to establish the concentration of the pathogen in
the food.

Greater Emphasis on the Control of Foodbome Hazards             In   the Pre-Harvest Phase of the
Farm-to-Table Continuum

In order to ensure effective control of microbiological contamination, the President's Food Safety
Initiative addresses foodborne hazards throughout the farm-to-table continuum. A majority of
Federal and state resources are allocated to the inspection of commercial food processors and
handlers and improvement of food handling practices by consumers. In addition, a significant
amount of research is aimed at developing analytical methods and prevention control programs
for use in post-harvest operations.

                                                14               Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dwnp Conversion
foods, including ground beef and other meats, poultry, eggs, and fresh fruits and vegetables, have
sustained a high level of awareness among the public about the issue of food safety. Changes,
such as the implementation of HACCP systems and the "Guide to Minimize Microbial Food
Safety Hazards," have enhanced the awareness of the potential role of production practices in
contamination of various food products. Producers of food animals, fruits, and vegetables must
be much more involved in learning about opportunities to reduce the chance of contamination by
pathogens of fecal origin, whether from domestic or wild animal species or human beings. This
emphasis has brought more attention to management practices that will reduce the prevalence of
pathogens, e.g., SalmoneUa, E coli, and Campylobacter, as well as provide resources for
educating producers on the implementation of such practices.

In 1999, the agencies will begin to address some of the producer needs under the President's
Food Safety Initiative. Agencies will evaluate risk-based pathogen reduction strategies for
producers and provide that information to them for use in running their operations. For 2000,
a greater emphasis needs to be placed on the control of foodborne hazards in the pre-harvest
phase of the overall food safety strategy. To achieve this, the 2000 budget will target additional
research and risk-assessment activities to the development of effective, reliable, and cost-effective
methods for controlling or eliminating pathogens in or on food products prior to harvest.

An interagency research planning process was initiated under the auspices of the Office of
Science and Technology Policy. HHS and USDA accelerated research plan for fresh fruits and
vegetables was developed and implemented, as were individual agency plans. All these research
efforts will be coordinated by the new President's Council on Food Safety, established by
Executive Order 13100 in July 1998.
Research projects supported by the 2000 budget will contribute to the development of effective
methods of handling and treating poultry, swine, and cattle manure during production that
prevent transmission of pathogens to agricultural lands and to crops used for human food.
Control of animal production practices will also help prevent possible distribution of pathogens
to crops or other animals from surface runoff and irrigation waters. For some foodborne
illnesses, the causative agent is never identified. This may be due to the lack of a detection
method for the pathogen or for the pathogen in the specific food. Improved detection
methodologies will be developed to enable producers to monitor their production processes for
contamination.

Antibiotic resistance is an important factor that must be controlled in both animal health and the
use of animals and their products as foods. Research is needed to develop the knowledge to
prevent the development of this antibiotic drug resistance. The development of resistant human
pathogenic bacteria is closely associated with the use of antimicrobial agents in human medicine,
but it is also likely that food producing animals are sources or vectors of resistant bacteria that

                                                 15
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
prevent both the emergence and the maintenance in food producing animals of pathogenic and
non-pathogenic antibiotic resistant bacteria.

The interagency Risk Assessment Consortium was formed to provide a central forum for
developing and using microbial risk assessment techniques, a first step toward providing uniform,
standardized techniques and approaches to applying risk assessment to food safety issues. Risk
assessment modeling supported by the 2000 budget for pre-harvest activities will evaluate the
effects of various on-farm production practices, processing systems, and transportation systems on
the contamination of food. The proposed research will result in improved information to base
decisions on production practices that will result in fewer pathogens in food animals being
presented for slaughter.

In support of the President's directive to ensure the safety of fruits and vegetables, a survey will
be conducted of fruit and vegetable growers and packinghouse handling practices with regard to
food safety. A primary use of these data would be to establish a baseline of agricultural
practices related to microbial food safety and to provide a benchmark to measure future industry
changes. Survey data reported by producers would inform domestic and international data users
on U.S. grower food safety practices. The survey information would also be used to target
specific industry educational outreach programs to increase fruit and vegetable industry awareness
on microbial food safety.

Conclusion

Expected outcomes from the President's Food Safety Initiative for 2000 include a strengthened
food safety foundation specifically in surveillance, inspections, research and risk assessment,
education, and coordination of response to foodborne illness outbreaks. Progress will be made
toward realizing the President's goal of establishing a seamless, science-based food safety system
that involves all levels of government. Baselines for foodborne illness outbreaks will be
established which will enable public health agencies to monitor the impact of prevention control
interventions and more rapidly identify trends in emerging pathogens. Additional steps will be
taken to make food inspection techniques consistent across the country, so that inspection results
will be"interchangeable" among federal, state and local agencies. Risk assessment will be used to
direct research, surveillance and other efforts. Research will facilitate the adoption of new
methodologies for rapid identification of foodborne hazards and greater control of those hazards
from farm-to-table. Educational programs will improve safe food practices and will provide
necessary information to producers for responding to increased challenges for ensuring the safety
of products during production.



                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   lIex-Dwnp Conversion
                                                16
    FY 2000 PROPOSAL


                                        1997               1998            1999             2000          Proposed
                                       Approp.            Approp.        Budget                            Increase
ACTIVITY                                                                                 Proposal

                                                                  Dollars in Thousands

SURVEILLANCE:                                                                             .
USDA:
  Food Safety and Inspection Service      $1,000           $1,500          $1,500          $1,500                      $0
  Economic Research Service              ~                ~               ~               ~                             0

           Subtotal, USDA                  1,032            1,532            1,785            1,785                     0

HHS:
  Food and Drug Administration                 737          3,897           6,097          15,097                   9,000
 Centers for Disease Control and
     Prevention                            4500            14,500          19,000          37000                    18,000

       Subtotal, HHS                       5,237           llillZ          ~               &Q2Z                 27,000
                                   .
         Subtotal, Surveillance            6,269          19,929           26,882          53,882               27,000

COORDINATION:

USDA:
  Food Safety and Inspection Service             0                0               0           1,450                  1,450

HHS:
 Food and Drug Administration              7.173            z..m            z.m.              un                        Q


         Subtota4 Coordination             7,173            7,723           7,923             9,373                  1,450

INSPECTIONS:

USDA:
  Food Safety and Inspection Service             0          565              8,412            8,778                    366
  Foreign Agricultural Service                   0         __ 0                               LOOO                   1.000
                                                                                  Q
       Subtotal, USDA                            0           565                              9,778                  1,366
                                                                             8,412

HHS:
  Food and Drug Administration            73,244           81114          108714          134,314               25,600


         Subtota4 Inspections             73,244           81,679         117,126         144,092               26,966

                                        1997               1998            1999               2000         Proposed
                                       Approp.            Approp.        Budget                             Increase
ACTIVITY (Cont.)                                                                         Proposal

                                                                  Dollars in Thousands


                                                     17       Automated Records 'vlanagemt,."         ;:'j " .. L

                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

USDA:
  Agricultural Research Service                               5,461         4,498             4,818              7,218    2,400
  Cooperative State Research,
    Education, and Extension Service                            145           150             1,962              1,962        0
  Food Safety and Inspection Service                              0             0             1,000              2,000    1,000
  Economic Research Service                                      33            33               686                686        0
  National Agricultural Statistics Service                        0             0                 0              2,500    2,500
  Office of the Chief Economist                              ~             -----.m          ~                      158        0

        Subtotal, USDA                                        5,701          4,741            8,624             14,524    5,900


HHS:
  Food and Drug Administration                                2589           6539            JJn2               16439     2,700


          Subtotal, Risk Assessment                           8,290         1l,280          22,363             30,963     8,600

EDUCATION:

USDA:
  Cooperative State Research,
    Education, and Extension Service                          2,365         2,365             7,365              8,287    922
  Food Safety and Inspection Service                              0             0             2,500              2,720    220
  Food And Nutrition Service                                      0             0             2,000              2,000      0
  Office of the Chief Economist                                  27            38                38                 38      0
  Economic Research Service                                     420           420               420                420   __ 0

        Subtotal, USDA                                        2,812         2,823            12,323             13,465     1,142

HHS:
  Food and Drug Administration                                4,800         6,870           10,470              15,170   4,700
  Centers for Disease Control                                     0        __   0          ~                  ~          __  0

        Subtotal, HHS                                         4,800         6,870           lQ,2ZQ              15,670    4,700


          Subtotal, Education                                 7,612         9,693           23,293              29,135    5,842

RESEARCH:

USDA:
  Agricultural Research Service                              44,186         50,351          64,001              71,701    7,700
  Cooperative State Research,
    Education, and Extension Service                          3,724         6,250            10,438             12,151    1,713
  Agricultural Marketing Service                                  0             0           ....Q.lli           6,257    __   0

        Subtotal, USDA                                       47,910        56,601           80,696             90,109     9,413

HHS:
  Food and Drug Administration                               2Q,ill        W23              ~                  43,293     6,900


          Subtotal, Research                                 68,703        83794           117,089            133,402     16,313


TOTAL, INITIATIVE                                            ~             ~               ~                 ~            ~

                     "1) \ 12. .   ... _...... L .::.ystem
                                                                                     AlltflTJ11tlld ~ecQrcJ,$ Marmgement System
                                                                                                  .
  Hex-Dump Conversion                                                                   '

                                                                      18             f!~<)o';ri;';', ~ 1'111 ~r~ipn
                                           FY 2000 PROPOSAL

                                                                                                                        Increase
                                                1997           1998           1999          1999          2000         Over 1999
TOTAL INITIATIVE                               Approp.        Approp.        Budget        Enacted       Proposal        Budget

                                                                             Dollars in Thousands

USDA:
  Agricultural Research Service                $49,647        $54,849         $68,819       $67,219        $78,919         $10,100
  Cooperative State Research,
    Education, and Extension Service              6,234          8,765         19,765                       22,400           2,635
  Agricultural Marketing Service                      0              0          6,257      24,765 W          6,257               0
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              1,000          2,065         13,412          2,831        16,448           3,036
  Economic Research Service                         485            485           1,391        18,352          1,391              0
  Office of the Chief Economist                      89             98             196           938          .196               0
  Foreign Agricultural Service                        0              0               0           196         1,000           1,000
  National Agricultural Statistics Service            0              0               0             0         2,500           2,500
  Food and Consumer Service                                                     2000               0         2000                0
                                                         Q.             Q.                     2000
            Subtotal, USDA                                                    1ll,840                       13l,1ll         19,271
                                                 57,455        66,262
                                                                                             116,481

HHS:
  Food and Drug Administration                  109,335        133,335        183,335        158,335       232,335         48,900
 Centers for Disease Control                      4500          14,500         19500          19500         37,500         18,000

           Subtotal, HHS                        ll3 835        147835         202,835                     ~                66,900
                                                                                             177 835

                                                                                            ~
TOTAL, INITIATIVE                               lZlJ2Jl       ~               ~                   bJ      4QQ R46           MJZ),


 w    The Conference Report accompanying the Omnibus Appropriations Act for 1999 directs USDA to consult with the
      Food and Drug Administration regarding food safety research objectives of the agency and recommends that
      $5.0 million of the funds provided to USDA for the food safety component of the National Research Initiative be
      used to meet those needs.

 bJ The Conference Report accompanying the Omnibus Appropriations Act for 1999 (the Act) identifies the funding
      increases for activities identified under the President's Food Safety Initiative. The agencies are currently evaluating the
      Act to determine the final allocation of funds to support the various activities of the Initiative.




                                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                                  HeX-Dump Conversion




                                                               19

                               Surveillance- FY 2000 Budget Request

FoodNet, PulseNet, and other improvements in national epidemiologic capacity funded by FSI
funds in FY 1998 and 1999 are beginning to provide better, more reliable information about
foodborne illnesses and outbreaks. Federal and state public health officials are now using this
data to trace the causative agent of outbreaks back to the source.          In FY 2000, these
surveillance mechanisms will have established a baseline that will be used by the food safety
agencies to identify outbreaks, evaluate the effect of interventions to reduce the number of
illnesses, and to identify illnesses caused by emerging pathogens.

Increased reliability of FoodNet data will result in an increased number of foodborne outbreaks
being identified. This will trigger an increase in the number of epidemiologic outbreak and
traceback investigations that must be conducted to determine the source of the contamination and
facilitate its removal from the marketplace.     The capacity of state health departments to identify
outbreaks and determine the pathogen involved will be expanded and enhanced to accommodate
the increase. FY 2000 activities will continue to focus on achieving full capacity for state health
laboratories, accessibility of surveillance systems now in place, and expanding the scope of the
systems to be more comprehensive in the array of pathogens tracked. Information generated by
these activities will be used to identify new and emerging foodborne contaminants, characterize
consumer risk, determine possible points of control, evaluate the effectiveness of prevention and
control efforts, and target needed research and education efforts.

.An increased number of state health departments will be added to the pathogen DNA-fingerprint
 network, PulseNet, and data on SalmoneUa Typhimurium will be. added to the database (the
 current database contains E. coli 0157:H7 data), greatly extending its usefulness in epidemiologic
and traceback investigations. Global surveillance for Salmonellosis will mark the beginning of a
 \ preparedness' strategy, providing early warning to U.S. food safety officials about the existence
of potential safety concerns in countries importing products into the U.S.       Likewise access to
international databases linking veterinary and human databases will provide forewarning of the
emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance.

Coordination Strategy

CDC, USDA, and FDA participate in working groups along with state representatives, such as
the FORCG and the FoodNet working group, to provide guidance and direction on surveillance
activities to meet each agency's needs. These working groups coordinate planning and'
prioritization of work to meet the needs of each agency, identifying gaps that must be filled,
resources that must be developed, and complementary work to meet these needs.

FY 2000 Activities

   Communicadng outbreak data to federal and state public health authorides
                          ,.
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                 20                 Hex-Dump Conversion
    identify unusual patterns and to disseminate this information to USDA, FDA, and others
    for use in food safety policy decision-making and coordinating responses to outbreaks

-   FDA, working with the states, CDC, and USDA will initiate development of electronic
    communication and data-sharing systems for use in federal-state monitoring and traceback
    investigations

Tracing foodborne iUness to its source

-   FDA, working with the states, will provide training and resources to states to strengthen
    outbreak response and traceback capabilities

International foodborne illness

-   CDC in collaboration with the World Health Organization and other international
    partners, will begin global surveillance for Salmonellosis. This information will provide
    another type of early warning for U.S. food safety authorities to initiate appropriate
    oversight measures for imported foods.

Better, more reliable foodborne illness data about an increased number ofpathogens:

-   CDC, with support from FDA and USDA, will expand the scope of FoodNet to improve
    the qualitative and quantitative database for foodborne disease, i.e., to more fully reflect the
    cross-section of the U.S. population and to enhance the accuracy of data generated. CDC
    will also expand surveillance in FoodNet to include foodborne outbreaks and outbreak
    investigations.

    CDC will expand PulseNet to 30 state health departments with capacity for E coli
    0157:H7 and SalmoneUa Typhimurium subtyping and begin addition of SalmoneUa
    Enteritidis. PulseNet data will be fully integrated into routine surveillance.

-   CDC will expand the capacity of state and local health departments to test for Norwalk-like
    caliciviruses and initiate a surveillance network to monitor circulation of Norwalk-like virus
    strains in the U.S.

-   CDC will evaluate the effectiveness of an algorithm for preventing illness among persons
    who potentially have been exposed to food service workers infected with hepatitis A.


Antibiotic resistance

    FDA, working with CDC, will expand and increase the overall capacity of NARMS and
    its geographic scope to assure a higher probability of detecting emerging resistant
    pathogens capable of animal to human transmission and to minimize the occurrence of

                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                               21          Hex-Dump Conversion
of bacterial isolates from human and animal origin in the NARMS database from 2,000
and 3,000 to 4,000 and 7,000, respectively, we will be able to increase our probability of
identifying potential outbreaks.

CDC will collaborate with USDA in working with the international community to assess
feasibility of international antimicrobial resistance databases. This collaboration will
facilitate international response to resistance emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance
throughout the world.

                                 Summary Budget - Surveillance

                                              1998       1999            2000       Proposed
                                             ~          Budget        Proposal       Increase
  SURVEILLANCE
                                                        Dollars in Thousands

  USDA:
   Food Safety and Inspection Service         $1,500      $1,500         $1,500         $0
                                                                                       __0
   Economic Research Service                  ---2l       ---.ill.       ---.ill.
         . Subtotal, USDA                      1,532       1,785          1,785                 0

  HHS:
   Food and Drug Administration                3,897       6,097         15,097          9,000
   Centers for Disease Control and
     Prevention                               14.500      19,000         37,000         18,000

          Subtotal, HHS                       18.397      25,097         52,097         27.000



  TOTAL, Surveillance




                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                              22

A national, rapid, effective response to foodborne illness outbreaks requires a coordinated effort
that crosses agency lines, while recognizing the unique statutory responsibilities of each federal,
state, and local agency involved. This requires agreement about the roles and responsibilities of
federal, state, and local public health officials and the most expeditious manner of operating
within those parameters in responding to outbreaks, collecting epidemiologic data, and quickly
initiating traceback investigations.

FORCG has made significant strides toward a cohesive national outbreak response system, with
the development of standard, uniform procedures, for use of federal, state, and local officials in
responding to outbreaks, that reduce the time between identification of an outbreak and initiation
of measures to contain the outbreaks and limit the number of illnesses. Work that will continue
to refine the uniform procedures and build a nationally responsive system for rapid outbreak
response is an integral part of a nationally integrated food safety system.

Coordination Strategy

FORCG is the primary point of coordination between federal agencies and state representatives.
In responding to outbreaks, individual agencies in FORCG have identified gaps in resources or
expertise that, if filled, would greatly strengthen their contribution to coordination, rapid response
and containment of the outbreak. This budget request includes funding to meet these needs.

FY 2000 Activities

       CDC will meet with international health organizations to discuss the importance, as the
       national and international distribution of foodstuffs increases, of why the domestic food
       supply needs to remain safe.

   -   USDA will increase the number of District Epidemiology Officers in FSIS by 10, for a
       total of 18, to provide coverage for an increase in the number of product recalls. Product
       recalls have increased from 40 in 1996 to 50 in 1997.

                                       Summary Budget - Coordination

                                                    1998       1999             2000    Proposed
                                                              Budget                     Increase
         COORDINATION
                                                              Dollars in Thousands

         USDA:
           Food Safety and Inspection Service            $0        $0          $1,450       $1,450

         HHS:
          Food and Drug Administration


         TOTAL, Coordination



                                                    23           Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
     Hex-Dump Conversion


24

A center point of inspection activities for FDA and USDA will be assistance to states to enhance
their inspection capacity and to conduct inspections to augment federal inspections, particularly to
vt;rify implementation of HACCP regulations. Training, technical assistance, and grants to the
states will be used. Increase coverage and frequency of coverage of domestic firms, with the
highest risk firms (those firms producing, processing, or distributing high risk products) to be .
inspected once per year· and lower risk firms less frequently, is a primary goal of FDA. Both
agencies will also continue to work to eliminate barriers to cross-utilization of inspection
resources. Use of preventive control measures, such as HACCP and the Food Code, by the
retail food service industry will be a major focus of cooperative federal-state activity. FDA and
USDA will work with states, providing resources and training to promote adoption of the Food
Code by retail food service establishments.
Emphasis on development and use of food production preventive control measures will continue
with evaluations of foreign food production systems, increasing the number of state and
international arrangements for assuring food safety, and working with USDA and industry to
develop additional measures. Evaluations of foreign food production systems will be conducted
to follow-up on foodborne illness outbreaks associated with imported products, and to assure that
food products imported into the U.S. meet the level of safety as foods produced in the United
States. These evaluations will also be used to verify agreements between trading partners, such
as Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRAs).

Coordination Strategy

FDA and USDA will continue to work closely together in providing state and local food safety
officials and industry with the training necessary to effectively use preventive controls systems,
such as HACCP, and to perform inspections of HACCP systems. The agencies also have in
place several working groups considering how the agencies might more effectively use their
inspection resources, as well as ensure compliance in transportation and food service operations.

FY 2000 Activities

  State Inspections

       FDA will expand support, trammg, and guidance to our state counterparts (using
       partnerships, contracts, and other mechanisms), state inspection of FDA-regulated high risk
       establishments, following FDA guidelines and procedures.

   -   USDA will expand special assistance to states to implement Field Automation Information
       Management to provide FSIS off-shelf inspection automation infrastructure to provide the
       automated infrastructure for FSIS off-shelf inspection that will accommodate HACCP
       requirements, laboratory equipment for pathogen detection required by the HACCP final
       rules, and HACCP training for state inspectors.

                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            HeK-Dump Conversion·
                                               25
      poultry products in FSIS laboratories to determine the compliance of some 2,000 state
      inspected establishments with pathogen reduction performance standards, and will contract
      for comprehensive reviews and audits of 20 state laboratories to facilitate state
      implementation of HACCP and to permit state-inspected meat and poultry products to
      enter interstate commerce.

  -   FDA will hire individuals with expertise in epidemiology to assist in epidemiologic and
      environmental assessments of foodborne outbreaks.           .

Retail Foods

      FDA will work with States, providing training, training funds, and equipment to aid the
      retail food service industry in implementing HACCP, implementing use of food safety
      provisions in the Food Code, and in adoption of the Food Code.

      FDA and USDA will work with states to promote adoption of the Food Code by an
      increased number of states.

Imports

  -   USDA will facilitate the collection of data on agricultural practices in the U.S., report on
      good agricultural production and manufacturing practices within the food sector, and
      support FDA field staff visits to foreign countries, primarily in Latin American, South
      America, and Asia, associated with the GAP/GMPs.

Prevendve Control Systems

      FDA and USDA will continue to provide HACCP training/assistance and inspection
      training to states, as appropriate, for seafood, meat, and poultry HACCP and FDA will
      implement HACCP for fruit and vegetable juices~

      FDA and USDA will increase the number of MRAs, equivalency, and other international
      agreements.      FDA will increase the number of inspections of foreign food processors
      from 100 to 250 and will conduct evaluations of foreign food production systems to
      support its arrangements.

  -   USDA, with FDA and in cooperation with the Risk Assessment Consortium, will conduct
      international risk assessment workshops and other training activities for foreign
      governments to facilitate understanding of the risks associated with microbial
      contamination on food, particularly produce, and the control measures needed to reduce
      incidence of foodborne illness. These workshops and training sessions will be initiated by
      USDA with FDA, or done in cooperation with other organizations such as the
      International Institute· for Cooperation in Agriculture, the Food and Agriculture
      Organization, and/or the World Health Organization as appropriate.

                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                               26            Hex-Dump Conversion

                                       1998        1999            2000     Proposed
                                      Approp.     Budget        Proposal     Increase
INSPECTIONS
                                                  Dollars in Thousands

USDA:
 Food Safety and Inspection Service     $565        $8,412         $8,778        $366
 Foreign Agricultural Service           __ 0         __  0          \'000        \'000

        Subtotal, USDA                      565      8,412          9,778        1,366

HHS:
 Food and Drug Administration          81 114      108,714        134,314      25,600


TOTAL, Inspections




                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                  H~·.D\lftip Conversion



                                       27

 Education is at the heart of translating science (including regulatory science), and scientific
 advances, into readily accessible, comprehendible information for use by industry, producers,
 health profession'als, consumers, food service operations and others to change unsafe food
 practices and to respond appropriately when a foodborne illness occurs. To improve case
 identification and disease surveillance, educational materials will be produced for clinical and food
 microbiologists and for public health professionals based on research conducted in FY 1998 and
 1999.       Retail food service operations (including fast food restaurants, vending operations,
 institutional feeding operations such as schools, hospitals, and nursing homes) have been
 reported to be the source of a substantial number of foodborne illnesses. Federal agencies will
'cooperate with states and industry to provide training and educational materials geared toward
 use of safe food practices by food service workers and implementation of the food safety
 provisions of the Food Code.

To minimize the occurrence of animal drug residues in edible animal tissues, education programs
will be targeted to veterinarians and food animal producers on proper drug use. Educational
programs will be developed to train school personnel and health professionals on methods to
prevent foodborne illness.

Further evaluation of the effectiveness of the national consumer education campaign, "Fight
BACl", in changing consumer food practices will be conducted with the refinement of messages
and campaign methods.

The Partnership for Food Safety Education is a powerful model for the development of other
alliances to leverage available resources in implementing the education and training programs a
national food safety system will demand for success. By joining the expertise of federal, state,
and local authorities with industry, academia, and consumer groups, partnerships allow expanded
scope of education efforts beyond what anyone entity can accomplish alone and, thus, will be
the mainstay of education and training efforts for a national food safety program. Training
and education programs for food service workers will also be developed and implemented
through a recently formed public/private partnership and will be research and science-based.

Coordination Strategy

Coordination of education programs and setting pnontles for future actlVltles occurs through
such public/private partnerships as the Partnership for Food Safety Education, the Food Service
Training and Education Alliance, the Seafood HACCP Alliance, as well as interagency working
groups and states.

FY 2000 Activities
                                                                Automated Records Management System
   Retail Food Service
                                                                Hex-Dwnp Conversion


                                                 28
     to implement a national education and training program to ensure greater safety in retail
     food preparation practices, including use of HACCP principles in retail establishments,
     based on the results of the pilot program initiated in FY 1999.
     FDA and USDA will, through contracts and partnerships with states, industry, and others,
     conduct education activities promoting use of safe food preparation, storage, and
     distribution practices by retail food service workers and by the food transportation industry.

     FDA will evaluate food service HACCP pilots initiated in FY 1999, expand and refine this
     pilot program based on the evaluations, and conduct a pilot program using the recently
     developed Recommended National Retail Food Regulatory Program standards. These
     standards were developed in conjunction with the Conference of Food Protection which
     includes membership from all states, and the District of Columbia, as well as
     representation from industry and consumer groups.

     FDA will expand behavioral research, to identify barriers for safe food preparation
     practices by the retail food sen;ice industry, that can help guide the design of more
     effective training programs and materials. USDA will develop educational programs to
     provide Meat and Poultry HACCP education and training to small retailers.

     FDA and USDA will continue to form and support partnerships and alliances, such as the
     Partnership for Food Safety Education and the Food Service Training and. Education
     Alliance.

  Animal Drug Use

     FDA will develop and expand educational partnership agreements with state and local
     agencies to address appropriate use of drugs in food animals and disseminate materials
     developed in FY 1998 and 1999 on minimizing the occurrence of drug residues in edible
     animal tissues.

     FDA will work with veterinary practltloners, producer groups, and veterinary medical
     schools to increase awareness of food safety issues related to the use of animal drugs and
     feeds through exhibit programs, satellite teleconferences, town hall meetings, and industry
     workshops.

     FDA will work cooperatively with veterinarians, producers, and other stakeholders to
     encourage development of recommendations on prudent use of antimicrobials and support
     educational strategies to encourage implementation.

Consumers

     USDA and FDA will increase efforts to integrate research and education through
     technology transfer (see Research) and the development of educational programs that focus



                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                               29
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
       knowledge base.

  -    USDA, FDA, and CDC will expand educational programs for consumers that focus on
       the role of the consumer in ensuring and improving the safety of the nation's food supply
       through the Partnership for Food Safety Education and other mechanisms. Efforts to
       reach vulnerable segments of the population with targeted education will be expanded.

Producers

  -    USDA, working with FDA, will increase efforts to provide domestic fruit and vegetable
       growers education and outreach on how to minimize contamination of their crops and use
       FDA's GAP/GMP guidance for the microbial risk from fresh fruits and vegetables.

  -    USDA and FDA will develop educational programs for veterinarians on how to function
       as auditors or certifiers of best management practices for livestock production units for
       pathogen reduction in animals.

  -     USDA and FDA will develop educational programs and provide them to producers on the
      . management systems needed to reduce or eliminate specific pathogens that can cause
        human illness through contamination of food products.

  Health Professionals

  -    CDC, working with FDA, will develop appropriate education and training materials based
       on analysis of the FY 1999 survey results of training needs for food safety professionals at
       state and local environmental health agencies and begin plans for delivery of needed
       training.

  -    CDC, working with FDA and USDA, will develop and deliver standardized distance-based
       training on food microbiology to laboratorians in states and territorial public health
       laboratories to assist in identification of foodborne pathogens associated with diarrheal
       illness through the National Laboratory Training Network in collaboration with the
       Association of Public Health Laboratories.

       CDC will provide distance-based training programs in foodbome disease prevention
       targeted to public health nurses nationwide through the Public Health Training Network.

  School Children

  -    CDC, FDA, and USDA will broaden the dissemination of school-based food safety
       education programs and include teacher enhancement programs. Much of this will be
       done in cooperation with the Partnership on Food Safety Education.

                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                30

                                            1998       1999             2000       Proposed
                                           Approp.    Budget         Proposal       Increase
EDUCATION
                                                      Dollars in Thousands

USDA:
 Cooperative State Research, Education,
    and Extension Service                   $2,365      $7,365           $8,287        $922
 Food Safety and Inspection Service              0       2,500            2,720         220
 Food And Nutrition Service                      0       2,000            2,000           0
 Office of the Chief Economist                  38          38               38           0
 Economic Research Service                  . 420          420              420        __ 0

        Subtotal, USDA                       2,823      12,323           13,465         1,142

HHS:
 Food and Drug Administration               6,870       10,470           15,170        4,700
 Centers for Disease Control                __  0       --.2QQ           --.2QQ        __  0

        Subtotal, HHS                        6,870      10970            15,670         4,700


TOTAL, Education




                                                               AtttoH1ated Rec rds M
                                                               Hex jj'   ..' 0          anagement System
                                                                   - Iiliip COli version




                                            31

Building on the progress made in research currently underway, research in FY 2000 will focus
on filling gaps in data required to support development of additional preventive control
mechanisms and on the development of more, rapid detection methods. Translation of science
from theory to practice will be another focus.       Working with the private sector, including
academia, the agencies will develop, validate, and evaluate the safety of simple techniques for
consumers, retail food service establishments, and small businesses to use in enhancing food
safety.   Producers of food animals and fresh fruits and vegetables are increasingly aware of the
role production practices play in the safety of foods and that they must be more involved in
reducing the opportunity for contamination by pathogens of fecal origin, whether from domestic
or wild animal species or human beings. Effective methods of handling and treating poultry,
swine, and cattle manure during production will prevent transmission of pathogens to agricultural
lands and to crops used for human food, and will help prevent possible distribution of pathogens
to crops or other animals from surface runoff and irrigation waters.

For some foodborne illnesses, the causative agent is never identified.. This may be due to the
lack of a detection method for the pathogen or for the pathogen in the specific food matrix.
Research will be conducted to determine the proportion of outbreaks for Which the etiologic
agent remains unknown and create a research base to begin identifying the agents.
Development of detection methods and preventive methods for foodborne pathogens will
continue. The budget request will support research to develop and assess new technologies to
prevent antibiotic resistance in pathogens and to develop methods. to detect resistant pathogens in
milk, meat, eggs, animal feeds, feces, and the environment.

The fundamental work in areas identified as critical to improving food safety will be expanded to
develop more accurate, rapid detection methods for pathogens, particularly pathogens that no
methods exist for, more effective intervention strategies to control microbial contamination,
determine factors underlying microbial resistance to traditional preservation techniques and
modify techniques accordingly, and understand and minimize the occurrence of antibiotic
resistance in pathogens. Research associated with fresh produce will continue on its accelerated
schedule as described in the interagency multi-year research plan.

Coordination Strategy

All food safety research will be coordinated through the Joint Institute on Food Safety Research
which, it is anticipated, will become operational October 1, 1999. USDA, FDA, and CDC will
continue to work with other food safety agencies, under the auspices of the Joint Institute on
Food Safety Research, to develop and implement an overall interagency research plan that will be
responsive to the public health needs of the regulatory agencies and improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of foodborne outbreak response.

FY 2000 Activities                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
  Improved Detecdon Methods


                                                32
    technology research; refine methods already developed to make them more user-friendly,
    adaptable to field-use situations, and better able to identify specific pathogens rather than
    just fecal contamination, as well as develop better sampling techniques to enhance
    detection of pathogens that occur sporadically at low levels on food.

-   CDC, FDA, and USDA will further improve diagnostic methods for Cyclospora,
    Cryptospoddium, or Campylobacter and develop methods for other newly identified
    human foodborne pathogens and for Norwalk-like caliciviruses to support surveillance and
    targeted case-control studies.

-   CDC will determine the proportion of foodborne outbreaks for which the causative agent
    is unknown, and create a research base to begin identifying the agents.

    USDA, working with FDA, will establish culture collections of resistant and non-resistant
    bacterial and fungal pathogens to facilitate identification and traceback of the pathogens to
    their source (e.g., environment, manure, water, animal feed).

    FDA will expand its ongoing research on the development of methods for detecting
    foodborne pathogens in animal feeds.

-   CDC will define reservoirs or external life cycles of foodborne pathogens, including the
    reservoir of Cyclospora, as a basis for devising strategies for preventing pathogen
    contamination at the production level.

Technology Transfer

    FDA will collaborate with other agencies and the private sector, at the National Center for
    Food Safety and Technology (NCFST) and the Joint Institute for Food Safety and Applied
    Nutrition (JIFSAN) and with academia, to translate preventive technologies and techniques
    developed into appropriate versions for use by small industry and consumers.

    FDA, CDC, and USDA will expand mechanisms to transfer technologies to states, small
    and large industry, foreign governments, consumers, and others.

Antibiotic Resistance

-   USDA and FDA will determine the concentration, length of use, and other selective factors
    or conditions favoring the acquisition and dissemination of resistance genes among
    pathogens and non-pathogens in food producing animals. Basic information will be
    developed using chemostat model systems, on the time and dose dependency of various
    antibiotics that favor the emergence of resistant organisms in the gastrointestinal tract of
    food animal species. The dynamics of development and persistence of antimicrobial (e~g.,

                                                             Aut!ltnated~e~ords Management System
                                                             ltelc.JjUfup GOrlversion
                                             33
    used to develop detection methods and preventive strategies.

-   USDA and FDA will develop technologies and controls, including competitive exclusion,
    that will prolong the usefulness of antibiotics for both human and animal use, and prevent
    food products of animal origin from being carriers of resistant organisms.

-   USDA and FDA will determine how antibiotic resistance iIi bacteria may be transferred
    among different bacterial populations.
-   CDC will define reservoirs or external life cycles of pathogens, including the impact of low
    doses of antibiotics on the spread of Shiga toxin E coli 0157:H7 in cattle, as a basis for
    devising strategies for preventing pathogen contamination (including antimicrobial resistant
    pathogens in food animals) at the production level.

    USDA and FDA will determine the effectiveness of best management practices
    interventions in the production setting related to control of antibiotic usage in food
    animals. This knowledge will also be used to develop educational programs for
    producers (see Education).

-   USDA will establish culture collections of resistant and non-resistant bacterial and fungal
    pathogens. These resources will be used to develop molecular characterization methods
    to facilitate the identification of the resistant bacterial pathogens detected in food products,
    and the tracing of these organisms to their source (e.g., environment, manure, water,
    animal feed).

Pathogen Control, Reduction) and Elimination

-   USDA will design effective control programs for zoonotic bacteria and parasites. This
    pre-harvest research will develop practical and economical pathogen reduction processes
    for manure from food producing animals. Different processes are needed and will be
    developed for each major type of animal production facility, and the processes will be
    suitable to farm size and manure production levels ,and have well-defined process
    parameters.

-   USDA will determine how bacteria and fungi normally' present on plants influence the
    growth and survivability of human pathogens that may be present. Data will be
    developed on the characteristics of fruits and vegetables, such as the presence of inhibitors
    of normal surface flora on fresh fruits and vegetables, associated with high quality products
    that resist growth of pathogens.

-   USDA, through grants, will facilitate epidemiologic studies to determine risk factors in the
    production of livestock or fresh fruits and vegetables that are related to the presence of
    specific organisms in the digestive tract of animals and the subsequent shedding of these
    organisms in the feces. Further work will focus on the production management practices

                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                               34
        methodologies facilitated through demonstration or extension efforts.

        FDA and USDA will expand research to develop technologies to control pathogens on
        fruits and vegetables, including proper handling procedures, rinses, and other procedures
        to reduce pathogen population on fresh-cut produce.

  Food Handling, Distribution, and Storage

        USDA will investigate the ecology of foodborne pathogens during handling, distribution,
        and storage, particularly of fresh fruits and vegetables, to determine sources of
        contamination and factors that increase the risk of disease transmission.

        USDA will extend product contamination studies to the distribution and storage phase of
        the food supply, evaluate the management practices that are determined to be most
        effective in initial experiments by monitoring field experiments, and facilitate the transfer of
        new methodologies through demonstration or extension efforts.

Other

        CDC will evaluate the economic impact of foodborne illness by conducting studies to
        document the economic burden of foodborne illness.

                                          Summary Budget -- Research

                                                     1998       1999            2000     Proposed
                                                    Approp.    Budget        Proposal     Increase
          RESEARCH
                                                               Dollars in Thousands

          USDA:
           Agricultural Research Service             $50,351    $64,001        $71,701       $7,700
           Cooperative State Research, Education,
             and Extension Service                    6,250      10,438         12,151       1,713
           Agricultural Marketing Service            __   0       6.257          6.257       __  0

                  Subtotal, USDA                      56,601     80,696         90,109        9,413

          HHS:
           Food and Drug Administration               27,193     36,393         43293


          TOTAL, Research




                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                       Hclt-Dump Conversion


                                                     35

Agencies will be conducting microbial risk assessments as a routine matter in making food safety
policy decisions and prioritizing public health risks. In the pre-harvest production area, data will
be generated on which to base predictive models for the risk of transmission of zoonotic
pathogens through farm management systems to the presentation of the animals for slaughter and
the transmission of zoonotic parasites through farm management systems, animal manure, and
water run off. Work will be expanded in the collection of data about the number of
microorganisms present in food associated with an outbreak and characteristics of individuals
who ate the food, but did not become ill, in an effort to determine dose-response relationships
for specific pathogens.

A study of production techniques used by fresh fruit and vegetable producers will produce some
of the type of data needed for development of intervention technologies, as well as risk
assessments to determine the need for more specific Good Agricultural/Good Manufacturing
Practices guidance. Fundamental research to develop risk assessment techniques will expand as
the growing use of strategies based on risk assessments alerts food safety officials to additional
hazards in the food supply.

Coordination Strategy

The identification of critical information needs in risk assessment and setting methodological
priorities will be coordinated through the interagency Risk Assessment Consortium formed in FY
1998.

FY 2000 Activities

  Risk Assessment Consortium

        FDA, CDC, USDA and other participants, will continue to build and expand the
        cooperative base of the Risk Assessment Consortium to identify critical needs for
        development of microbial risk assessment techniques applicable to a wide range of foods
        and to meet the requirements of agencies participating in the consortium. The Consortium
        will evaluate how risk assessment can be used in priority setting, particularly for emerging
        pathogens.

        FDA, USDA, CDC and other participants will expand the risk assessment clearinghouse
        to better establish government, industry, academic partnerships.

  Risk Assessments

        FDA will conduct risk assessments of priority microbiological safety concerns as a matter
        of routine.


                                                             Automated Records l\fanagement System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                 36
    integrate risk assessment into development of HACCP programs, as appropriate, for
    various commodities.

    FDA will increase the number of risk assessments performed for antimicrobial products as
    part of the pre-approval food safety evaluation from 2 to 3 per year.

Modeling

    FDA, USDA, CDC and other agencies at the Consortium will develop models suitable for
    answering complex questions related to food safety issues, such as evaluating the relative
    effectiveness of risk management options or regulatory policies.

    USDA will develop a system that will contain data banks with models for the growth
    rates, lag times, survival, thermal inactivation, and radiation inactivation, as appropriate for
    additional pathogens. For post-harvest operations, it will contain information on normal
    contamination levels in raw food ingredients and food composition parameters (pH, water
    activity and processing). For pre-harvest operations it will contain data describing risk of
    various food animal production and transportation practices and interventions. These data
    banks will be made available to other agencies.

    FDA will evaluate the effectiveness of integrating individual food production, processing,
    and consumption models to develop process pathway models for various foods.

-   USDA and FDA will initiate studies and gather data on the incidence and number of
    pathogens on food producing animals at various critical· stages in production and
    management systems. With this data the research will develop predictive models for the
    risk of transmission of zoonotic pathogens· through farm management systems to the
    presentation of the animals for slaughter, and ultimately, to consumers. In addition to
    production practices, microbiological and animal behavioral data on various systems used
    for transporting swine will be generated and evaluated in relation to the subsequent
    contamination of the animals at slaughter. The research will also develop predictive
    models for the risk of transmission of zoonotic parasites through farm management
    systems, animal manure, and water run off.

    FDA will initiate mechanisms to transfer technologies and models developed for risk
    assessment to states, industry, foreign governments, and other users.

Dose-Response Assessments

    USDA will enter into cooperative agreements with 5 States to collect food specimens
    during investigations of foodborne disease epidemics. FDA will expand work to collect
    data about the level of contamination in foods associated with outbreaks and characteristics
    of people who ate the food but didn't become ill.         Information at the local level is
    necessary to accurately determine the exposure to pathogens in suspect foods. USDA
                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                               37           Hex-Dump Conversion
      information to support selection of appropriate dose-response model forms that will be
      used to assist the agency in determining acceptable pathogen levels on/in regulated meat,
      poultry, and egg products.


Exposure Assessment

  -   FDA will continue to extramurally fund research that expands the scope of exposure
      assessment and dose-response and other types of research that feed into the development
      of risk assessment techniques and models.

      FDA will make available to the food safety community, through technology transfer
      mechanisms, user-friendly software developed for predictive microbiology and risk
      assessment as a result of work conducted at the Consortium.

  Fruit and Vegetable Survey

  -   USDA will use as a base of data to establish a baseline of agricultural practices for fresh
      produce a FY 1999 pilot study to be conducted in California and New Yark, which will
      provide information for the final design of materials and plans. These two pilot States
      were chosen based on distinct differences in crops grown, growing conditions, and
      agricultural practices.

  -   USDA will conduct a statistical survey of approximately 10,000 fruit and vegetable
      growers, as well as fruit and vegetable packing houses, to establish a baseline for good
      agricultural practices as they relate to microbial food safety issues. It would be conducted
      in major fruit and vegetable States which account for nearly 85 percent of the nation's
      acreage.     The survey would consist of core questions covering water, manure
      management, facility sanitation, worker sanitation and hygiene, and transportation
      practices. The survey would also include questions related to specific practices and the
      related cost data to allow the calculation of associated costjbenefit analyses.

  -   USDA will provide the statistical survey data to FDA for use in providing guidance to
      industry to reduce the microbial risk from fresh fruits and vegetables.

                                    Summary Budget -- Risk Assessment

                                                    1998           1999           2000     Proposed
                                                   Appro.         Budget                  . Increase
        RISK ASSESSMENf                                       ------~------~------~I
                                                                Dollars in Thousands
                                                                            .
        USDA:
          Agricultural Research Service            $4,498         $4,818         $7,218     $2,400
          Cooperative State Research, Education,
             and Extension Service                      150        1,962         1,962            0
          Food Safety and Inspection Service             o         1,000         2,000        1,000
                                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                   38
                                                                           Hex-Dwnp Conversion
  National Agricultural Statistics Service         0      0       2,500        2,500
  Office of the Chief Economist              ~         ~          ~                0

           Subtotal, USDA                     4,741    8,624      14,524       5,900

HHS:
 Food and Drug Administration                 6,539    JJn2       16.439       '2.700


TOTAL, Risk Assessment




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion




                                             39


