RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedmah/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-NOV-1998 18:16:19.00

SUBJECT:   CPSC fyi

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
CPSC got the research money they wanted and is very grateful for our work
in getting it ...
·
    RECORD TYPE; PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR; Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME;23-NOV-1998 17;26;13.00

    SUBJECT;   corporate welfare

    TO: WEINSTEIN P@Al@CD@VAXGTWY      WEINSTEIN P@Al@CD@VAXGTWY @ VAXGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1 )   (0
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ;UNKNOWN

    TO; Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    None of these is totally satisfying, but my bet is that it's only a matter
    of time before
    Rahm reads this and asks the President to order us to develop a lawsuit to
    stop
    corporate welfare (see below).  I still wish we could do a commission
    (solution 3, below).

    Five Ways Out
                        THERE ARE SOLUTIONS TO THE
                        CORPORATE WELFARE MESS--BUT WHO
                        GOES FIRST?
                        What's a mayor to do? A major employer wants
                        to expand or build anew. Rather than simply
                        doing so, the corporation stirs up a bidding war to
                        see which city and state will pony up the most
                        cash, loans and tax breaks in the form of
                        economic incentives. If you're .the mayor and the
                        facility means jobs and income for your town, do
                        you play hardball and risk losing the plant and
                        the jobs? Or do you give in and hand out tax
                        money, only to face a never-ending string of
                        similar demands from others?

                         Right now it's not much of a debate; the mayors
                         cave.

                        The eagerness with which many states and cities
                        routinely cancel taxes and distribute free services
                        and grants to corporations puts enormous
                        pressure on every other public official to do the
                        same--even those who don't want to.

                        TIME has found many public officials deeply
                        upset at the ultimate cost of the giveaways to
                        their communitie's. Inevitably, tax rebates to a
                        selected few lead to higher taxes for others and
                        to cutbacks in essential services.              '

                        Can anything be done to stop the inequities?
                        Absolutely.

                        But first,    forget about cooperative agreements


                    among states to stop the war of incentives.
                    They've been tried, and they don't work. In
                    October 1991, New York City, New York State,
                    New Jersey and Connecticut agreed that a series
                    of costly bidding wars to attract corporations was
                    ruinous for all concerned. The four governments
                    signed what was described as a nonaggression
                    pact. Less than a year later, the truce was in
                    tatters. New Jersey fired the first shot;. among its
                    targets was the New York Mercantile Exchange,
                    which it tried to entice across the Hudson to
                    Jersey City. Piqued New York City officials
                    groused that because of New Jersey's wooing,
                    the city was forced to come up with an extra $30
                    million to keep the exchange in Manhattan.

                    Next, in January 1994, New Jersey's newly
                    elected Governor, Christine Todd Whitman, and
                    New York's new mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, both
                    Republicans, promised to end the border war.
                    "We're not interested in stealing from each
                    other," Whitman said.

                    But then, in September of that year, in what a
                    deputy of Giuliani's called a "shameless raid,"
                    Connecticut lured Swiss Bank Corp. from
                    Manhattan to suburban Stamford with $120
                    million worth of incentives.

                    Today, seven years after the first cease-fire, there
                    isn't even a pretense of a truce. The latest poker
                    game revolves around the new home of the New
                    York Stock Exchange. Now in cramped quarters
                    on Wall Street, the exchange has hinted that
                    cheaper New Jersey real estate looks awfully
                    good to it. In a knee-jerk spasm, New York City
                    and State offered $600 million in incentives--more
                    than twice the amount ever offered to keep a
                    company in New York--to keep the exchange in
                    Manhattan.

                    Which brings us to:

                     Solution No. 1 for ending corporate welfare at the
                    ·state and local level: the levying of a federal
                     excise tax on incentives. Under this proposal,
                     Congress would enact a law imposing a tax
                     equal to the value of the economic incentives
                     granted to a company. In other words, if New
                     York City and State governments were to give
                     $600 million to the New York Stock Exchange,
                     the Federal Government would hit the stock
                     exchange with a $600 million federal tax. Hence
                     no more value to economic incentives. No more
                     bidding wars among governments.

                    "You. have to make the tax confiscatory, a 100%
                    tax, to take away the incentive," says Arthur J.
                    Rolnick, senior vice president of the Federal
                    Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minn. "Then


                    there's no reason for a company to come
                    knocking at your door. Some [public officialsl
                    have criticized [this ideal, saying, 'We don't want
                    another tax.' And we tell them, 'This is a tax
                    you'll never have to collect.'"

                    The Federal Government has the authority to
                    impose such a tax under the commerce clause
                    of the Constitution, which gives Congress the
                    power "to.regulate Commerce with foreign
                    nations, and among the several states."




                    SPECIAL REPORT/CORPORATE WELFARE
                    NOVEMBER 30, 1998 VOL. 152 NO. 22

                    PAGE 1      2     3
                    That doesn't mean it would be easy. There would
                    be strong opposition from the corporate-welfare
                    bureaucracy: the tens of thousands of
                    economic-development specialists, consultants,
                    lawyers, accountants, conference planners and
                    others who earn their living by giving away
                    taxpayer dollars. Accounting and consulting firms
                    in particular, says ohio State.Senator Charles
                    Horn, work "both sides of the fence." They help
                    communities dream up incentive programs, then
                    bring them clients to collect the incentives.

                    What happens if Congress lacks the will?

                    Solutlon No. 2 A lawsuit to have incentives
                    declared unconstitutional. Legal scholars believe
                    the practice violates the Constitution's commerce
                    clause. Indeed, the Supreme Court has said as
                    much in several cases. In 1977, for example, the
                    court struck down a New York law that provided
                    for lower taxes on securities transactions
                    processed by brokers in New York. The state
                    pleaded that it needed the tax break to keep
                    brokerages around. The·court didn't buy it.

                    Even groups that usually oppose federal oversight
                    of local affairs are calling for it in this case. The
                    nonpartisan John Locke Foundation, a libertarian
                    think tank in Raleigh, N.C., is a case in point.
                    "We are a sort of right-of-center conservative
                    organization, and what we are basically arguing
                    is that the Federal Government should intervene,"
                    says John Hood, president of the foundation,
                    which is readying a federal lawsuit to challenge
                    state subsidies as violations of interstate
                    commerce.

                    Hood says it's personally "troublesome" for him
                    to call for a federal solution, but he ~nd others in
                    the foundation have come. to believe it's the only
                    way to end state subsidies to favored


                    businesses.

                    Corporate welfare at the state and local level
                    would end if either the Locke Foundation's
                    proposed lawsuit succeeded or Congress
                    accepted the suggestion of the Minneapolis
                    Federal Reserve's Rolnick and enacted an excise
                    tax. But what about all the incentives the Federal
                    Government passes out? Many members of
                    Congress, after all, build their careers on
                    government handouts to corporations, which add
                    up to two weekly paychecks for every working
                    person in America every year.

                    solution No. 3 Creation of a special commission
                    that would study federal programs and propose
                    which should be scrapped. That list would go to
                    Congress, which would be forced to vote either to
                    kill or preserve the programs listed.

                    In 1997, Senator John McCain of Arizona, along
                    with other Senators, introduced legislation calling
                    for the creation of an independent federal
                    commission to eliminate "unnecessary and
                    inequitable·federal subsidies" to private industry.
                    Both Congress and the President would be
                    required to· act on the recommendations of the
                    commission--either by accepting them or
                    rejecting them. "Unless Congress is forced to act
                    to eliminate programs, it will not," McCain noted
                    when he introduced the bill. "Perhaps
                    independent commissions are the only fair way
                    to ensure that neither side is given an advantage
                    to protect its ... corporate pork."

                    Of course, any such effort will be greeted with
                    stiff opposition from yet another entrenched
                    bureaucracy. Those are the agencies,
                    departments and special-interest groups that
                    profit from the existing system. There would be a
                    spirited fight led by large corporations to preserve
                    the Exim Bank, the Overseas Private Investment
                    Corp. and the Foreign Sales Corporations, to
                    name just three.


                    Solution No. 4 Shut off the flow of low-cost loans
                    from the Department of Housing and Urban
                    Development that have helped fuel the
                    competition to snag companies. These loans
                    date from the Housing and Community
                    Development Act of 1974 and were aimed at
                    "eliminating slums and blight." Today, TIME has
                    found, HUD loans help bankroll such projects as
                    a waterfront restaurant in Jacksonville, Fla. (it
                    later went out of business), a downtown hotel in
                    Philadelphia and an upscale fashion retailer in
                    Spokane, Wash. In that case, a $24 million HUD
                    loan arranged by the city of Spokane will go to
                    construct a new store and enlarge a parking
·
                        garage for Nordstrom Inc.

                        And if these four solutions are rejected?

                        solution No. 5 is rooted in what has become the
                        American way of late: sue. That's the course
                        advocated by Dwight D. Brannon, a Dayton,
                        Ohio, lawyer, who is suing state and local
                        officials and a onetime Dayton-based company
                        on behalf of its former workers.

                        The company is Hobart Corp., part of an
                        international conglomerate with sales of $2.4
                        billion in 1997. Hobart produces commercial
                        equipment for food preparation. Ever since the
                        Great Depression, the company had operated a
                        plant in Dayton. But in 1995, Hobart pulled up
                        stakes and moved 30 miles to the north, to
                        Piqua, Ohio, which offered $2 million in
                        incentives. In July, the company informed its 66
                        hourly employees in Dayton, many of whom had
                        worked at the plant for years--their average age
                        was 52--that their jobs would be terminated in
                        three days. According to the suit, Hobart staffed
                        the new location with part-time workers--average
                        age 34--from a temporary firm.

                        During a hearing in the lawsuit pending in u.s.
                        District Court in Dayton, the company's lawyer
                        explained it this way: "Every action [Hobart] has
                        taken is motivated by sound economic or
                        operational rationale."

                        Exactly. And until governments figure out a way
                        to end the practice, corporate welfare will flourish.
                        END

                        PAGE   1    2     3
