RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mike Cohen   <mikec~20904@yahoo.com>   ( Mike Cohen <mikec_20904@yahoo.com> [ U

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-NOV-1998 10:40:52.00

SUBJECT:   education item for weekly

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I realized last night that I forgot to give you the ESEA item you
requested yesterday. Here it is. please "respond to let me knowif you
receive this or have any difficulty with it, since its the first
e-mail I've sent from home.

ESEA Reauthorization.   DPC staff met with Education Department staff
to review the
Department?s progress in developing an ESEA reauthorization proposal.
Education?s approach
overall is to maintain the fundamental focus throughout ESEA programs
on helping students
reach high standards and, for the most part, to maintain the current
programs (though they and we
are unsure how best to deal with Goals 2000).    Some small programs are
likely to be
consolidated," and Education is developing proposals to expand the role
of Title 1 in providing
preschool programs, and to create a new emphasis on improving high
school education in ESEA.
DPC is working with Education to ensure that the reauthorization
proposal provides stronger
accountability for results and more effective interventions for low
performance than current law,
more vigorously promotes public school choice, and more effectively
ensures that program funds
are used tO,support educational practices that work. We are also
working to ensure that positions
you have previously taken on strengthening bilingual education and the
Safe and Drug Free
Schools Program are fully incorporated into the reauthorization
proposal.   Together with the
Education Department we are developing a strategy to place a greater
and more effective
emphasis on improving the quality of teaching, especially in high
poverty schools, though we are
not yet clear on how best to achieve this. DPC, OMB and Education
believe it is important to
transmit a proposal to Congress shortly after the next session
begins. To accomplish this,
Education will have to significantly speed up its work.    To help move
this along, we will provide
ED with detailed proposals on key issues,   review Education?s progress
again the week after
Thanksgiving, and establish a process for completing major policy
decisions by the end of this
year.




DO YOU YAHOO!?
Get your free @yahoo.com address at http://mail.yahoo.com


