RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-NOV-1998 18:51:33.00
            ,
SUBJECT:   Strategic Plan on Native American economic development

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a draft of the strategic plan on Native American economic
development that was required as the result of the President's memorandum
at the economic development conference on August 6.  The centerpiece of
the plan is a tollfree number to provide assistance on economic
development across all agencies.

We still need to do some minor editing on this draft and vet it through
Interior, SBA, and Commerce. However, the. agencies plan on sending this
to the President sometime next week.   Let me know if you have any comments
on the draft. Thanks, Mary
=============.======= ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D61]MAIL459356030.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D8070000010A020100000002050000008210000000020000A9A73AE47EE3FAB8518EB3
E756638C070E28F063ED66D79FFF6D2F967AC45656B46DE9CBFA3CB5F7E7782A81ED930CBFAD39
AF878E9718AA4B11F34A327A1AEBOB9E8AAF6EDA9E49FDF6FC62892E948F4B5AABFD392686B873
OC55E3BDF903F5D385FC5B64EB1CC4E3AC9A84C13FBDD45E840A727D6C295263BC8E08B8COOD5E
52D9BFA58F1FCF04049350F5A29B69DD9FB5EB472746795ABCF14152EC5BDC4F935DCC0190CDA7
3439DAF6DF35BD5F53395CE55COAOC6C3DD4886D2A16782EA9E7592C6B4A6090027687A4A0127A




December 14, 1998



The Honorable William Jefferson Clinton
The White House
Washington, D.C. 20500

Dear Mr. President:

Attached is our joint report, as requested in your August 6, 1998, Memorandum, regarding the
development of a Federal strategic plan for coordinating existing economic development
initiatives for Native Americans and Alaska Native communities. The report articulates the
components ofthe plan, which includes the identification of current actions and the proposal of
future actions that will improve Federal coordination, increase tribal access to Federal economic
development information and assistance, increase economic opportunities within tribal
                                       .
communities, and identify gaps in the. delivery of Federal economic development assistance.

The report reflects our consultation with the Domestic Policy Council, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and the Department of Housing and Urban Development. After your review and
approval ofthe report, our next steps will be to implement the current actions identified and to
develop further the identified future actions.

We are confident that our proposal will further your goal to improve Federal coordination in the
area of economic development as well as meet the needs ofthe agencies, tribal communities, the
private sector and non-profit community that is working to do build strong tribal economies.

Sincerely,




William M. Daley                     Bruce Babbitt                    Aida Alvarez
Secretary of Commerce                      .
                                     Secretary of Interior
                                                        .
                                                                      Administrator, Small
                                                                      Business Administration

Enclosure
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

                                     Economic Development in Indian Country

                                              Joint Report to the President

                                                    December 14, .1998


      Executive Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2

      I. Introduction....................................................... · 3

        II. Increasing Access to Federal Programs and Initiatives. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5

           III.    Increasing Economic Development Opportunities in Tribal Communities . . 7

        IV.       Going Forward: Identifying and Addressing Gaps . .................... 9

              V.    Closing ......... : .............................................. .
.10

Appendices

        A.         President Clinton's Memorandum for the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of
                   Housing and Urban Development, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of
                   the Treasury and Administrator of the Small Business Administration, August 6,
                   1998

        B.         FY 2000 Proposal for a Native American Economic Development Access Center




                                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


                                                              -1-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

On August 6, 1998, President Clinton directed the Department of Interior (DOl), the Department
of Commerce (DOC), and the Small Business Administration (SBA) to report back within 90
days with a strategic plan for coordinating Federal existing economic development initiatives for
Native American and Alaska Native communities, including initiatives involving the private
sector. In developing the plan, DOl, DOC and SBA were further directed to consult with all
interested parties, including tribal governments and other Federal agencies and offices -
particularly, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (RUD), Department of
Transportation (DOT), and Department of Agriculture (DOA). Under the Memorandum, DOl,
DOC and SBA have joint leadership in the development and implementation of the plan and will
use existing and propose new resources to support the elements of the plan.

Based on the work to date of the Subcommittee on Economic Development under The White
House Domestic Policy Council Working Group on American Indians and Alaska Natives,
including the conference on Bringing Economic Self-Determination to Indian Comn1Unities, this
document articulates a plan in response to the President's Memorandum that is aimed to improve
coordination among Federal agencies by (1) increasing access to Federal economic development
programs and assistance, (2) increasing opportunities in tribal communities and (2) identifying
and addressing gaps in the delivery of Federal economic development assistance. Appendix A is.
the Presidential Memorandum on Economic Development in American Indian and Alaska Native
Communities, which provides the backdrop for the plan. Appendix B is the detailed proposal
for the Native American Economic Development Access Center.

The ultimate goal of the plan is to improve the coordination of Federal economic development
programs and initiatives, thereby, increasing the effectiveness of, and access to, such programs in
Indian country.




                                                                   AutomatedR
                                                                   Hex-D      ecords Management System
                                                                         ump Conversion




                                               -2-

I. INTRODUCTION

Commitment to Promote Indian Economic Development

The Clinton Administration has worked hard to honor tribal sovereignty and strengthen
government-to-government relations with Indian tribes. Yet, too often, as America moves
forward, American Indians-and Alaska Natives have been left outside mainstream economic
progress. Today, the Bureau of Indian Affairs reports that 49% of adult reservation Indians are
without full-time work. The President and the Congress have made clear that economic
self-determination is an essential element of Indian self-determination. See Executive
Memorandum on Economic Development in American Indian and Alaska Native communities,
dated August 6,1998; 25 U.S.c. § 1451 et seq. (congressional statement of national policy).
The Departments of Commerce, Interior and the Small Business Administration are committed to
using existing resources and authorities to the fullest to assist Indian tribes to achieve economic
self-determination, see ~ 25 U.S.C. §§ 47,450 (e) (b), 1542-1544, and, where appropriate and
necessary, to seek additional resources to help tribes establish reservation economies to a point
where the average Indian standard ofliving is comparable to the national standard ofliving.

Establishment of the Inter-Agency Subcommittee on Economic Development

In February, 1998, The White House Domestic Policy Council Working Group on American
Indians and Alaskan Natives, chaired by Secretary of Interior Bruce Babbitt, established a
Subcommittee on Economic Development. The Subcommittee aims to (1) promote
coordination among Federal agencies with existing economic development responsibilities; (2)
increase access to Federal economic development programs and initiatives by the tribes and
Indian owned businesses; and (3) build awareness about other Federal programs and initiatives
that are supportive oftribal economic development efforts.

Several meetings ofthe Subcommittee were held during Spring 1998. Nearly a dozen agencies
were identified as having programs and initiatives that directly or indirectly impact economic
development in Indian country. The Subcommittee recognized the difficulty faced by tribes and
Indian-owned businesses in trying to locate and access this wide range of Federal assistance.
Also recognized was that many synergies exist between the diverse programs and initiatives, and
that each agency's efforts to serve Indian country would be strengthened by effective
coordination at the Federal level. In learning about the new programs and initiatives that some
agencies planned to introduce in 1998, the Subcommittee decided to organize a national
conference that would showcase these and other existing Federal initiatives, as well as highlight
initiatives by the private sector and tribal and Indian-owned business success stories.




                                               -3-             Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dwnp Conversion

White House Conference on Economic Development

The conference, Building Economic Self-Determination in Indian Communities, was held August
5-6, 1998, in Washington, D.C. Sponsoring agencies included The White House, Departments
of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban
Development, Interior, Justice, Labor, Transportation, Treasury, the Indian Health Service, the
Comptroller of the Currency, and the Small Business Administration. Panel sessions covered
Indian country success stories; building infrastructure and a positive climate for business;
expanding business opportunities; Alaska Native economic development; rural business; banking
in Indian communities; Federal contracting opportunities. In addition, breakout sessions were
held on franchising; the Internet and electronic commerce; welfare to work initiatives; tourism;
exporting; communications and technology; diversifying tribal economies; and manufacturing.

The historic conference was attended by nearly 1,000 tribal, private sector and federal officials.
The Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Interior, Justice, Labor, and the Administrator of the
the Small Business Administration provided official addresses underscoring their agency's
commitment to opening the doors of economic opportunity to the Indian community. The
conference was highlight was a keynote address by President Clinton on August, 6, 1998, in
which he pledged the Administration's assistance on several important fronts to boost economic
development in Indian country.

President's Memorandum Calling for Improve Federal Coordination

The conference demonstrated the effectiveness of a strong, coordinated Federal effort. In order
to ensure an on-going process, President Clinton, during his address to the conference, directed
the Department of Interior, the Department of Commerce, and the Small Business Administration
to report back within 90 days with a strategic plan for

       ."coordinating existing economic development initiatives for Native American and
       Alaska Native communities, including initiatives involving the private sector. "

As the President's Memorandum directed, the Secretary of Interior, Secretary of Commerce and
the Administrator of the Small Business Administration would jointly lead the development of
the plan and consult with all interested parties, including tribal governments and other Federal
agencies and offices - particularly, the Departments of Housing and Urban Development,
Transportation and Agriculture. The plan will build upon current efforts in the agencies and
detail future efforts such as providing technical assistance, enhancing infrastructure, and
development software. Appendix A contains the President's Memorandum in its entirety.


                                                                    Automated Records Management System
Listening Session on Economic Development                           Hex·Dump Conversion
                                               -4-


In developing this plan, the Subcommittee and nearly 100 tribal officials attended a listening
session on economic development issues co-hosted by the National Congress of American
Indians and the Commerce Department's Economic Development Administration in October,
1998, in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. Among other things, the tribal officials highlighted t,he
need for Federal economic development programs and initiatives to be more easily identifiable
and accessible.

Proposed Inter-Agency Plan

In response to the President's Memorandum, and feedback from the listening session with the
tribal officials, the Subcommittee proposes the following elements that will constitute its
strategic plan:

       1.      Increasing access to Federal economic development programs and assistance;

       2.      Increasing economic development opportunities within tribal communities; and

       3.      Identifying gaps in Federal economic development efforts that may be addressed
               through administrative and/or legislative remedies.

This plan serves as a starting point for improved Federal coordination and should viewed as a
"living document" -- one that 'will be amended and modified in consultation and partnership with
Indian country.

II. INCREASING ACCESS TO FEDERAL PROGRAMS AND INITIATIVES

The most important aspects for successful economic development in Indian country is access to
information and assistance. This includes topics such as listings of available federal programs
and their use, assistance on the development of business plans and other business management
and administrative guidance, direction to private capital sources, assistance in developing
marketing, import/export initiatives and specialized individual technical assistance and training.

A. The centerpiece of the Subcommittee's plan to increase access and improve coordination
involves the following proposed actions:

~      Creation of an Information Referral Center on Economic Development. The' Bureau
       of Indian Affairs (BIA) proposes, for inclusion in the FY 2000 budget request ofthe
       President, the creation of a Native American Economic Development Access Center
       (NAEDAC). The would provide tribes, Indian-owned businesses, the private sector
       and non-profits easy access to information on a wide range of Federal economic

                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                               -5-
                                                                    'Hex-Dump Conversion
       development programs and initiatives. The new center would use a toll-free 1-800
       number, the Internet and other technology to enable easy and affordable access by the
       Indian community. The center could be modeled, in part, after the succ~ss of
       Commerce's Trade Information Center, which is a comprehensive resource for
       information on all Federal government export assistance programs. The BIA would
       create and provide the basic support for the center. Appendix Bcontains a detailed
       proposal on the functions of the center.

       Memorandum of Understanding Between Key Agencies. In order to ensure the
       effectiveness of the NAEDAC center, a Memorandum of Understanding would be
       implemented between the BIA and key federal agencies with economic development
       responsibilities. The agreement would outline the responsibilities of each agency in
       support of the NAEDAC, including the contribution of data and materials and the training
       of the center's staff on the objectives of each agency's programs.

B. The Subcommittee also has identified other actions that currently are being developed and
implemented that will help to increase access and improve coordination:

~      Inventory of Existing Federal Programs. Work is underway by members ofthe
       Subcommittee to produce a comprehensive database of all Federal economic
       development programs and initiatives impacting Indian country. The BIA will create the
       database and make it available on their web site and on CD Rom. The inventory also
       will be produced in hard copy, modeled, in part, after the success of USDA's Guide to
       USDA Programs for American Indians and Alaska Natives, which provides a
       comprehensive overview of the many important USDA programs available to tribes,
       including programs administered by the Rural Business-Cooperative Service, Rural
       Housing Service and Rural Utilities Service. The initial inventory will be completed by
       the BIA by March, 1999.

       Strengthening the Codetalk Web Site. Managed by HUD's Office of Native American
       Programs, this web site is the oldest federal web site specifically targeting Native
       Americans. Presently, the site focuses on general Indian housing issues, but is being
       revamped so that it can serve as a portal to other existing Federal resources for Native
       Americans on areas, such as welfare reform and economic development. HUD proposes
       implementing a Memorandum of Understanding with other agencies desiring to
       participate in Codetalk.

       Strengthen Cooperation Between Agency Field Efforts. The Subcommittee has
       identified the need for closer cooperation between SBA's Tribal Business Information
       Centers and the Native American Business Development Centers funded by Commerce's
       Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA). Between these two agencies, a total


                                              -6-                Automated Records :-'fanagement System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

        of approximately 22 sites are strategically located throughout Indian country, primarily in
        conjunction with the tribal college system. The centers' products and services need to be
        as comprehensive as possible and each site should contain an identical reservoir of
        information and personal assistance.

        In addition, the Subcommittee recommends that SBA and MBDA coordinate with the
        following Federal resources aimed at improving tribal economic development: USDA's
        Rural Development offices and personnel with expertise in business, community, and
        housing programs in states with large American Indian reservations; Commerce's U.S.
        Export Assistance Center, which has a team of experts in key field offices to promote
        exports by American Indian businesses, particularly in the areas of jewelry, arts and
        crafts, tourism and entertainment; and HUD's Community Buildings program.

 III. INCREASING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES IN TRIBAL
 COMMUNITIES

  The Subcommittee also has identified actions, some of which are currently being developed and
  some of which are proposed for the future, that will help to support and enhance economic
. development opportunities within tribal communities. The Subcommittee will work to ensure
  that information about these activities are disseminated throughout the Federal government and
  implemented in a coordinated fashion:

 A. The following actions are proposed by the Subcommittee to enhance opportunities within
 tribal communities:          .       .

 ~      Business Deals on Wheels Seminars. The BIA's FY 2000 proposal for the Native
        American Economic Development Access Center identifies the need for a coordinated
        effort to bring existing Federal initiatives directly to Indian communities. Because
        SBA's Tribal Business Information Centers and MBDA's Native American Business
        Development Centers are geographically stationary and sometimes hard to reach by those
        unable to travel,. a traveling business seminar would be developed by the Center and
        manned by a combination of headquarters and field agency personnel, as well as private
        resources. The seminars would consist of both general sessions and individualized
        technical assistance on a variety of topics, such as tourism, banking, etc. The seminars
        would be tailored, where possible, to the community where the seminar is taking place.

        Demonstration Program on Economic Development. HUD's Office of Native
        American Programs, as part of its FY 2000 budget, proposes a demonstration program to
        improve the utilization of the Indian Community Development Block Grant and Indian
        Housing Block Grant Program. The two programs combined represent a significant
        resource for economic or business development.

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                               -7-             HeX-Dump Conversion


       Indian Graduate Business Fellowships. The Department of Justice's Office of Native
       American Programs proposes the creation of an Indian Graduate Business Fellowships
       program in order to address the need for greater managerial and financial expertise in
       Indian country. In other fields, such as law, Federal Indian fellowship programs have
       been extremely helpful in developing qualified Indian professionals to serve the Federal
       and tribal governments as well as the private sector. Experience has shOwn that a
       targeted Federal Indian fellowship program for graduate students in business related
       fields would boost tribal human resources infrastructure and assist in long-term efforts to
       boost Indian economies. Appropriate legislation and funding would be needed to
       support the initiative, which could be modeled after the Indian Health Service's Indians
       into Medicine Program.

B. The Subcommittee also has identified the following actions that currently are being
developed and implemented that will have an impact on tribal economic development efforts:

~      Study on Lending and Investing in Indian Country. The Community Development
       Financial Institution (CDFI) Fund will be conducting a study on lending and investment
       practices on Indian reservations and other land held in trust by the United States. The
       components of the study are to (I) identify barriers to private financing; (2) identify the
       impact of such barriers on access to capital and credit for Native American popUlations;
       and (3) to submit a report to the President and Congress with the findings of the study,
       recommendations to any necessary statutory and regulatory changes to existing Federal
       programs, and policy recommendations for community development financial
       institutions, insured depository institutions, secondary market institutions, and private
       sector capital institutions. In conjunction with the study, the Fund will develop an action
       plan to determine better ways for accessing credit an lending for Native American
       communities. This action plan will be developed through a series of workshops in
       cooperation with Tribal and private sector participation.

       Handbook on "American Indian Reservations and Trust Areas." Commerce's
       Economic Development Administration (EDA) will update this publication, which is an
       important resource for persons interested in doing business on reservations. The
       handbook provides valuable economic data on all American Indian and Alaska Native
       communities. Over 5,000 copies of the 1996 version have been distributed to date.
       EDA also will make. the existing handbook available on its web site by March, 1999.

       Implementation of One-Stop Mortgage Center Initiative. Increasing
       home-ownership opportunities and access to capital in American Indian and Alaska
       Native communities was recognized by President Clinton as an integral part of economic
       development. .In early August, the President issued an Executive Order tasking HUD


                                              -8-                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
       and the Department of Treasury to partner with tribal governments, pertinent federal
       agencies and private partners, to initiate a pilot project to streamline the mortgage lending
       process in Indian country. Work is underway on the selection and start-up of the pilot
       projects.

       Protection of Native American- Intellectual Property. Commerce's Patent and
       Trademark Office (PTO) proposes to conduct a workshop on how to protect intellectual
       property through obtaining a patent or trademark. -The workshop is timely in light of
       legislation recently signed by President Clinton that directs PTO to study the protection of
       official tribal symbols from trademark infringement. The workshop would be held in
       conjunction with the annual conference of the American Indian Science and Engineering
       Society.

       Study on Tribal Technology Infrastructure. Recognizing the importance of ensuring
       that Indian communities fully participate in the new information economy, President
       Clinton's August 6 Memorandum directed the Commerce Department to conduct a study
       on the state of infrastructure technology needs. EDA will conduct the study, which is
       due for completion by May, 1999. In addition, Commerce is exploring in general how
       to help rural and urban distressed communities with a technology-based economic
       development strategy, including physical infrastructure and upgrading the skills ofthe
       local workforce.

IV. GOING FORWARD: IDENTIFYING AND ADDRESSING GAPS

In order to address the on-going need for improved Federal coordination, the Subcommittee will
continue to work on a regular basis to identify and address any gaps in the delivery of economic
development information and assistance to Indian country. As part of its deliberative process,
the Subcommittee will consider whether administrative or legislative remedies are required to
create new authority for, or remove barriers to, improving Federal tribal economic development
efforts. For example, in April, 1998, Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell introduced S. 2010, the
"Native American Business Development, Trade Promotion and Tourism Act of 1998." The
BIA's FY 2000 proposal for a Native American Economic Development Access Center is
designed, in part, to address the concerns raised by the legislation.

An important part of the Subcommittee's on-going efforts will involve building partnerships with
national organizations, such as the National Congress of American Indians and the National
Indian Business Association, in order to identify gaps and solutions in the provision of Federal
economic development assistance and to help identify specific tribal educational needs (e.g., how
to do bond structurings).

V. CLOSING                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

                                               -9-


As a result of the President's Memorandum, and the work ofthe Subcommittee to date, we are
entering a new era of Federal cooperation in the area of Indian economic development. There is
a renewed sense of excitement and urgency about building upon the progress already made at the
Building Economic Self-Determination in Indian Communities conference and moving in a
direction that will ensure that tribal communities reap the greatest benefits from Federal
economic development efforts for generations to come. Under the auspices of The White House
Domestic Policy Council Working Group on American Indians and Alaska Natives, and in
partnership with the tribes, Indian-owned businesses, the private sector, and non-profit
organizations, the members of the Subcommittee stand committed to the goals outlined in this
report and, ultimately, to bringing access to Federal economic development programs and
initiatives to a new and unprecedented level throughout Indian country.




                                                                   Automated Records M
                                                                   Hex D              anagement System
                                                                      - ump Conversion

                                            -10-

                                          APPENDIXB

                                    Bureau of Indian Affairs
                                   U.S. Department of Interior

                        Outline of the FY 2000 Budget Proposal for a
                   Native American Economic Development Access Center

Prospective clients would interface with the Center through a number of ways : (1) an Internet
web page; (2) direct telephone technical assistance via a toll-free 800-number; (3) on-site
community interaction with business specialists; (4) printed literature; and (5) documentation and
instructional CDs. Incoming inquiries would receive almost immediate feedback and response.
To make the service easier to use, the center would provide information and technical assistance
on a topical basis, so that prospective clients do not need to know the name of a specific agency
or program before utilizing the service. Specifically, the Center would have the following
components:

Internet resources - The development of a website that would house a comprehensive
inventory of available federal programs with detailed descriptions of how they may be used by
the Indian community. The database will include a user-friendly search engine that would
permit users to Clearly define their interests and the type of assistance they are seeking in order to
better focus their attention to Federal programs that can provide financial and technical
assistance. Each participating agency would have access to the BIA-operated web site where
they could enter and update the descriptions of all operating programs on a regular basis.

An online "ask the expert" module which permits users to ask specific questions about federal
programs, their use and general questions about economic ventures and opportunities in Indian
Country. Questions will be received in one central site (the Bureau of Indian Affairs) and
transmitted via e-mail to the appropriate federal agency for direct answering. Monitoring to
ensure that questions are responded to in a timely manner will be conducted by the central web
master. A permanent record of incoming questions will be maintained and used to develop user
profiles and guide future program efforts.

The web site will maintain a library of on-line resources, including links to other Federal
agency web sites that include economic development information relevant to Indian Country as
well as other private, non-profit information resources.

Telephone Assistance - Because many people do not yet have access to Internet resources, an
"800" number will be established and widely advertised for the purpose of providing direct
discussions with Tribes, Indian individuals and others with questions on doing business in Indian
Country. Calls will come into a central site (Bureau of Indian Affairs) and either will be

                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                -11-               Hex·Dump Conversion

answered directly or forwarded to an appropriate party at another federal entity where a more
precise answer may be found. A database willbe created to record general information
regarding incoming calls and the manner in which they were answered. The "800" line would
be open from 9:00 a.m. EST until 8:00 p.m. EST to ensure that coverage is available for all time .
zones.

On-site Technical Assistance - In-depth technical assistance is usually best provided in
face-to-face communications. However, many tribes and Indian individuals do not have access
to local community resources to assist them in their business development efforts. An effort to
provide for more direct technical assistance by knowledgeable federal and private resources can
greatly enhance the potential for ne~ business ventures. As outlined in the report, the center
will work to promote closer cooperation and information-sharing between SBA's and MBDA's
tribal business information centers and organize a series of on-site "Business Deals on Wheels"
semmars.

Printed Materials - Each federal agency with programs which can assist economic development
activities will provide informational brochures, pamphlets, etc., to the BIA's Center from
which the public may request general information (more specific requests such as for regulations
would be forwarded to the appropriate agency). A written version of the website containing
federal program inventory would be developed so that persons without Internet access may also
be able to have access to important Federal program information.

Instructional CD ROMs - Where appropriate, federal agencies will seek to place large volumes
of written materials, forms, application criteria, etc., on CDs which can be made available to
Tribes and individual Indians. CDs are a more efficient method for distribution of large
quantities of written information. Computer-based instructional CDs also may be developed,
which can be used as learning tools on how to conduct business in Indian Country, how to
develop business plans for Indian entrepreneurs and Tribes, and other related topics. The BIA's
"Sharing Our Dream - Doing Business in Indian Country" is an excellent example of how CD's
can be used by tribes in their marketing and other business-related efforts. Additional titles that
could be developed by the center include:

               Creating a business plan for small businesses
               Sample legal documents for Tribal governments
               Processing leases for homeowners hip (in development)
               Best practices in Indian economic development




                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                               . Hex-Dump Conversion
                                               -12-




                                            Hex D Records Management System
                                            Automated
                                               - ump Conversion




                                     -13-
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 041 - FOLDER -002


[11/27/1998 - 11/30/1998]


