RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Shannon Mason (    CN~Shannon   Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-NOV-1998 17:58:28.00

SUBJECT:   Farm Safety Net paper

TO: Lisa M. Kountoupes ( CN=Lisa M. Kountoupes/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]            )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Sylvia M. Mathews   ( CN=Sylvia M. Mathews/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]            )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elise H. Golan ( CN=Elise H. Golan/OU=CEA/O=EOP @ EOP [ CEA ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: David W. Beier ( CN=David W. Beier/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]               )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Frazierp ( Frazierp @ midusa.net @ inet [ UNKNOWN]       )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Janet L. Graves   ( CN=Janet L. Graves/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP      [ WHO]       )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Rhonda Melton ( CN=Rhonda Melton/O=Ovp @ OVP [ UNKNOwN]         )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:


Here is the revised version of the ag safety net paper.  Please review and
send any comments to Mark Weatherly with a cc to Sally Katzen COB tomorrow
(12/1). Also, please indicate your department or agency's view on each of
the options.

Thanks.==================== ATTACHMENT        1 ====================
ATT CREATION. TIME/DATE:  0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D13]MAIL457385431.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504332060000010A020100000002050000002BD80000000200003BB670CA8C2D14FBC65E51
D230ED6DDE56C70E5FCF7B66CBF2D2B521520BC446872407C33284F4EAF61816D15BABFA422ADB
26CB36BD65380FE0831DB95E8DA621BF48BB918D7EFC5BECFDBFFC1D834011BD51COB2C23F9BD4
                                                                                  11130198
                      HOW TO FIX THE FARM INCOME SAFETY NET

I.     Introduction

For more than a decade bipartisan farm policy has directed producers to seek income increasingly
from markets rather than from Federal subsidies. The 1994 Crop Insurance Reform and 1996
Farm Bills attempted to create a farm income safety net of market-oriented crop insurance and
commodity marketing loan programs, rather than ad hoc disaster, market intervention, and price
support programs. Farm income reached a record $61 billion in 1997 as export demand grew
and world commodity stocks tightened from 1995.

In 1998 in the US, regional inadequacies of crop insurance (including low coverage and
participation), weather and multi-year production problems, and nation-wide low prices for many
commodities provoked sharp criticisms ofthe 1996 Farm Bill and crop insurance. Proposals
appeared in July to revive price-setting Federal subsidy programs, mainly through raising
USDA's "marketing loan rate" to boost crop payments to farmers (see Appendix B for
discussion).

II. Administration Proposals

In response, an NEC-Ied interagency group this summer crafted a package of proposals to
address the specific areas of need throughout the nation's farmland. This included targeted
assistance for regions of need, primarily through a supplemental crop insurance benefit fOf-
multi-year losses.

Second;the President announced on July 18th the purchase and donation overseas of2.5 million
tons of wheat to boost US farm prices and to relieve hunger around the world, using existing
USDA authorities and mandatory funding. In November, the President announced an additional
food-aid package of 3.1 million tons of wheat and other commodities for Russia.

Finally, the Administration agreed to support Sens. Harkin's and Daschle's proposal to remove
the 1996 Farm Bill limitation on marketing loan rate levels.            -

III.     Status of Farmer Assistance

The Administration negotiated a $6 billion disaster assistance package in the FY 1999 Omnibus
Appropriations Bill to boost farm income. The President further charged Secretary Glickman
with addressing the "gaps" in the farm safety net that were exposed during the 1998 crop year.
Recently, the Congressional Agriculture Committees have announced their intention to address
the problems through the crop insurance program.



                                                1          Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
billion to farmers under existing authority, spending that was not projected in the FY 1998
Mid-Session Review of the Budget. The $6 billion in additional assistance should maintain farm
income in crop-year 1998 near the 1997 record level. The issue is how much enhancement does
the safety net need? Should Federal programs prevent any farmer's income from falling below
the five-year average level? Should income supplements be targeted to smaller, low-income
farmers? Total additional USDA outlays for production agriculture approved since July, above
those assumed in the FY 1999 Budget, amount to approximately $10 billion, including the costs
of the recent food-aid programs.

IV. Problems in Farm Country and Options for Dealing with Them

In its FY 2000 Budget request, USDA proposes to continue the path of the 1996 Farm Bill, and
Administration policy, by helping farmers to manage risk. It recommends a series of program
changes to: make crop insurance more attractive by covering more risk at reduced costs;
enhancing emergency programs; and expanding risk-management education. A proposal could
also re-establish the requirement that farmers purchase crop insurance, and send a message to
farmers that these increased insurance subsidies would negate the likelihood of future emergency
payments such as those provided through the FY 1999 Omnibus bill.

Gaps in the Safety Net

This section lists the five main problems with the current farm income safety net, then analyzes
the options, in addition to the USDA proposals. The options can be dialed by benefits and costs.
Also, to achieve targeting by income or gross revenues, means-testing could be overlaid on most
options.

Problem One:      Crop loss due to natural disaster -- crop insurance can fail to indemnify enough
                       ofthe loss because:
               a) Too little acreage is insured (i.e., too few farmers participate); and
               b) Insured acreage is covered at too Iowa percent of expected revenue (i.e.,
                       too little coverage is purchased by the average fiumer).

Problem Two: Multi-year crop loss due to natural disaster, where:
            a) Poor production history hurts "good" farmers by raising premiums and
            lowering the insurable yield; and
            b) Even higher, "buy-up" coverage levels, after consecutive loss years, may
            indemnify too little to sustain the farm operation.

Problem Three: Low prices nationally, as much as 40 percent below the 5-year average,
            primarily due to large harvests and reduced export demand.

Problem Four:      High producer expenses, where:
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                2
                b) exogenous shocks raise input costs like fuel, or livestock feed from a small
crop.
Problem Five:      Insufficient pavrnents to neediest or smallest farmers while most pavrnents
                continue to go to relatively wealthy and large-scale farmers.


Options:

1.   Enhance Crop Insurance. Increase crop insurance subsidies on all Federal crop
insurance products, both "yield insurance" and "revenue insurance" plans. This would be
achieved by increasing coverage on free Catastrophic (CAT) policies and increasing premium
subsidies on higher levels of yield and revenue insurance. (See Appendix A for background
on crop yield and revenue insurance.)

Estimated costs:                                      2000 2001      2002 2003 2004
       (outlays in millions of dollars)                              1,541 1,587 1,635
1,684 1,734

The proposed increases hold two strong attractions for farmers: a) the obvious attraction of
increasing the value of their insurance policy at no extra cost, and b) increasing the likelihood
that they will receive an indemnity payment. In other words, instead of simply decreasing the
amount of farmer-paid insurance premium cost at current coverage levels (which would have no
impact on the probability of receiving an indemnity payment), the USDA proposal would both
avoid cost increases to the farmer and raise the level of indemnity payments.

Revenue insurance policies are currently subsidized by USDA at a lower percentage than
comparable yield insurance policies. This option would increase the USDA premium subsidy
for revenue insurance on par with yield coverage, increasing the incentive to purchase this
expensive, but more comprehensive, coverage. It also has the added positive effect of increasing
the farmers' incentive to sell their crops on the forward market.

Farmers are notoriously reluctant to forward contract much of their crops out of fear that prices
will increase after they have locked in their forward price. Crop Revenue Coverage (CRC)
allows farmers to forward contract with the confidence that if prices go up after they have
obligated themselves to deliver at a lower price, they will not miss out on higher revenues
because CRC indemnifies against missing out on higher prices. The commodity exchanges find
this aspect of revenue coverage attractive because trading volume would increase. However,
they also have expressed some concern over the extent to which subsidized revenue coverage
might compete with their futures and options contracts.

Ensuring Participation
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                 3
success ultimately hinges on its impact on buyer behavior. Insurance is not currently required of
producers, and they will have to make their own risk management decisions -- to buy or not to
buy. However, large media advertising campaigns (also proposed by USDA) combined with a
program structure that would virtually eliminate the lower coverage range of buy-up insurance
would help to ensure the expected response on the part of farmers, as long as they can be
convinced that the government will not once again revert to ad hoc disaster payments as future
"disasters" arise.

However, to reduce the uncertainty associated with buyer behavior, the Administration could
reimpose the provision ofthe 1994 Crop Insurance Reform Act which required producers to
purchase some level of crop insurance in order to receive any other USDA program benefits,
especially the basic AMTA payments. This so-called "linkage" provision was in effect for one
year, the 1995 crop year, and resulted in nearly doubling the amount of crop insurance sales.
Linkage was not particularly controversial, and its abolition in the 1996 Farm Bill in response to
some producers' objections was accomplished without seriou~ policy review by the
Administration or Congress.

Pro:
      Consistent with the market-oriented farm policies of the 1996 Farm Bill.

      The President explicitly noted the need to fix crop insurance.

      Has best chance of enactment, given congressional Agriculture Committees' stated plan
       to propose major improvements in crop insurance .
                                      .
      Would significantly increase crop insurance participation ifnot undermined by ad hoc
       disaster spending, and particularly if "linkage" is re-established (requirement that a
       producer buy crop insurance in order to participate in other USDA programs).

      Crop insurance is more inclusive than many other USDA programs, covering nearly 70
       different crops.

      Crop insurance is more friendly to the beginning farmer. Other programs (e.g., AMTA
       payments) have more cumbersome eligibility hurdles.

      Avoids sending a "mixed message" on the economic structure offarm policy (the hope of
       future ad hoc disaster spending or direct price/income support), and encourages producers
       to actively manage their risk, albeit on very concessional terms.

      More revenue insurance purchases would increase the number of producers protected
       against both weather risk and market risk.


                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                4
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

      Could be used as a "transitional" fix: Subsidies could be dialed down as future conditions
       and policies warrant.

Con:
      Because the program does not guarantee benefits or require participation, its efficacy is
       ultimately dependent on buyer behavior (unless "linkage" is re-established).

      Increasing coverage at the CAT level could result in a "buy-down" effect; i.e., farmers
       who previously paid for buy-up insurance opt for free CAT coverage.

      Budget "watchdog" groups may protest the new subsidies to U.S. agriculture as
       unnecessary.

      Private commodity exchanges might object to perc~ived competition from
       government-subsidized price risk management tools, i.e., revenue insurance.

2. Fix Multi-year Crop Insurance. Introduce a new multi-year loss insurance provision as
an optional add-on to the crop insurance policy. A version of this was included in the
Administration's summer '98 farm disaster aid package and enacted in the Omnibus bill. This
proposal would make the availability of multi-year coverage permanent.

Estimated Costs                              2000    2001   2002 2003       2004
       (outlays in millions of dollars)                       171 176           181       187
192

The development of this provision is only in the discussion stages at USDA but the product could
be rolled out by the 2000 crop year. OMB would work with USDA to ensure that no duplicate
benefits would be paid through these provisions to either new insureds or producers who
received 1998 emergency assistance for multi-year losses.

The 1998 emergency multi-year loss benefits simply provided supplemental indemnity payments
to qualified insured farmers equal to 25 percent of the indemnities received over the relevant crop
years. The new policy provisions would likely have a similar effect, i.e., retroactively increase
coverage levels for consecutive-loss years (if the farmer was insured in each year) and payout
supplemental indemnities. The actual structure ofthe coverage has yet to be proposed by
USDA.
It would be for multiple years or losses but not in perpetuity (e.g., cap at 5 or 6 years).

Pro
      Consistent with the market-oriented farm policies of the 1996 Farm Bill.


                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                5
                                                                Hex,Dump Conversion
       on 1998 emergency assistance.

      Crop insurance covers more crops and is more available to new farmers than most other
       USDA commodity assistance programs.

Con
      Because the program does not guarantee benefits or require participation, its efficacy is
       ultimately dependent on buyer behavior.

      Moral hazard, while true for subsidized crop insurance generally, could be greater.

3. Cover More Non-insured Crops. Increase support for non-insured crops covered by the
Non-insurance Crop Assistance Program (NAP).

Estimated costs:                             2000 2001      2002 2003       2004
       (outlays in millions of dollars)                       475 489          504        519
535

Despite the growth in the number of crops covered by the insurance program over the last
decade, many crops remain for which no insurance is available, e.g., artichokes, lettuce, ginseng,
mushrooms, and many more. This option proposes to increase NAP coverage on par with
coverage increases of CAT insurance; i.e, guarantee about 42 percent of expected revenue, and
includes livestock among "non-insured" commodities covered under NAP.

Benefits can be targeted, such as through USDA's proposal to increase crop-loss assistance on
non-insured crops for small farms, and provide increased incentives for private companies to
seek out and "sell" free CAT coverage to limited resource farmers.

Pro:
      Addresses the vulnerability of producers who raise crops and livestock for which no
       insurance exists.

      Could be perceived as unfair if CAT coverage is raised while NAP is not.

Con:
      Costly to cover more minor crops, mostly vegetables, which was not a source of national
       farmer dissatisfaction in summer '98.


4.    Promote Commodity Options. Increase USDA's current educational options pilot
programs (OPP) and other risk management education and outreach efforts.



                                                6           Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
OPPs on two commodities                                   21 22           22     23   24
Education and outreach                                       29        30     31     32
  33

Options on futures contracts are often cited as the equivalent of price insurance. Producers who
purchase "put" options have effectively purchased a price floor. When prices go up, they can
still enjoy the benefits of higher prices, but they are protected if prices fall below the floor, or
"strike price", they purchased.
USDA has recently implemented a program to teach dairy farmers how to use these markets that
provides a short term, hands-on trading experience with USDA sharing the cost of the options
contracts. The program lasts only for six-months per producer and allows the producer to buy
options on a limited quantity of milk. The producer learns the markets, the terminology,
hedging strategy, and how to select and deal with a broker.

The program vision is not for permanent subsidies. Its sole objective is to educate the producer
in the hope that the producer will continue to manage price risk using options after "graduating"
from the short term, subsidized program. For OPPs to succeed, legislation would require a
change to remove language requiring budget neutrality. The 1996 Farm Bill stipulates that
OPPs must be budget neutral "to the maximum extent practicable". USDA interprets that to
mean that recipients of USDA program payments who participate in an OPP must forego in
program payments the amount of the subsidies they will receive under the OPP. This provision
does not apply in USDA's current dairy OPP because dairy farmers are not currently receiving
program payments. Thus, the offset is not "practicable".

In addition, USDA would conduct aggressive outreach prograrns to organize county-level
workshops, develop university curricula, and a multimedia advertising campaign.

Pro:
      Consistent with the market-oriented reforms ofthe 1996 Farm Bill.

      Futures/options markets exist for most ofthe eight major "program crops".

      Complements the other options such as increased insurance coverage by alerting and
       introducing farmers to risk management tools.

Con:
      Futures/options markets exist for only a limited number of crops.

5. Permit Risk Management Accounts. Provides a tax advantage for building financial
reserves to be used for farm contingencies. In its "Bluebook" of policy guidance for the 1996
Farm Bill, the Administration proposed "income stabilization accounts". Treasury
representatives suggest that the permanent tax relief measures for farmers in the FY 1999


                                                    7          Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
provisions in "good" years for fanners, and permanent extension of income averaging. These
were scored by Treasury as reducing tax receipts by $36 million annually, but the actual effect of
these changes in the tax code on farm income is not yet known. (A similar, "FARRM" IRA
proposal was nearly adopted in the FY 1999 Omnibus bill.)

Risk management or income stabilization accounts could be designed to provide benefits for only
relatively small or low-income fanners. Such accounts are being tried in Canada and France.
They normally permit pre-tax deposits into the account up to a certain amount. Incentives such
as a government contribution component could be considered as well. In the event of a disaster,
the farmer is permitted to withdraw the funds without penalty. The withdrawals would help
support the fanner until the next crop year and would likely be taxed in a lower bracket than the
fanner's normal income.

The income amounts deposited, the withdrawal triggers (e.g., decreases in gross revenues, net
income, price index below moving average, etc.), eligibility and consequent costs are widely
adjustable. This concept could be announced as a pilot program for a specific cornmodity or
regIOn.

Estimated costs: (outlays in millions of dollars)       2000 2001   2002 2003        2004
                                                         200 200     200 200          200
Pro:
      Encourages prudent savings while reducing the impact of future disasters on both the
       fanner and the Federal budget.

      Builds on producers' current ability to manage their income streams by savings and
       timing of input and capital purchases for tax purposes, popular approaches for farmers.

      Makes more comprehensive an Administration safety net policy of "various solutions
       appropriate to segments and conditions in fann country".

Con:
      Treasury representatives believe this option would - if not targeted - disproportionately
       aid large, wealthy fanners while providing little assistance to small fanners.

      Low fanner participation would be expected.

6. Strengthen Standing Emergency Programs. USDA's proposal includes assistance for
livestock, and would allow fann~rs to receive both CAT and NAP benefits, USDA disaster loans,
and other USDA fann credit. Some were included in Summer '98 Administration package.

Estimated costs
       (outlays in millions of dollars)

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                    8
                                                               Hex-Dump ConYoraion
 27
 b) Allowing both CAT and NAP benefits                          10       10         11      11    11
 c) Small agriculture-related business loans (discretionary)    (50)    (52)       (54)     (56) (58)

 Pro:
        Small farm- and small business-oriented.

        CAT and NAP can be re-structured to also limit benefits to larger, well-capitalized
         operations.

 Con:
        Without proper limits in place, CAT and NAP are subject to abuse by larger businesses.

 7.     Land Retirement. Some producers farm land that encounters natural disabilities (like
 excessive wetness or disease) that persist longer than one year, but that is likely to return to
 production. USDA could enter medium-term contracts (3 - 5 years non renewable) to retire such
 land, including land in the Upper Plains that is diseased or under water, or land in the southwest
 that is quarantined due to kamal bunt. Payments would be made for "environmental benefits",
 including conservation practices aimed to restore the land to production. An area-wide problem
 could be required to trigger in a farm's land for eligibility. USDA's Conservation Reserve
 Program (CRP) retires land for lO-year periods, but not when they are made unproductive due to
 natural afflictions. A version of this proposal was included in Administration's Summer '98
 package and in the 11/13 USDA budget letter, but was not enacted.

 Estimated costs: (outlays in millions of dollars)       2000   2001    2002    2003      2004
                                                           50    75      100     100       100
 Pro:
        Would fill a gap in the current program structure, since there is no program aimed at this
         problem.

 Con:
        Unlikely need for medium-term retirement program; land problems better ameliorated
         through farming practices or a program that would permanently retire land.

 8.     Marketing Loans.      Uncap 1996 Farm Bill levels. (See Appendix B)

 Estimated costs                                         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
        (outlays in millions of dollars)                 4,000 4,000 4,000 3,000 3,000

. Removing the 1996 Farm Bill's limitation on marketing loan rates (85 percent ofa five-year
  moving average minus high and low years, but not more than the 1995 level) would enable the
  loan rates to rise to a level that practically guarantees regular annual payments in the years ahead.

                                                     9          Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
abolished by the 1996 Farm Bill. As a general commodity program, it would apply to all major
field crops for the 1.8 million participants in USDA crop subsidy programs. This was proposed
by Sens. Harkin and Daschle in the summer, and by the Administration in some forms, but
defeated in Congress on six occasions.

A targeted version, a "two-tier marketing loan", was proposed by Sen. Daschle in the 1996
Farm Bill deliberations. This proposal would offer a higher loan rate for a minimum volume of
production per fanner, e.g., the first 10,000 bushels. Production above that level would receive
a lower loan rate or none at all. This regime would provide relatively greater benefit to smaller
producers.

Pro
      Popular with many populist supporters of the Administration.

      Would be perceived as supporting smaller, less efficient farmers.

Con
      Would return fann policy back to failed, costly past programs that hurt US exports and
       would lead to production supply controls, widely unpopular with farmers.

      Untargeted version would provide gratuitous financial windfall to many farmers.

      Targeted version would be opposed by many larger farmers, especially of cotton and rice.

      Would compete/conflict with market-oriented programs (e.g., revenue insurance, OPPs).

      Fails   ~o   help individual farmers with diminished or failed crop.

9.    Federal Assistance for Exports.          Donations and support for faltering export markets.

Estimated costs (outlays in millions)            2000      2001      2002      2003         2004
                                                 2,500    2,500      2,500     2,500      2,500

The humanitarian food aid packages of July for wheat and November for Russia could be
extended so long as the commodity to be donated remains in surplus in the US. While sufficient
 funding usually is not an obstacle for the mandatory programs and emergency authorities
involved, this action is limited by GATT rules on subsidies, our trading partners' complaints, and
the undermining of US commercial exports. The actual impact of Federal donations on US farm
prices is in dispute, but the announcements of donations are seen as popular among many
fanners, if not commodity markets. The Administration's active role in managing the Asian
economic crisis--a major cause of reduced demand for US agricultural exports--is viewed as a
general form of help to US farmers, but indirect and longer-term.

                                                    10         Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
         Perceived in farm country as positive action.

         Can cause "additional" exports to those countries unable to purchase food.

 Con
         Need for bulk commodities is limited. Truly hungry people not already being supplied
          by standing government programs tend to need consumer-ready foodstuffs.

         Limited by tendency to displace US commercial exports.

         Unpredictable impact on markets means unreliable domestic farm support program.

 v.     Offsets

 USDA has not proposed any offsets to date. OMB recommends P AYGO offsets from cuts in
 guaranteed Agriculture Market Transition Act (AMTA) payments. The shift in funding would
 effectively redistribute funds guaranteed to producers who have not experienced crop losses and
 rewards those who have actively managed their yield risk and paid a share of the associated costs.
  AMTA payments are only authorized through FY 2002; however, baseline rules extend the
 authorization and baseline spending indefinitely.

   The distribution of AMTA payments by state compares favorably to the expected redistribution
   of funds through increased crop insurance subsidies. Some discrepancies arise among certain
   Midwestern states (Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Nebraska) that receive significant AMTA payments
   and whose proportion of benefits would likely be eroded and shifted toward states with higher
   crop insurance losses. Many ofthe states experiencing increases in their proportional benefits
   are those with particular problems over the most recent period (Texas, North Dakota, Minnesota,
   Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina). In effect, the redistribution takes benefits from areas
   with a lower incidence of crop losses and moves them to areas that have been harder-hit in the
 . past year and have had historically higher levels of uninsured or underinsured producers .
. Further, in a loss-year similar to the one experienced in 1998, the redistribution of benefits
   channels funds much more dramatically to areas in the most need.

 However, crop insurance indemnities are not guaranteed as are AMT A payments. Coverage
 begins at specified loss levels verified at the individual farm level. The same number of dollars
 is projected to be disbursed over the long run, but wide variations in year-to-year outlays will
 occur. The proposal channels funds to farmers who have taken proactive steps to manage their
 risk and suffered verified losses, at the cost of guaranteed payments withdrawn from farmers
 holding AMTA contracts. Using AMTA payments as an offset achieves some targeting of
 AMTA benefits.


                                                               Automated Records M
                                                  11           Hi D                anagement System
                                                                 ex- ump Conversion

Appendix A:      Crop Insurance

Yield Insurance (USDA's standard mUlti-peril crop insurance products)

Crop insurance coverage is made up of two components, yield coverage and price coverage.
The buyer can choose among various coverage combinations of both yield and price. The
minimum coverage level insures 50 percent of average yield at 60 percent of a USDA-set price.
This plan is known as Catastrophic Risk Protection (CAT), or "50/60" coverage.. The highest
coverage available nationally is the 751100 level. The most popular coverage to date is the
65/100 level. At this level of coverage, if the insureds suffer a 50 percent yield loss, they are
made whole on the lost production up to 65 percent (or 15 percent in this case) and the indemnity
payment would amount to the 15 percent of covered loss times 100 percent of the USDA-set
pnce.

USDA offers two general levels of insurance coverage; Catastrophic Risk Protection (CAT), and
so-called "buy-up" coverage which is all coverage levels higher than CAT. CAT premium is
100 percent subsidized and the farmer only pays a nominal administrative fee for it. CAT
covers only 30 percent of expected revenue. Buy-up coverage is available at levels between 60
and 75 percent of expected revenue and is subsidized on a scale that slides downward as
coverage increases. In other words, 65 percent coverage involves a 40 percent premium subsidy,
and 75 percent coverage involves a 24 percent SUbsidy.

USDA has performed marketing analysis to estimate how much an average producer is willing to
pay for buy-up crop insurance. That amount is $5.30 for each $100 ofliability insured. USDA
proposes to apply that farmer-paid amount toa coverage level that is considered high enough to
restore credibility to the crop insurance program in the wake of the harsh criticisms last summer.
That level is 70 percent of expected revenue.

The following example illustrates how the insurance coverage works:

   a)      a com grower with 1,000 acres and an average yield of 100 bushels per acre has an
           expected yield of 100,000 bushels;
   b)      the insured price set by USDA is $2.30 per bushel;
   c)      "701100" coverage is purchased, so the farmer has insured $161,000 ofliability
           (70,000bushels at $2.30Ibu.);
   d)      if the farmer experiences a 40 percent yield loss (i.e., a harvest of 60,000 bushels) an
           indemnity of $23,000 would be paid (i.e., the 10,000 bushels that would make the
           farmer whole up to 70 percent of average production multiplied by 100 percent of the
           $2.30Ibu. price);


                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                12              Hex-Dump Conversion
             which 32 percent, $4,160, is currently paid by USDA;
     1)      USDA also reimburses the private insurers' administrative expenses at a rate of 24.5
             percent of gross premium, or in this case $3,185.

Revenue Insurance

Standard crop insurance policies do not indemnify producers who have not experienced crop
losses due to natural causes. However, even a producer who harvests 100 percent of expected
yield can be put on difficult financial footing through price declines. The Federal crop insurance
program currently offers three policies that provide indemnities in the event of falling prices
regardless of crop losses ("revenue insurance"). These products are all less than three years old.
  Two are struggling to become established but one has been very successful. Crop Revenue
Coverage (CRC), developed by one ofthe private crop insurance companies, now accounts for
16% of the crop insurance market (nearly $300 million in annual premium). This is a very high
growth rate over just three years, particularly in light of its price tag -- CRC premiums are 30
percent higher than comparable yield insurance on average.

Revenue insurance policies are subsidized by USDA at a lower percentage than yield coverage.
It is worth noting that, in light of this lower subsidy on a high-priced policy, CRC's growth tends
to contradict the notion that farmers are unwilling to pay significant premium costs for crop
insurance. This, in tum, further supports options that retain market-oriented safety net
programs, with an eye toward dialing down subsidies over the long term.

CRC's success in the market is attributable to one unique component of its coverage; CRC
indemnifies if prices fall and if prices rise; CRC will indemnify yield loss at the current market
price ifit has gone up during the insurance period. To summarize, revenue policies work much
like standard policies but payout indemnities in more circumstances:

     a)   yield loss when prices remain unchanged (like standard policies);
     b)   yield loss when prices fall (like standard policies);
     c)   yield loss when prices rise (CRC pays out at the higher market price);
     d)   no yield loss but prices fall (revenue policies only).

The following is an example of revenue insurance, scenario "d" above:

a)        a com grower with 1,000 acres and an average yield of 100 bushels per acre has an
          expected yield of 100,000 bushels; .
b)        the insured price, established by the average price of December com futures during the
          month of February, is $2.45 per bushel;
c)        "70/100" coverage is purchased, so the farmer has insured $171,500 of liability (70,000
          bushels at $2.45/bu.);
d)        by December, the farmer has no yield loss (i.e., a harvest of 100,000 bushels)


                                                  13
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
       (November) has dropped to $2.00Ibushel (i.e., down 45 centslbushel). An indemnity of
       $31,500 would be paid (i.e., the 70,000 bushels insured multiplied by 100 percent of the
       $0.45Ibu. price decline);
f)     the total insurance premium for the coverage would likely be around $17,000, of which
       24 percent, or $4,160, is currently paid by USDA;
g)     USDA also reimburses the private insurers' administrative expenses at a rate of23.5
       percent of gross premium, or in this case $3,995.


Appendix B: Boosting Farm Income Through Marketing Loans

A major goal of some farm interests is to increase USDA's "marketing loan rate" so it would
guarantee farm income robust enough to cover the relatively higher costs of production of some
U.S. farmers. Sens. Daschle and Harkin were chief proponents of increasing ("uncapping")
marketing loan rates during the summer's debate on how to improve the farm income safety net.


How marketing loans work
USDA's marketing crop loans, a program to enable farmers to avoid selling during the                ,
lowest- price (harvest) period of the year, basically set a price floor for the crop, backed by the
Treasury. Farmers take out a 9-month loan from USDA at harvest time based on a statutory
"loan rate" or
price per bushel. If market prices drop below the loan rate, farmers can repay the loan at the
lower market price per bushel. USDA absorbs (loses) the difference between the market price
and the (higher) loan rate price, and the farmer keeps the crop to sell on the market. Marketing
loans are available for the major US field crops, like wheat and corn. Payments under the
program are limited to $75,000 per person per crop year.

Current issue
The 1996 farm bill capped the loan rate at 85 percent of the five-year moving average price for
the commodity, but not more than 1995 levels. The 1990 farm bill gave the Secretary of
Agriculture discretion to reduce the loan rate from the five-year average, depending on market
conditions and budget costs. That bill also required that supply controls be imposed appropriate
to those market conditions to determine the size of the crops produced and the cost to the
government. Uncapping loan rates would raise them (by 22 percent for wheat, IS percent for
corn) to an average price level that would be unusually high at present, because it would include
the historic record high price period of 1995 and 1996. Farm interests have not suggested
reimposing supply controls, which is unpopular with farmers.

For example, a wheat farmer with 100,000 bushels in 1998 faced a capped loan rate of
$2.58Ibushel, an average price of$2.65, but a low price of$2.35. He received $23,000 (100,000
times the 23 cent gap between the low price and the loan rate) by asking USDA for a "loan


                                                 14               Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dwnp Conversion
variation of a marketing loan. Foregoing entirely a USDA crop loan, the farmer gets a cash
payment from USDA for the difference between the loan rate and the prevailing market price.)

The farmer then held onto the crop for 10 weeks and sold it at $2.70 and received $270,000.
The marketing loan boosted the farmer's 1998 income by 9 percent under the current loan rate
regime ($23,000 divided by $270,000). lfthe wheat loan rate had been uncapped, the USDA
loan deficiency payment would have been $81,000 (100,000 times the 81 cent gap between the
low price and the uncapped loan rate of $3.16 for 1998), a boost of 30 percent to the farmer's
income.

Costs
USDA to-date has paid about $1.6 billion in marketing loan gains on the 1998 crop for all major
commodities. Probably the costs for this crop under current loan rates will total about $2 billion
this year. Uncapping loan rates for one year only on the 1998 crop, as Sens. Daschle and Harkin
proposed, would have cost an additional $5 billion in FY 1999. The cost for uncapping on the
1999 crop only, with outlays largely in FY 2000, probably would be about $4 billion according
to current price projections.

Policy significance
Federal attempts in the 1960s and 1980s to protect farmers from market cycles demonstrated that
USDA price-support loan rates that are within about 25 percent of commodity market prices
distort markets by:
        - setting an effective floor on market prices for producers;
        - stimulating US production;
        - increasing taxpayer costs;
        - leading to production controls, reduced exports and greater foreign production.

Loan rates that are low relative to market prices avoid these distortions, but can provide an
income safety net in case of a price collapse. An NEC interagency process concluded in 1994
that raising loan rates slightly was dubious policy because of its market effects even when it
would cost much less than under current price conditions.

Budgetary costs and policy problems could be reduced when raising marketing loan rates by
targeting the payments to those producers in greatest need. For example, this could be done by
excluding high-income farmers and limiting the higher loan rate to each producer's first few
thousand bushels of grain.




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


                                               15
                                                     FOIA Number:    Kagan opd14



           Clinton Presidential Records
         Automated Records Management
                 System [EMAIL]
         This is not a presidential record. This is used as an
     administrative marker by the William J. Clinton Presidential
                             Librarv Staff.



    Hex Dump file is not in a recognizable format, has been incorrectly
                          decoded or is damaged.




    Attachment Number: [ATTACH.D13]MAIL487385432.326


