RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: I-DEC-1998 12:14:12.00

SUBJECT:   DPC Goal & Objective Document

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert'ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D36]MAIL44898253J.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504351050000010A02010000000205000000745F000000020000478E82882B4271F457BIAD
3548479ABF221D8542CA1886593983EED196BBA870964E5AEOE7B92B16B4720DB75B046F5F137D
BB25E368A0495F96ACDE8F52COC77E6A220074B83C017E46B8CA7DFOA888CCB6D4622F79CF371A
OF9A9EAC99AF5DEA6FCE3A885F7F8DOCA61C894D70E502397E50215DF7F98DC2FAE183B8D91AFD
E942ECC6FD5D5B4FEC69967E72FAAD378E08BAE8AAB81DAF3022EIABA83F309762884535BA5E06
796D8FE280A76BDA5DA440CE77C87B329F61DC9BE65EOB92B83505222376EE65FA7EE676D4ACE3
B59637AC6CB0772EI0FA291DC83838C2A501A5C360265506808856AF4419EE47AAF340C554C74F
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

                                        December 2, 1998

 MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

 FROM:                     BRUCE REED
                           ELENA KAGAN

 SUBJECT:                  DOMESTIC POLICY COUNCIL GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

         The central mission of the Domestic Policy Council is to advance the President's
. domestic agenda. The following memo outlines our goals and objectives in carrying out the
  domestic priorities that the President set forward in this year's State of the Union.

 OVERALL GOAL:


 GOAL: Education. Develop and implement policies to achieve high education standards
 nationwide and improved student performance to meet those standards.

        Objectives:
        - Work with Education Department to reauthorize the Elementary and Secondary
        Education Act and Goals 2000 to strengthen federal support for state and local efforts to
        raise standards and improve student achievement.
        - Work with Education Department to strengthen accountability for reaching high
        standards throughout federal education programs.
        - Work to improve the quality of teaching by providing incentives for states and school
        districts to better train and test new teachers, better support beginning teachers, and end
        practices of hiring unqualified teachers, especially in high poverty schools. Promote the
        work ofthe National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, encourage states and
        local school districts to adopt policies to place a master teacher in every school, and
        highlight successful efforts at the state and local level.
        -Work to increase the number of states with charter schools legislation, and propose
        additional ways of expanding choice within public education.
        - Work with the independent, bipartisan National Assessment Governing Board and the
        business and education communities to reinvigorate the President's proposal for national
        tests, either by finding private financial support or by refiaming the proposal to better
        gain Congressional support.                                                          .
        - Work with the Education Department, the education community and Congressional
        supporters to enact the President's School Modernization proposal.

 GOAL: Education. Work to ensure that new initiatives enacted last year are effectively

launched and implemented, and receive continued funding.

       Objectives:
       - Work with the Education Department and education community to ensure a successful
       launch of the Class Size Reduction initiative, so that local implementation proceeds
       smoothly, 30,000 teachers are hired, and Congress provides continued funding for the
       initiative.
       - Work with the Education Department to ensure that initial implementation of the
       Reading Excellence Act effectively supports the President's America Reads Challenge,
       and along with the class size reduction initiative, works to improve reading achievement
       in the early elementary grades.
       - Work with the Education Department and the K-12 and higher education community to
       ensure that the President's new initiative to improve teacher education and to recruit
       talented individuals into teaching is effective launched, and spurs broader improvements
       in teacher preparation nationwide.
       - Work with the Education Department, the K-12 and higher education community, the
       business community and community based groups to ensure that GEAR UP (the
       President's High Hopes initiative) is launched effectively, forms strong partnerships
       between higher education and K-12 education, and provides the mentoring and support
       necessary to increase high school graduation and college attendance of middle schoo!.

GOAL: Health Care. Work towards developing policy sound and politically viable health
reform initiatives, designed to achieve bipartisan support, that provide for targeted coverage
expansions, a more efficient, modernized and market-oriented Medicare program, improved
access to home and community based long-term care services for the chronically ill of all ages, a
health care system that assures that long-overdue quality and consumer protections are in place,
and an increasingly intensive focus on public health initiatives aimed at preventing, diagnosing,
treating and curing illness, as well as strengthening the nation's health care safety net.

       Objectives:
       - Work with Congress to pass strong health care quality reforms. We will continue to
       advocate for a strong, enforceable Patients Bill of Rights, medical privacy legislation, and
       protection against genetic discrimination. We will also take administrative and
       legislative action to improve the quality of the care delivered in nursing homes and
       assisted living facilities.
       - Aggressively implement executive actions and recently enacted legislation (the
       Children's Health Insurance Program) designed to expand coverage, and continue the
       development of and support for new legislation aimed at expanding access to needed
       health care coverage and services. We will continue to support legislation similar to the
       Jeffords-Kennedy Work Incentives Improvement Act, which would enable people with
       disabilities to retain their Medicaid coverage when returning to work. We will also work
       to develop a tax credit for work impairment expenses for people with disabilities. In
       addition, we will continue to evaluative the feasibility and advisability of advocating for
                                                             Automated Records Management System .
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

      expanded insurance options for the 55-65 population.
      - Implement BBA Medicare reforms and prepare for Commission recommendations. We
      will assure that any viable reforms that emerge from the Medicare commission meet the
      President's goal of improving the program while protecting beneficiaries. We will
      continue to advocate for the rapid implementation of Medicare reforms passed in last
      year's BBA, and will work to design new initiatives that promote initiatives aimed at
      increasing new plan choices for beneficiaries (and stopping HMO withdrawals from the
      program), Medigap reforms, and aggressive anti-fraud and abuse activities.
      - Develop and pass new long-term care initiatives aimed at supporting (not supplanting)
      family caregiving of the chronically ill. We will develop a new tax credit initiative
      designed to relieve some of the extraordinary costs of providing long-term care to elderly
      and disabled popUlations. Among other initiatives, we will also work to provide
      information, counseling, training, and respite services to individuals with the
      overwhelming responsibility of caring for an aged parent or relative
      - Develop and implement additional successful public health initiatives. New research
      and surveillance efforts are necessary to adequately address the threat that bioterrorism
      and resistant bacterial strains present to the public health. Efforts will also be made to
      increase the speed of new drug and product approvals, and improve food quality.
      Additional emphasis will be placed on research that seeks to isolate the cause of asthma, a
      disease affecting millions of children. These initiatives will build on our ongoing
      commitments to AIDS prevention and treatment programs, biomedical research, and a
      host of other public health initiatives.

GOAL: Welfare. Promote work and personal responsibility.

      Objectives:
      - Oversee implementation of the new welfare law to ensure that the Administration
      does everything in its power, through executive action, regulations, and other
      efforts, to help states collect child support, promote personal responsibility, and
      help people move from welfare to work and succeed in the workforce.
      - Support ongoing successful efforts to encourage the public and private sectors to
      hire from the welfare rolls and for faith-based and nonprofit groups to help former
      recipients succeed in the work force.
      - Secure reauthorization ofthe $1.5 billion a year Welfare-to-Work fund to help
      states and cities find and create jobs for the most disadvantaged welfare recipients
      and fathers of children on welfare.
      - Extend tax credits to encourage companies to hire welfare recipients.
      - Work with HUD and DOT to ensure successful implementation and secure
      continued funding for Welfare to Work housing vouchers and Access to Jobs
      transportation initiativ~s enacted in FY 1999 budget.

GOAL: Crime. Enact a new omnibus crime bill to establish the Administration's next phase of
anti-crime priorities.
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 HeX-Dump Convenion

       Objectives:
       - Lead multi-agency effort to develop and draft new omnibus anti-crime legislation which
       will create new initiatives to combat crime and improve public safety -- such as COPS II,
       firearms strike forces, offender accountability -- as well as reauthorize existing programs
       in the 1994 Crime Act, such as the Violence Against Women Act and funding for Drug
       Courts.
       - Organize events highlighting main provisions of President's new crime legislation and
       budget, as well as past Administration accomplishments such as the Brady Law and
       assault weapons ban.
       - Draft directives, executive orders, and reports in furtherance of bill's objectives.
       - Lead outreach effort to educate, inform, and build consensus with law enforcement,
       mayors, other elected officials, a bipartisan Congressional delegation, and
       community-based organizations on President's legislation and key priorities.

GOAL: Drugs. Promote and secure full funding for the President's 1999 lO-year Drug Control
Strategy.

       Objectives:
       -Coordinate Administration-wide efforts to promote drug testing and treatment for
       offenders under criminal justice supervision.
       - Work closely with ONDCP on continued implementation of the National Anti-Drug
       Media Campaign and Southwest Border initiatives.
       - Work with ONDCP and Department of Education to revamp Safe and Drug-Free
       Schools Program.
       - Work to ensure full funding for President's drug strategy in appropriations process.

GOAL: Tobacco. Finish the job of significantly reducing teen smoking.

       Objectives:
       - Secure legislative reaffirmation of the Food and Drug Administration's authority to
       regulate tobacco and restrict advertising targeted at children.
       - Enact legislation to build on the state settlement and significantly reduce youth smoking
       by further increasing the price of cigarettes, funding anti-tobacco public health efforts,
       and protecting farmers and farming communities.
       - Ensure, through executive action, that the Administration undertakes all possible actions
       to reduce youth smoking.

GOAL: Child Care. Develop a strategy to pass the President's proposals to provide greater
assistance with child care costs to low- and middle-income working parents through significant
new subsidies for low-income working families, and greater tax relief for middle-income
working families.

       Objectives:                                           Automated Records Man.;\gement SY,ll;;m
                                                             Rex-nl"l1~ Conver<;ion

      - Introduce in FY 2000 budget and SOTU significant new child care investments, equal to
      or greater than FY 1999 request.
      - Include in the President's child care proposal a tax relief initiative to support parents
      who chose to stay at home with their children.
      - Build on recent budget victory of new child care quality investments by including in the
      President's FY 2000 budget increased support for quality improvements.
      - Work with White House Legislative Affairs, HHS, and Treasury to develop a
      congressional strategy to build on Democratic and Republican legislative proposals.
      - Continue work with White House Office of Public Liaison to build more vocal support
      in the women's, children's, and parents' advocacy groups.

GOAL: Child Care. Develop a strategy to build on after-school victory in the FY 1999 budget
and secure a significant new increase in the FY 2000 discretionary budget.

      Objectives:
      - Include in the President's FY 2000 budget and SOTU a significant new investment in
      the 21st Century Community Learning Center after-school program.
      - Work with White House Legislative Affairs, OMB, and the Department of Education to
      develop a congressional strategy for FY 2000 appropriations.
      - Work with White House Office of Public Liaison to build more vocal support in the
      women's, children's, anti-crime, and parents' advocacy groups.

GOAL: Families Agenda. Develop and advance Families Agenda.

      Objectives:
      - Develop package of budget proposals for the SOTU and the FY 2000 budget including:
      (1) child care initiative; (2) FMLA Expansion; and (3) paid parental leave support.
      - Work with White House Offices of Legislative Affairs and Public Liaison to develop
      congressional and outreach strategies.

GOAL: Civil Rights. Promote and strengthen enforcement of the civil rights laws.

      Objectives:
      - Work to ensure increased funding for civil rights agencies and for civil rights initiatives
      in the budget and appropriations process, particularly for equal pay for women and the
      EEOC.
      - Assist in building support for the use of "paired testing" and other effective enforcement
      tools.
      - Promote increased emphasis on voluntary compliance, technical assistance, education,
      and dispute resolution.
      - Organize events highlighting rules, regulations, and legislation to improve civil rights --
      involving, for example, legislation on equal pay and funding to reduce the backlog at the
      EEOC.
                                                                 ·Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

      - Draft directives, executive orders, and letters in furtherance of civil rights issues.


GOAL: Community Empowerment. Enact several additional new community empowerment
initiatives including an expansion of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit, new incremental
housing vouchers, full funding for Empowerment Zones, other community empowerment tax
incentives.

      Objectives:
      - Co- lead multi-agency effort to develop and draft new community empowerment
      legislation and initiatives that will create jobs, provide access to capital and credit for all
      Americans, and provide affordable housing and homeownership opportunities to more
      individuals.
      - Organize events highlighting main provisions of President's Community Empowerment
      Agenda.

GOAL: Political Reform. Secure passage of bipartisan McCain-Feingold/Shays-Mee?an
campaign finance reform legislation.

      Objectives:
      - Coordinate Administration-wide efforts to secure passage of CFR legislation.
      - Work closely with OVP on securing voluntary support for free TV time for candidates
      for Federal office.
      - Organize events highlighting main provisions of President's Community Empowerment
      Agenda.

GOAL: Food Safety. Fund the President's Food Safety Initiative and strengthen food safety
legislation.

      Objectives:
      - Pass legislation providing mandatory recall authority for USDA and increased
      inspection authority for imports.
      - Work to ensure full funding for food safety in the budget and appropriations process.
      - Work with the President's Council on Food Safety to draft a comprehensive strategic
      plan on food safety.

GOAL: Consumer Initiatives. Promote the Administration's consumer protection policy.

      Objectives:
      - Organize events highlighting rules, regulations, and legislation to improve consumer
      protection and privacy issues including child safety, consumer fraud, and
      slamming/cramming.
      - Work with agencies to produce a better coordinated and more comprehensive consumer·

                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

      agenda.
      - Find opportunities for the President and Vice-President to highlight Administration
      commitment to consumer issues via executive order and directive.

GOAL: Native Americans. Develop and fund educational, health care, and economic
development initiatives for Native Americans.

      Objectives:
      - Develop new initiatives in furtherance of Presidential directives and executive orders --
      involving, for example, 1000 new Native American teachers, a single toll-free number for
      access to economic development assistance, and wiring all BIA schools to the Internet.
      - Work to ensure full funding for Native American programs in the budget and
      appropriations process including Indian Health Service funding and Bureau of Indian
      Affairs school construction.

GOAL: Agricultural and Rural Initiatives. Help promote the President's agricultural and
rural policies, including an improved farm safety net.

      Objectives:
      - Work to ensure funding for agricultural and rural initiatives.in the budgetand
      appropriations process, including coordination with the NEe and USDA on establishing
      an improved crop insurance program.
      - Organize events highlighting rules, regulations, and legislation to assist agricultural and
      rural communities -- involving, for example, legislation regarding disaster assistance for
      farmers.

GOAL: Promote new ideas for a values-oriented Administration's agenda.

      Objectives:
      - Utilize on-going work at agencies to find opportunities for the President and
      Vice-President to speak about values issues that may involve executive orders, reports
      and directives ranging from child abuse to increased time demands on working parents
      and elder care.
      - Work to create and continue Administration-wide initiatives on social issues,
      particularly effecting women, children and families. Issues, for example, include
      domestic violence (such as supporting passage of a second Violence Against Women
      Act) and developing a comprehensive Administration policy against alcoholabuse.




                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
. ,.
