 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Sally Katzen ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-DEC-1998 12:16:32.00

 SUBJECT:   revised ag paper - table stays the same

 TO: Lisa M. Kountoupes   ( CN=Lisa M. Kountoupes/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)      )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Sylvia M. Mathews ( CN=Sylvia M. Mathews/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [WHO)         )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Elise H. Golan ( CN=Elise H. Golan/OU=CEA/O=EOP @ EOP [ CEA ) )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: David W. Beier ( CN=David W. Beier/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN)           )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Frazierp ( Frazierp @ midusa.net @ inet [ UNKNOWN)   )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Janet L. Graves (CN=Janet L. Graves/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)        )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Rhonda Melton ( CN=Rhonda Melton/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN)     )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
  please disregard the previous draft ag paper and replace it with this.
 It is only slightly different from the. earlier one,  we should all be on
 the same page.  Sorry for any inconvenience.==================== ATTACHMENT            1
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D6)MAIL472292S3P.326 to ASCII,
 .The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FFS7S04332060000010A0201000000020S000000EOCE000000020000DA29A9A834EAB7SSDCSE30
 ADC0903C92618F717DA347B9C04FS8872B882ACE70F1BB1DFCSCFEFSC474A937B467D09S72E368
                                                                                   11130/98
                       HOW TO FIX THE FARM INCOME SAFETY NET

 I.     Introduction

, For more than a decade bipartisan farm policy has directed producers to seek income increasingly
  from markets rather than from Federal subsidies. The 1994 Crop Insurance Reform and 1996
  Farm Bills attempted to create a farm income safety net of market-oriented crop insurance and
  commodity marketing loan programs, rather than ad hoc disaster, market intervention, and price
  support programs. Farm income reached a record $61 billion in 1997 as export demand grew
  and world commodity stocks tightened from 1995.

 In 1998 in the US, regional inadequacies of crop insurance (including low coverage and
 participation), weather and multi-year production problems, and nation-wide low prices for many
 commodities provoked sharp criticisms of the 1996 Farm Bill and crop insurance. Proposals
 appeared in July to revive price-setting Federal subsidy programs, mainly through raising
 USDA's "marketing loan rate" to boost crop payments to farmers (see Appendix B for
 discussion).

 II. Administration Proposals

 In response, an NEC-led interagency group this summer crafted a package of proposals to
 address the specific areas of need throughout the nation's farmland. This included targeted
 assistance for regions of need, primarily through a supplemental crop insurance benefit for
 multi-year losses.

 Second, the President announced on July 18th the purchase and donation overseas of2.5 million
 tons of wheat to boost US farm prices and to relieve hunger around the world, using existing
 USDA authorities and mandatory funding. In November, the President announced an additional
 food-aid package of 3.1 million tons of wheat and other commodities for Russia.

 Finally, the Administration agreed to support Sens. Harkin's and Daschle's proposal to remove
 the 1996 Farm Bill limitation on marketing loan rate levels.

 III.     Status of Farmer Assistance

 The Administration negotiated a $6 billion disaster assistance package in the FY 1999 Omnibus
 Appropriations Bill to boost farm income. The President further charged Secretary Glickman
 with addressing the "gaps" in the farm safety net that were exposed during the 1998 crop year.
 Recently, the Congressional Agriculture Committees have announced their intention to address
 the problems through the crop insurance program.


                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                 1                Hex-Dump Conversion
billion to farmers under existing authority, spending that was not projected in the FY 1998
Mid-Session Review of the Budget. The $6 billion in additional assistance should maintain farm
income in crop-year 1998 near the 1997 record level. The issue is how much enhancement does
the safety net need? Should Federal programs prevent any farmer's income from falling below
the five-year average level? Should income supplements be targeted to smaller, low-income
farmers? Total additional USDA outlays for production agriculture approved since July, above
those assumed in the FY 1999 Budget, amount to approximately $10 billion, including the costs
ofthe recent food-aid programs.

IV. Problems in Farm Country and Options for Dealing with Them

In its FY 2000 Budget request, USDA proposes to continue the path of the 1996 Farm Bill; and
Administration policy, by helping farmers to manage risk. It recommends a series of program
changes to: make crop insurance more attractive by covering more risk at reduced costs;
enhancing emergency programs; and expanding risk-management education. A proposal could
also re-establish the requirement that farmers purchase crop insurance, and send a message to
farmers that these increased insurance subsidies would negate the likelihood of future emergency
payments such as those provided through the FY 1999 Omnibus bill.

Gaps in the Safety Net

This section lists the five main problems with the current farm income safety net, then analyzes
the options, in addition to the USDA proposals. The options can be dialed by benefits and costs.
Also, to achieve targeting by income or gross revenues, means-testing could be overlaid on most
options to address the recurring issue that insufficient payments go to the neediest or smallest
farmers while most payments continue to go to relatively wealthy and large-scale farmers.

Problem One:      Crop loss due to natural disaster -- crop insurance can fail to indemnity enough
                       of the loss because:
               a) Too little acreage is insured (i.e., too few fanners participate); and
               b) Insured acreage is covered at too Iowa percent of expected revenue (i.e.,
                       too little coverage is purchased by the average farmer).

Problem Two: Multi-year crop loss due to natural disaster, where:
            a) Poor production history hurts "good" farmers by raising premiums and
            lowering the insurable yield; and
            b) Even higher, "buy-up" coverage levels, after consecutive loss years, may
            indemnity too little to sustain the farm operation.

Problem Three: Low prices nationally, as much as 40 percent below the 5-year average,
            primarily due to large harvests and reduced export demand.



                                                2               Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
            a) certain regions have high production costs arising from natural factors; or
            b) exogenous shocks raise input costs like fuel, or livestock feed from a small
crop.


Options:

1. Enhance Crop Insurance. ([Agency name)              supports; _ _recommends against
because...) Increase crop insurance subsidies on all Federal crop insurance products, both
"yield insurance" and "revenue insurance" plans. This would be achieved by increasing coverage
on free Catastrophic (CAT) policies and increasing premium subsidies on higher levels of yield
and revenue insurance. (See Appendix A for background on crop yield and revenue
insurance.)

Estimated costs:                                    2000    2001     2002 2003 2004
       (outlays in millions of dollars)                              1,541 1,587 1,635
1,684 1,734

The proposed increases hold two strong attractions for farmers: a) the obvious attraction of
increasing the value of their insurance policy at no extra cost, and b) increasing the likelihood
that they will receive an indemnity payment. In other words, instead of simply decreasing the
amount of farmer-paid insurance premium cost at current coverage levels (which would have no
impact on the probability of receiving an indemnity payment), the USDA proposal would both
avoid cost increases to the farmer and raise the level of indemnity payments.

Revenue insurance policies are currently subsidized by USDA at a lower percentage than
comparable yield insurance policies. This option would increase the USDA premium subsidy
for revenue insurance on par with yield coverage, increasing the incentive to purchase this
expensive, but more comprehensive, coverage. It also has the added positive effect of increasing
the farmers' incentive to sell their crops on the forward market.

Farmers are notoriously reluctant to forward contract much of their crops out of fear that prices
will increase after they have locked in their forward price. Crop Revenue Coverage (CRC)
allows farmers to forward contract with the confidence that if prices go up after they have
obligated themselves to deliver at a lower price, they will not miss out on higher revenues
because CRC indemnifies against missing out on higher prices. The commodity exchanges find
this aspect of revenue coverage attractive because trading volume would increase. However,
they also have expressed some concern over the extent to which subsidized revenue coverage
might compete with their futures and options contracts.

Ensuring Participation


                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                3                  Hex-Dump Conversion
 success ultimately hinges on its impact on buyer behavior. Insurance is not currently required of
 producers, and they will have to make their own risk management decisions -- to buy or not to
 buy. However, large media advertising campaigns (also proposed by USDA) combined with a
 program structure that would virtually eliminate the lower coverage range of buy-up insurance
 would help to ensure the expected response on the part of farmers, as long as they can be
 convinced that the government will not once again revert to ad hoc disaster payments as future
 "disasters" arise.

 However, to reduce the uncertainty associated with buyer behavior, the Administration could
 reimpose the provision of the 1994 Crop Insurance Reform Act which required producers to
 purchase some level of crop insurance in order to receive any other USDA program benefits,
 especially the basic AMT A payments. This so-called "linkage" provision was in effect for one
 year, the 1995 crop year, and resulted in nearly doubling the amount of crop insurance sales.
 Linkage was not particularly controversial, and its abolition in the 1996 Farm Bill in response to'
 some producers' objections was accomplished without serious policy review by the
 Administration or Congress.

 Pro:
       Consistent with the market-oriented farm policies of the 1996 Farm Bill.

,      The President explicitly noted the need to fix crop insurance.

       Has best chance of enactment, given congressional Agriculture Committees' stated plan
        to propose major improvements in crop insurance.

       Would significantly increase crop insurance participation ifnot undermined by ad hoc
        disaster spending, and particularly if "linkage" is re-established (requirement that a
        producer buy crop insurance in order to participate in other USDA programs).

       Crop insurance is more inclusive than many other USDA programs, covering nearly 70
        different crops.

       Crop insurance is more friendly to the beginning farmer. Other programs (e.g., AMTA
        payments) have more cumbersome eligibility hurdles.

       Avoids sending a "mixed message" on the economic structure of farm policy (the hope of
        future ad hoc disaster spending or direct price/income support), and encourages producers
        to actively manage their risk, albeit on very concessional terms.

       More revenue insurance purchases would increase the number of producers protected
        against both weather risk and market risk.

                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                 4                Hex-Dump Conversion

       Could be used as a "transitional" fix: Subsidies could be dialed down as future conditions
        and policies warrant.

Con:
       Because the program does not guarantee benefits or require participation, its efficacy is
        ultimately dependent on buyer behavior (unless "linkage" is re-established).

        Increasing coverage at the CAT level could result in a "buy-down" effect; i.e., farmers
       . who previously paid for buy-up insurance opt for free CAT coverage.

       Budget "watchdog" groups may protest the new subsidies to U.S. agriculture as
        unnecessary.

       Private commodity exchanges might object to perceived competition from
        government-subsidized price risk management tools, i.e., revenue insurance.

2. Fix Multi-year Crop Insurance. ([Agency name] _ _ supports;                 recommends
against because... ) Introduce a new multi-year loss insurance provision as an optional add-on
to the crop insurance policy. A version of this was included in the Administration's summer
'98 farm disaster aid package and enacted in the Omnibus bill. This proposal would make the
availability of multi-year coverage permanent.

Estimated Costs                               2000   2001    2002 2003 2004
       (outlays in millions of dollars)                        171 176     181              187
192

The development of this provision is only in the discussion stages at USDA but the product could
be rolled out by the 2000 crop year. OMB would work with USDA to ensure that no duplicate
benefits would be paid through these provisions to either new insureds or producers who
received 1998 emergency assistance for multi-year losses.

The 1998 emergency multi-year loss benefits simply provided supplemental indemnity payments
to qualified insured farmers equal to 25 percent of the indemnities received over the relevant crop
years. The new policy provisions would likely have a similar effect, i.e., retroactively increase
coverage levels for consecutive-loss years (if the farmer was insured in each year) and payout
supplemental indemnities. The actual structure of the coverage has yet to be proposed by.
USDA.
It would be for multiple years or losses but not in perpetuity (e.g., cap at 5 or 6 years).

Pro
       Consistent with the market-oriented farm policies of the 1996 Farm Bill.

                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                 5
                                                                      Hex-Dwnp Conversion
       on 1998 emergency assistance.

      Crop insurance covers more crops and is more available to new farmers than most other
       USDA commodity assistance programs.

Con
      Because the program does not guarantee benefits or require participation, its efficacy is
       ultimately dependent on buyer behavior.

      Moral hazard, while true for subsidized crop insurance generally, could be greater.

3. Cover More Non-insured Crops. ([Agency namel_,_ supports; _ _recommends
against because ...) Increase support for non-insured crops covered by the Non-insurance Crop
Assistance Program (NAP).

Estimated costs:                             2000 2001      2002 2003       2004
       (outlays in millions of dollars)                       475 489          504        519
535

Despite the gr<;>wth in the number of crops covered by the insurance program over the last
decade, many crops remain for which no insurance is available, e.g., artichokes, lettuce, ginseng,
mushrooms, and many more. This optiqn proposes to increase NAP coverage on par with
coverage increases of CAT insurance; i.e, guarantee about 42 percent of expected revenue, and
includes livestock among "non-insured" commodities covered under NAP.

Benefits can be targeted, such as through USDA's proposal to increase crop-loss assistance on
non-insured crops for small farms, and provide increased incentives for private companies to
seek out and "sell" free CAT coverage to limited resource farmers.

Pro:
      Addresses the vulnerability ofprodilcers who raise crops and livestock for which no
       insurance exists.

      Could be perceived as unfair if CAT coverage is raised while NAP is not.

Con:
      Costly to cover more minor crops, mostly vegetables, which was not a source of national
       farmer dissatisfaction in summer '98.                          .



                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                6          Hex-Dump Conversion
against because...) Increase USDA's current educational options pilot programs (OPP) and other
risk management education and outreach efforts.

Estimated costs: (outlays in millions of dollars)       2000 2001    2002 2003 2004
OPPs on two commodities                                   21 22          22     23   24
Education and outreach                                       29       30     31     32
    33

Options on futures contracts are often cited as the equivalent of price insurance. Producers who
purchase "put" options have effectively purchased a price floor. When prices go up, they can
still enjoy the benefits of higher prices, but they are protected if prices fall below the floor, or
"strike price", they purchased.

USDA has recently implemented a program to teach dairy farmers how to use these markets that
provides a short term, hands-on trading experience with USDA sharing the cost of the options
contracts. The program lasts only for six-months per producer and allows the producer to buy
options on a limited quantity of milk. The producer leams the markets, the terminology,
hedging strategy, and how to select and deal with a broker.

The program vision is not for permanent subsidies. Its sole objective is to educate the producer
in the hope that the producer will continue to manage price risk using options after "graduating"
from the short term, subsidized program. For OPPs to succeed, legislation would require a
change to remove language requiring budget neutrality. The 1996 Farm Bill stipulates that
OPPs must be budget neutral "to the maximum extent practicable". USDA interprets that to
mean that recipients of USDA program payments who participate in an OPP must forego in
program payments the amount of the subsidies they will receive under the OPP. This provision
does not apply in USDA's current dairy OPP because dairy farmers are not currently receiving
program payments. Thus, the offset is not "practicable".

In addition, USDA would conduct aggressive outreach programs to organize county-level
workshops, develop university curricula, and a multimedia advertising campaign.

Pro:
        Consistent with the market-oriented reforms of the 1996 Farm Bill.

        Futures/options markets exist for most of the eight major "program crops".

        Complements the other options such as increased insurance coverage by alerting and
         introducing farmers to risk management tools.

Con:
        Futures/options markets exist for only a limited number of crops.


                                                    7          Automated Records Management System
                                                               HeX-Dump Gonversion
_ _ recommends against because...) Provides a tax advantage for building financial reserves
to be used for farm contingencies. In its "Bluebook" of policy guidance for the 1996 Farm Bill,
the Administration proposed "income stabilization accounts". Treasury representatives suggest
that the permanent tax relief measures for farmers in the FY 1999 Omnibus Appropriations Bill
are sufficient. These included: extending loss-carryback provisions in "good" years for
farmers, and permanent extension of income averaging. These were scored by Treasury as
reducing tax receipts by $36 million annually, but the actual effect 6fthese changes in the tax
code on farm income is not yet known. (A similar, "FARRM" IRA proposal was nearly adopted
in the FY 1999 Omnibus bill.)

Risk management or income stabilization accounts could be designed to provide benefits for only
relatively small or low-income farmers. Such accounts are being tried in Canada and France.
They normally permit pre-tax deposits into the account up to a certain amount. Incentives such
as a government contribution component could be considered as well. In the event of a disaster,
the farmer is permitted to withdraw the funds without penalty. The withdrawals would help
support the farmer until the next crop year and would likely be taxed in a lower bracket than the
farmer's normal income.

 The income amounts deposited, the withdrawal triggers (e.g., decreases in gross revenues, net
 income, price index below moving average, etc.), eligibility and consequent costs are widely
 adjustable. This concept could be announced as a pilot program for a specific commodity or
.region.

Estimated costs: (outlays in millions of dollars)       2000   2001   2002    2003   2004
                                                         200    200    200     200    200
Pro:
       Encourages prudent savings while reducing the impact of future disasters on both the
        farmer and the Federal budget.

       Builds on producers' current ability to manage their income streams by savings and
        timing of input and capital purchases for tax purposes, popular approaches for farmers.

       Makes more comprehensive an Administration safety net policy of "various solutions
        appropriate to segments and conditions in farm country".

Con:
       Treasury representatives believe this option would - ifnot targeted - disproportionately
        aid large, wealthy farmers while providing little assistance to small farmers.

       Low farmer participation would be expected.



                                                    8                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
_ _ recommends against because ...) USDA's proposal includes assistance for livestock, and
would allow farmers to receive both CAT and NAP benefits, USDA disaster loans, and other
USDA farm credit. Some were included in Summer '98 Administration package.

Estimated costs                                                2000     2001    2002      2003   2004
       (outlays in millions of dollars)
a) Emergency livestock feed                                    24        25            25         26
27
b) Allowing both CAT and NAP benefits                          10        10         11      11 11
c) Small agriculture-related business loans (discretionary)    (50)     (52)       (54)     (56)(58)

Pro:
      Small farm- and small business-oriented.

      CAT 'and NAP can be re-structured to also limit benefits to larger, well-capitalized
       operations.

Con:
      Without proper limits in place, CAT and NAP are subject to abuse by larger businesses.

7.     Land Retirement. ([Agency namel _ _ supports;                    recommends against
because...) Some producers farm land that encounters natural disabilities (like excessive wetness
or disease) that persist longer than one year, but that is likely to return to production. USDA
could enter medium-term contracts (3 - 5 years non renewable) to retire such land, including land
in the Upper Plains that is diseased or under water, or hind in the southwest that is quarantined
due to kamal bunt. Payments would be made for "environmental benefits", including
conservation practices aimed to restore the land to production. An area-wide problem could be
required to trigger in a farm's land for eligibility. USDA's Conservation Reserve Program
(CRP) retires land for lO-year periods, but not when they are made unproductive due to natural
afflictions. A version of this proposal was included in Administration's Summer '98 package
and in the 11/13 USDA budget letter, but was not enacted.

Estimated costs: (outlays in millions of dollars)       2000   2001     2002    2003      2004
                                                          50    75       100     100       100
Pro:
      Would fill a gap in the current program structure, since there is no program aimed at this
       problem.

Con:
      Unlikely need for medium-term retirement program; land problems better ameliorated
       thr?ugh farming practices or a program that would permanently retire land.



                                                    9               Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
because...) Uncap 1996 Farm Bill levels. (See Appendix B for background.)

Estimated costs                                       2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
       (outlays in millions of dollars)               4,000 4,000 4,000 3,000 3,000

Removing the 1996 Farm Bill's limitation on marketing loan rates (85 percent ofa five-year
moving average minus high and low years, but not more than the 1995 level) would enable the
loan rates to rise to a level that practically guarantees regular annual payments in the years ahead.
 This would tum the marketing loan program into a type of "deficiency payment," a program
abolished by the 1996 Farm Bill. As a general commodity program, it would apply to all major
field crops for the 1.8 million participants in USDA crop subsidy programs. This was proposed
by Sens. Harkin and Daschle in the summer, and by the Administration in some forms, but
defeated in Congress on six occasions.

A targeted version, a "two-tier marketing loan", was proposed by Sen. Daschle in the 1996
Farm Bill deliberations. This proposal would offer a higher loan rate for a minimum volume of
production per farmer, e.g., the first 10,000 bushels. Production above that level would receive
a lower loan rate or none at all. This regime would provide relatively greater benefit to smaller
producers.

Pro
      Popular with many populist supporters of the Administration.

      Would be perceived as supporting smaller, less efficient farmers.

Con
      Would return farm policy back to failed, costly past programs that hurt US exports and
       would lead to production supply controls, widely unpopular with farmers.

      Untargeted version would provide gratuitous financial windfall to many farmers.

      Targeted version would be opposed by many larger farmers, especially of cotton and rice.

      Would compete/conflict with market-oriented programs (e.g., revenue insurance, OPPs).

      Fails to help individual farmers with diminished or failed crop.

9.   Federal Assistance for Exports. ([Agency name]             supports; _ _recommends
against because... ) Donations and support for faltering export markets.

Estimated costs (outlays in millions)         2000      2001      2002       2003         2004
                                              2,500    2,500      2,500      2,500      2,500

                                                 10                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
extended so long as the commodity to be donated remains in surplus in the US. While sufficient
 funding usually is not an obstacle for the mandatory programs and emergency authorities
involved, this action is limited by GATT rules on subsidies, our trading partners' complaints, and
the undermining of US commercial exports. The actual impact of Federal donations on US farm
prices is in dispute, but the announcements of donations are seen as popular among many
farmers, ifnot commodity markets. The Administration's active role in managing the Asian
economic crisis--a major cause of reduced demand for US agricultural exports--is viewed as a
general form of help to US farmers, but indirect and longer-term.

Pro:
      Perceived in farm country as positive action ..

      Can cause "additional" exports to those countries unable to purchase food.

Con
      Need for bulk commodities is limited. Truly hungry people not already being supplied
       by standing government programs tend to need consumer-ready foodstuffs.

      Limited by tendency to displace US commercial exports.

      Unpredictable impact on markets means unreliable domestic farm support program.

V. Offsets

USDA has not proposed any offsets to date. OMB recommends P AYGO offsets from cuts in
guaranteed Agriculture Market Transition Act (AMTA) payments. The shift in funding would
effectively redistribute funds guaranteed to producers who have not experienced crop losses and
rewards those who have actively managed their yield risk and paid a share ofthe associated costs.
 AMTA payments are only authorized through FY 2002; however, baseline rules extend the
authorization and baseline spending indefinitely.

The distribution of AMTA payments by state compares favorably to the expected redistribution
of funds through increased crop insurance subsidies. Some discrepancies arise among certain
Midwestern states (Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Nebraska) that receive significant AMTA payments
and whose proportion of benefits would likely be eroded and shifted toward states with higher
crop insurance losses. Many of the states experiencing increases in their proportional benefits
are those with particular problems over the most recent period (Texas, North Dakota, Minnesota,
Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina). In effect, the redistribution takes benefits from areas
with a lower incidence of crop losses and moves them to areas that have been harder-hit in the
past year and have had historically higher levels of uninsured or underinsured producers.


                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                11
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
channels funds much more dramatically to areas in the most need.

However, crop insurance indemnities are not guaranteed as are AMT A payments. Coverage
begins at specified loss levels verified at the individual farm level. The same number of dollars
is projected to be disbursed over the long run, but wide variations in year-to-year outlays will
occur. The proposal channels funds to farmers who have taken proactive steps to manage their
risk and suffered verified losses, at the cost of guaranteed payments withdrawn from farmers
holding AMTA contracts. Using AMTA payments as an offset achieves some targeting of
AMT A benefits.




                                                                Automated Records Management S)ster:,
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                 12

 Appendix A:      Crop Insurance

 Yield Insurance (USDA's standard multi-peril crop insurance products)

  Crop insurance coverage is made up of two components, yield coverage and price coverage.
  The buyer can choose among various coverage combinations of both yield and price. The
  minimum coverage level insures 50 percent of average yield at 60 percent of a USDA-set price ..
  This plan is known as Catastrophic Risk Protection (CAT), or "50/60" coverage. The highest
. coverage available nationally is the 751100 level. The most popular coverage to date is the
  65/1 00 level. At this level of coverage, if the insureds suffer a 50 percent yield loss, they are
  made whole on the lost production up to 65 percent (or 15 percent in this case) and the indemnity
  payment would amount to the 15 percent of covered loss times 100 percent of the USDA-set
  price.

 USDA offers two general levels of insurance coverage; Catastrophic Risk Protection (CAT), and
 so-called "buy-up" coverage which is all coverage levels higher than CAT. CAT premium is
 100 percent subsidized and the fanner only pays a nominal administrative fee for it. CAT
 covers only 30 percent of expected revenue. Buy-up coverage is available at levels between 60
 and 75 percent of expected revenue and is subsidized on a scale that slides downward as
 coverage increases. In other words, 65 percent coverage involves a 40 percent premium subsidy,
 and 75 percent coverage involves a 24 percent subsidy.

 USDA has performed marketing analysis to estimate how much an average producer is willing to
 pay for buy-up crop insurance. That amount is $5.30 for each $100 ofliability insured. USDA
 proposes to apply that fanner-paid amount to a coverage level that is considered high enough to
 restore credibility to the crop insurance program in the wake of the harsh criticisms last summer.
 That level is 70 percent of expected revenue.

 The following example illustrates how the insurance coverage works:

     a)     a com grower with 1,000 acres and an average'yield of 100 bushels per acre has an
            expected yield of 100,000 bushels;
     b)     the insured price set by USDA is $2.30 per bushel;
     c)     "70/100" coverage is purchased, so the fanner has insured $161,000 of liability
            (70,000 bushels at $2.30Ibu.);
     d)     if the fanner experiences a 40 percent yield loss (i.e., a harvest of 60,000 bushels) an
            indemnity of$23,000 would be paid (i.e., the 10,000 bushels that would make the
            fanner whole up to 70 percent of average production multiplied by 100 percent of the
            $2.30Ibu. price);



                                                 13             Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
             which 32 percent, $4,160, is currently paid by USDA;
     1)      USDA also reimburses the private insurers' administrative expenses at a rate of24.5
             percent of gross premium, or in this case $3,185.

Revenue Insurance

Standard crop insurance policies do not indemnify producers who have not experienced crop
losses due to natural causes.' However, even a producer who harvests 100 percent of expected
yield can be put on difficult financial footing through price declines. The Federal crop insurance
program currently offers three policies that provide indemnities in the event of falling prices
regardless of crop losses ("revenue insurance"). These products are all less than three years old.
  Two are struggling to become established but one has been very successful. Crop Revenue
Coverage (CRC), developed by one ofthe private crop insurance companies, now accounts for
16% ofthe crop insurance market (nearly $300 million in annual premium). This is a very high
growth rate over just three years, particularly in light of its price tag -- CRC premiums are 30
percent higher than comparable yield insurance on average.

Revenue insurance policies are subsidized by USDA at a lower percentage than yield coverage.
It is worth noting that, in light ofthis lower subsidy on a high-priced policy, CRC's growth tends
to contradict the notion that farmers are unwilling to pay significant premium costs for crop
insurance. This, in tum, further supports options that retain market-onented safety net
programs, with an eye toward dialing down subsidies over the long term.

CRC's success in the market is attributable to one unique component of its coverage; CRC
indemnifies if prices fall and if prices rise; CRC will indemnify yield loss at the current market
price ifit has gone up during the insurance period. To summarize, revenue policies work much
like standard policies but payout indemnities in more circumstances:

     a)   yield loss when prices remain unchanged (like standard policies);
     b)   yield loss when prices fall (like standard policies);
     c)   yield loss when prices rise (CRC pays out at the higher market price);
     d)   no yield loss but prices fall (revenue policies only).

The following is an example of revenue insurance, scenario "d" above:

a)        a com grower with 1,000 acres and an average yield of 100 bushels per acre has an
          expected yield of 100,000 bushels;
b)        the insured price, established by the average price of December com futures during the
          month of February, is $2.45 per bushel;
c)        "70/100" coverage is purchased, so the farmer has insured $171,500 ofliability (70,000
          bushels at $2.45/bu.);
d)        by December, the farmer has no yield loss (i.e., a harvest of 100,000 bushels)


                                                  14
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
       (November) has dropped to $2.00lbushel (i.e., down 45 centslbushel). An indemnity of
       $31,500 would be paid (i.e., the 70,000 bushels insured multiplied by 100 percent of the
       $0.45lbu. price decline);
1)     the total insurance premium for the coverage would likely be around $17,000, of which
       24 percent, or $4,160, is currently paid by USDA;
g)     USDA also reimburses the private insurers' administrative expenses at a rate of23.5
       percent of gross premium, or in this case $3,995.


Appendix B: Boosting Farm Income Through Marketing Loans

A major goal of some farm interests is to increase USDA's "marketing loan rate" so it would
guarantee farm income robust enough to cover the relatively higher costs of production of some
U.S. farmers. Sens. Daschle and Harkin were chief proponents of increasing ("uncapping")
marketing loan rates during the summer's debate on how to improve the farm income safety net.


How marketing loans work
USDA's marketing crop loans, a program to enable farmers to avoid selling during the
lowest- price (harvest) period ofthe year, basically set a price floor for the crop, backed by the
Treasury. Farmers take out a 9-month loan from USDA at harvest time based on a statutory
"loan rate" or
price per bushel. If market prices drop below the loan rate, farmers can repay the loan at the
lower market price per bushel. USDA absorbs (loses) the difference between the market price
and the (higher) loan rate price, and the farmer keeps the crop to sell on the market. Marketing
loans are available for the major US field crops, like wheat and com. Payments under the
program are limited to $75,000 per person per crop year.

Current issue
The 1996 farm bill capped the loan rate at 85 percent of the five-year moving average price for
the commodity, but not more than 1995 levels. The 1990 farm bill gave the Secretary of
Agriculture discretion to reduce the loan rate from the five-year average, depending on market
conditions and budget costs. That bill also required that supply controls be imposed appropriate
to those market conditions to determine the size of the crops produced and the cost to the
govemment. Uncapping loan rates would raise them (by 22 percent for wheat, 15 percent for
com) to an average price level that would be unusually high at present, because it would include
the historic record high price period 'of 1995 and 1996. Farm interests have not suggested
reimposing supply controls, which is unpopular with farmers.

For example, a wheat farmer with 100,000 bushels in 1998 faced a capped loan rate of
$2.58lbushel, an average price of $2.65, but a low price of $2.35. He received $23,000 (100,000
times the 23 cent gap between the low price and the loan 'rate) by asking USDA for a "loan


                                                15
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
variation of a marketing loan. Foregoing entirely a USDA crop loan, the farmer gets a cash
payment from USDA for the difference between the loan rate and the prevailing market price.)

The farmer then held onto the crop for 10 weeks and sold it at $2.70 and received $270,000.
The marketing loan boosted the farmer's 1998 income by 9 percent under the current loan rate
regime ($23,000 divided by $270,000). If the wheat loan rate had been uncapped, the USDA
loan deficiency payment would have been $81,000 (100,000 times the 81 cent gap between the
low price arid the uncapped loan rate of $3 .16 for 1998), a boost 0[30 percent to the farmer's
income.

Costs
USDA to-date has paid about $1.6 billion in marketing loan gains on the 1998 crop for all major
commodities. Probably the costs for this crop under current loan rates will total about $2 billion
this year. Uncapping loan rates for one year only on the 1998 crop, as Sens. Daschle and Harkin
proposed, would have cost an additional $5 billion in FY 1999. The cost for uncapping on the
1999 crop only, with outlays largely in FY 2000, probably would be about $4 billion according
to current price projections.

Policy significance
Federal attempts in the 1960s and 1980s to protect farmers from market cycles demonstrated that
USDA price-support loan rates that are within about 25 percent of commodity market prices
distort markets by:
        - setting an effective floor on market prices for producers;
        - stimulating US production;
        - increasing taxpayer costs;
        - leading to production controls, reduced exports and greater foreign production.

Loan rates that are low relative to market prices avoid these distortions, but can provide an
income safety net in case of a price collapse. An NEC interagency process concluded in 1994
that raising loan rates slightly was dubious policy because of its market effects even when it
would cost much less than under current price conditions.

Budgetary costs and policy problems could be reduced when raising marketing loan rates by
targeting the payments to those producers in greatest need. For example, this could be done by
excluding high-income farmers and limiting the higher loan rate to each producer's first few
thousand bushels of grain.




                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                               16                  Hex-Dump Conversion


