RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-DEC-199B 19:02:34.00

SUBJECT:       Central American relief

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Scott Busby ( CN=Scott Busby/OU=NSC/O=EOP @ EOP [ NSC 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CCo Marjorie Tarmey ( CN=Marjorie Tarmey/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN .

CC: Leslie Bernstein ( CN=Leslie Bernstein/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Scott Busby and I met this morning with DOJ, INS and State to develop
final recommendations on how we should proceed with announcements related
to the post-Mitch situation in Central America.   The following outlines
the issues discussed and the decisions that we need to make.

1.    TPS.

We received the first half of q&a from State and were promised the rest by
the end of the day today. Also by c.o.b. today, State is going to provide
us with a final position on whether we should reinstitute stays of
deportation for either the Dominican Republic or Haiti given our decision
to provide stays for Guatemala and EI Salvador (to ensure consistency) .
State will also provide any information we need to support our final
decisions on this issue.

The group recommends that Commissioner Meissner make the TPS announcement,
along with a person from the State Department.  It was thought that Doris
would be best equipped to respond to the immigration questions.  We would
seek to have her do the announcement on Monday aftrenoon (she is out of
the country this week) to give us adequate time to brief representatives
of the countries before the Central Americans presidents arrive on
Thursday for the debt relief conference.

As to addressing concerns about fraud, INS proposes to reduce the TPS
registration to six months (it has traditionally been coextensive with the
TPS period) and will be developing questions to assist in determining
eligibility.

2.        Legislative Parity

All of the legislative affairs folks (Caroline Fredrickson (WH) , Patty
First (DOJ) , Allen Erenbaum (INS), Broderick Johnson (WH) , and Gina
Abercrombie-Winstanley (NSC}) agree that we should not make any
l"        f·



     announcement supporting legislation to achieve "parity" for Salvadorans
     and Guatemalans until after they have had much more time to work with
     members of Congress. Their fear is that if we make the announcement too
     soon, that will only give those who will be opposed to the legislation
     (such as Lamar Smith) a chance to get to the swing voters or other key
     members before we can. The leg. folks feel particularly strongly about
     this in light of indications of support for some kind of legislative acti
     on for Central Americans by Sens. Hatch and Abraham.  Caroline noted that
     Hatch would be particularly put off by an announcement of our decision on
     legislation after he has indicated interest, but before he has been fully
     consulted about such a proposal.

     However, the group agreed that it would be a good idea to indicate to the
     advocacy community and the Ambassadors to EI Salvador and Guatemala (and
     possibly the presidents if there is.a POTUS or VPOTUS meeting with them)
     that we plan to work with Congress to enact legislation next year that
     would achieve· parity for Salvadorans and Guatemalans.

     3.    Extreme Hardship and the NACARA regulation

     DOJ (including INS) is opposed to including in the final NACARA regulation
     any presumption of extreme hardship (rebuttable or otherwise) for
     nationals from EI Salvador and Guatemala.   This opposition is based on the
     following: (1) such a presumption has never before been utilized; (2) a
     country-based presumption would be inconsistent with the concept of
     "individual adjudication" that underlies suspension claims; (3) it would
     be inconsistent with the facts (blc it would not be "extreme hardship" for
     some Sal·vadoran and Guatemalan nationals to return to un-harmed parts of
     their countries and blc hardships created by the hurricane will be
     significantly diminished by the time these adjudications occur); and (4)
     such a conclusion would be inconsistent with our decision not to grant TPS
     to these countries (blc a presumption of extreme hardship would imply that
     these countries cannot really absorb their nationals) .

     INS would agree to provide information to immigration judges and NACARA
     adjudicators on hurricane-related conditions in El Salvador and Guatemala
     and direct them to take these conditions into account when adjudicating
     suspension claims for nationals of those coun'tries. They would also
     consider amending the NACARA regulation to specifically identify
     conditions relating to natural disasters as relevant to the extreme
     hardship determination.

     Thus, we may be able to couple our TPS announcement with a general
     statement that we plan to ensure that the conditions created by Hurricane
     Mitch are taken into account in the process of,deciding NACARA suspension
     cases.

     4.    Next Steps

     We need to decide the following:

     a.  Whether we agree to defer announcement of our support for legislative
     parity until we have had more of a chance to work with Congress.

     Scott and I agree that this announcement should be deferred, in the
     interest of actually getting the legislation passed.    We also agree that
     we should indicate to the advocacy community and the Ambassadors to EI
     Salvador and Guatemala that we plan to work with. Congress to enact
     legislation next year that would achieve parity. Jim Dobbins and Scott
     would conduct the briefings with the Ambassadors.
..     ·   U




     b. Whether we agree with the INS/DOJ view that we not adopt a presumption
     of extreme hardship for Salvadorans and Guatemalans covered by NACARA
     (n.b., such a presumption would be based on the totality of the
     circumstances vis-a-vis Salvadorans and Guatemalans covered by NACARA
     i.e., the history of unfair denial of asylum claims; ABC litigation;
     NACARA; our statements in support of parity) .

     Scott and I recommend holding off on this decision until after the end of
     the comment period for the NACARA regulation (end of January).  This gives
     us more time to consider this option and avoids our making regulatory
     decisions outside of the notice & comment process.

     c. Whether we continue to believe (given the strong possibility that the
     announcement will be TPS only) that press availability on the announcement
     (with Doris and someone from the State Dept.) would be better than a press
     release.

     Scott and I recommend that Doris and someone from State should do a press
     availability.  Our concern is that a press release would result in an
     uncontrolled message.

     d. Whether we continue to believe that we need to announce TPS for
     Honduras and Nicaragua before the POTUS or VPOTUS possibly meets with the
     Central American presidents (on Dec. lOth or 11th). Our thinking had been
     that we did not want the TPS question to be open when the POTUS meets with
     the presidents; however, in light of the fact that the annoucement will be
     good news for two countries and not for the other two, does that change
     the calculation?

     Scott and I recommend that we make this annoucement Monday afternoon
     (December 7th). Jim Dobbins was agnostic, but we think that   (1) the
     decision in overdue (Dobbins agrees); and (2) there is an advantage to
     taking the TPS issue off the table in advance of the presidents' visit.

     Please let me or Scott. know what you think about these issues and whether
     you would like to get together to discuss them.   Thanks.

     julie


