RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-DEC-1998 11:46:22.00

SUBJECT:   Responsible Fathers Grants

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is an updated summary of the fathers grants idea. It reflects
considerable staff-level input and general support from OVP, DOL and HHS,
but has not yet gone through official clearance at the agencies.    I do
not believe the VP has been briefed yet (though his fatherhood advisors
are on board), but that is supposed to happen shortly.


This is a more detailed discussion paper including options on several
issues.


The biggest issue is still how to pay for the proposal.  I need to touch
bases w/ OMB on the status of funding for the Welfare-to-Work
reauthorization, since this would likely be carved out of that amount.
We'd be glad to discuss this further.==================== ATTACHMENT   I ===========
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
U~able to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D32]MAIL43922S63J.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FFS7S043E6040000010A0201000000020S000000081C000000020000448CS9EODFBSA3E220EF6S
DA6BA07ESE637788F4SCEDS7F941EA270E00774S6DSC1F3D31D24SDB6F2E8D3916B1F98B867FCB
SA6DC4SB30AFOS555DAEDE78EE76BDFOC656ED76702AC9D7CSOOE70BAD1F6F2D43S6F6DB8345C3

                         RESPONSIBLE FATHERHOOD GRANTS

GoallPurpose
Strengthen families by helping fathers to be more effective and involved parents and responsible
members of their community through: 1) mcreasing the employment and earnings of low income
fathers so they can better support their children either through child support or more take-home
pay and 2) Promoting and supporting fathers' personal responsibility including paternity
establishment, child support, community involvement, and marriage (when appropriate).



Eligible population
Generally, fathers who are committed to playing by the rules in terms of employment, paternity,
child support, and responsible parenting. Depending on how eligibility is defined, the number
of poor non-custodial fathers conservatively ranges from 300,000 to 1 million. This does not
include fathers who live with some of their children but not others; nor does it include fathers in
prison or living on military bases. The grants could also serve fathers living with their children
if they need help with employment and parenting (limiting eligibility to non-custodial parents is a
disincentive to marriage and/or family unification). Non-custodial mothers would be served in
the same way as non-custodial fathers.

Allowable activities
Employment activities such as job placement, retention, re-employment, entrepreneurship, and
advancement services, and skills training combined with work. Job-related support services ifnot
                                                ,
otherwise available -- transportation, child care, clothes and tools. . Other services to promote .
responsible fatherhood including: outreach; peer support, parenting, violence reduction, conflict
resolution, and team parenting courses; legal assistance, mediation, counseling, treatment

Funding Level and Match
Approximately $200 million in federal funds, with a small state minimum. (Assuming Fathers
grants at 20% ofWTW formula grants, smallest states would get approximately $700,000).
Assuming same match as WTW program: $1 non-federal for every $2 federal, possibly with
expanded definition of allowable in-kind match. Consider allowing a small percent of Federal
T ANF $ to be transferred out as match (requires further discussion).

Funding Flow and Delivery System
Allocate majority of funds on a formula basis to states who submit Responsible Fatherhood
plans. Governor submits plan with mandatory sign-off from workforce, TANF, and child
support agencies, designates lead agency at state level, and identifies mechanism for ongoing
coordination among key agencies. Reserve about 15% at national level for research and
evaluation, technical assistance, and discretionary grants to test national models. Provide set
aside for formula grants directly to federally-recognize tribes who submit plan.


                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
Options
      1) Same as WTW: 85% of funds to local PICs/workforce boards, 15% reserved for
       Governor's discretionary activities. Require local PICs to coordinate with public
       agencies responsible for TANF and child support. Encourage PICs to subcontract with
       private, community groups, including faith-based organizations, where appropriate.
       Provide waiver authority for Governor to designate alternate service delivery entity.

      2) Allow Governor to allocate funds within state to entities that best meet state and local
       needs and circumstances. This could be done on a formula or competitive basis. Grant
       recipients would need to demonstrate coordination with local workforce, welfare, and
       child support systems.


Federal Administrative responsibility
Regardless of which federal agency administers the funds, there should be a strong mechanism
for ongoing interagency involvement in reviewing state plans, providing technical assistance,
sharing information among various constituencies, and coordinating with existing programs. Key
agencies include: DOL; HHS/OCSE and ACF; HUD; Justice. SBA, DOT, Education and others
also playa significant role.


Rationale
Most children on welfare live with a single (custodial) parent and depend on child support
payments from their non-custodial parent (usually father) for additional financial support. As
these families move from welfare to work and face time-limited welfare assistance, increasing
the child support paid by non-custodial parents is critical. Many of these fathers work, but their
employment tends to be unstable and confined to entry level jobs. A recent study found that 70
percent of poor non-custodial fathers had some involvement with the criminal justice system.
These same fathers express strong interest in being involved with their children, by providing
both financial and emotional support and serving as a positive force in their children's lives.
There is growing, broad-based support for responsible fatherhood initiatives. WTW funding is
an important new federal funding source but is limited to a subset of poor fathers whose children
are on welfare.




                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

                         RESPONSIBLE FATHERHOOD GRANTS

Goal/Purpose
            Strengthen families by helping fathers to be more effective and involved parents
             and responsible members of their community through:

               1) Increasing the employment and earnings of low income fathers so they can
             . better support their children either through child support or more take-home pay.

               2) Promoting and supporting fathers' personal responsibility including paternity
               establishment, child support, community involvement, and marriage (when
               appropriate) .

Rationale [needs to be refined and beefed up with statistics]
       Most children on welfare live with a single (custodial) parent and depend on child support
       payments from their non-custodial parent (usually father) for additional financial support.
        As these families move from welfare to work and face time-limited welfare assistance,
       increasing the child support paid by non-custodial parents is critical. Many of these
       fathers work, but their employment tends to be unstable and confined to entry level jobs.
       A recent study found that 70 percent of poor non-custodial fathers had some involvement
       with the criminal justice system. These same fathers express strong interest in being
       involved with their children, by providing both financial and emotional support and
       serving as a positive force in their children's lives.

Current Initiatives
       The Welfare-to-Work grants administered by the Department of Labor can be used to
       provide employment-related services to certain non-custodial parents of children on
       welfare. Several states have focused their entire formula grant funds on non-custodial
       parents, others intend to serve a significant number of non-custodial parents along with
       custodial parents. In addition, 54Welfare-to-Work competitive grants include
       non-custodial parents, with several of these grants focused exclusively on this population.
        However, these WTW services do not address the needs of a broader group of
       low-income fathers who do not themselves meet the WTW criteria or whose children are
       not currently on welfare.

       The Office of Child Support Enforcement is funding eight Responsible Fatherhood
       demonstrations projects to help low-income, unmarried fathers who have established
       paternity become involved in the lives oftheir children and become financially ..
       responsible parents. Funding for projects in CA, CO, MD, MA, MO, NH, W A, and WI,
       along with a multi-site evaluation, totals $1.5 million.

Eligible population
Generally, fathers who are committed to playing by the rules in terms of employment, paternity,
                                                                   AutomatedR
                                                                              ecorcls Manaaement Sy t
                                                                   Hex-D                  b        s em
                                                                      . ump Conversion

Depending on how the eligible popUlation is defined, there are between 2 million and 5 million
low income fathers, the majority of whom live with their children. The number of poor
non-custodial fathers conservatively ranges from 300,000 to 700,000. Data from the 1990 SlPP
indicates there are about 2 million fathers living in households with income below the poverty
level, of which: 1.5 million fathers live with their children (resident dads), 300,000 do not live
with any of their children (non-custodial dads), and 200,000 live with some of their children but
not do not live with others (dual dads). An additional 2. 7 million fathers live in households with
income between 100% and 150% of the poverty level, including: 2 million resident dads,
400,000 non-custodial dads, and 275,000 dual dads. Looking at personal income, which is the
basis for child support payments, about 3.8 million fathers have anual income below $10,000,
including: 2.3 million resident dads, 1 million non-custodial dads, and 450,000 dual dads.
These figures considerably understate the number of low-income fathers because they do not
include men in prison [approximately 1 million of whom are fathers?] nor those living on
military bases, plus they reflect the census undercount of poor, young minority men.

Options:
              (1) Preferred Option: Low-income parents. Could define income eligibility as
               150% of poverty, 185% of poverty, EITC eligibility, or below state or local
               average income of male earners (Fathers Count bill targets 80% of funds to the
               latter group).

              (2) Non-custodial parent of a child eligible for or receiving TANF, formerly
               received TANF, or at risk of receiving TANF. Could also non-custodial parents
               receiving Food Stamps -- provides link with population, by including fathers
               who are ABAWDs and Food Stamp E&T program.

              (3) 'Hard to Serve' non-custodial parents (current WTW definition). 70%
               criteria: either the child or the custodial parent has received TANF for at least 30
               months or will become ineligible for assistance within 12 months due to a time
               limit and the non-custodial parent has two of the three barriers related to low
               education skills, substance abuse or poor work history. 30% criteria: noncustodial
               parent has characteristics associated with long-term welfare dependence.

       All of the above income levels include fathers living with their children if they need help
       with employment and parenting (whether or not the parents are married). This could be
       open-ended, or limited to a certain percentage of the total grant funds. Limiting
       eligibility to non-custodial parents is disincentive to marriage and/or father living with
       children. Also, non-custodial mothers would be served in the same way as non-custodial
       fathers. Custodial parents on welfare are likely to be served under TANF or WTW.

NOTE: Options 2 and 3 are considered too narrow, administratively burdensome, and too tightly
linked to welfare status of custodial parent.


                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
             Employment activities -- same as WTW activities, including job placement,
              post-placement services, retention, re-employment, advancement. Include
              education and training tied to employment (allowing stand-along education and
              training raises equity issue with custodial parents). Also include
              entrepreneurship (build in link with IDAs).

             Employment-related supportive services ifnot otherwise available--
              transportation, child care, work-related expenses such as clothes and tools.
              Consider including one-time/short-tenn health care and housing expenses needed
              to help someone get or keep ajob. Whether to include ongoing health or housing
              assistance, i.e. monthly insurance premiums, needs further discussion.
              Encourage private sector involvement, including partnerships with health care
              providers (e.g. Kaiser Pennanente provides insurance coverage for participants,
              including fathers, in Baltimore Healthy Start programs for a minimal monthly
              premium).

             Other services to promote responsible fatherhood including: outreach, peer
              support groups, parenting classes, violence reduction, conflict resolution, team
              parenting courses, legal assistance, mediation, counseling, treatment, and other
              items related to the purpose of the program.

             Allow reasonable administrative expenses (15% to be consistent with WTW
              funds).
                                                                                                         \
             Encourage employment oflow-income non-clfstodial fathers to help collect child
              support from other non-custodial parents and reinforce the importance of
              responsible fatherhood. [being done in MD Responsible Fatherhood project?]

Funding flow and Service delivery system
Federal to State
              Allocate majority of funds on a fonnula basis to states who submit Responsible
               Fatherhood plans.

             Fonnula factors:
              Options [DOLlHHS: need to do runs}
                    Population (Fathers Count)
                    Low income men (data on fathers not available at sub-state level)
                    Poverty + number of children not living with both parents (similar to
                     Access and Visitation grants)
                    WTW fonnula (poverty and welfare receipt)

      Reserve 15% at national level for Secretary to provide research and evaluation, Technical
       Assistance, and discretionary grants to test national models. Assuming $200 M, 15% =

                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
         TA.)

Tribes
               Set aside for fonnula grants directly to federally-recognize tribes who submit plan.

Substate Allocation:
Options
              1) Same as WTW: 85% of funds to local PICs/workforce boards, 15% reserved
              for Governor's discretionary activities. Require local PICs to coordinate with
              public agencies responsible for TANF and child support, with community and
               faith based organizations involved in fatherhood issues, and with EZIECs.
              Encourage PICs to subcontract with private organizations where appropriate.
              Could provide waiver authority for Governor to designate alternate service
              delivery entity. Establish minimum grant size similar to WTW funds.

               2) Allow Governor to allocate funds within state to entities that best meet state
                and local needs and circumstances. This could be done on a formula or
                competitive basis. Grant recipients would need to demonstrate coordination with
                local workforce, welfare, and child support systems, at a minimum.

NOTE: Assuming charitable choice provision in TANF applies to WTW, states can contract with
            religious organizations.


Federal Administrative responsibility
            Regardless of which federal agency administers the funds, there should be a
             strong mechanism for ongoing interagency involvement in reviewing state plans,
             providing technical assistance, sharing infonnation among various constituencies,
             and coordinating with existing programs. Key agencies include: DOL;
             HHS/OCSE and ACF; HUD; Justice. SBA, DOT, Education and others also play
             a significant role.

Plan requirements
             Governor submits plan with mandatory sign-off from workforce, TANF, and child
              support agencies. Designates lead agency at state level and identifies mechanism
              for ongoing coordination among key agencies, such as Interagency Memorandum
              ofAgreement. For example, state might have existing Fatherhood Task Force.
              Could require state to get sign-off from, or demonstrate coordination with, at least .
              one other relevant agency such as Criminal Justice, Education, Housing or Health.
              Plan should document how coordination will occur at service delivery level,
              including referral process.



                                                 4             Automated Records l\lanagement System
                                                               Hex-DLllTIp Conversion
        .      Approximately $200 million, with a small state minimum [DOL doing runs with
                $200M allocated based on population and WTW formula; HHS doing runs based
                on low-income men and modified version of A&V formula], (Assuming Fathers
                grants at 20% ofWTW formula grants, smallest states would get approximately
                $700,000)
Match
Options
               (1) Current WTW match: $1 non-federal for every $2 federal. Up to 50% can be
                met in-kind.
               (2) $1 non-federal for every $2 federal. Up to 75% in-kind.
               (3) No match (Fathers Count). (Not recommended due to equity with other WTW
                funds)
        Existing foundation-funding for Fatherhood demos could count toward match. Also
        consider broad definition of in-kind match and flexibility on timing -- not all required in
        1st year. Consider allowing a small percent of Federal TANF $ to be transferred out as
        match (requires further discussion).

Evaluation
              Require cooperation with evaluation as condition of receiving grant funds.

Technical Assistance
             Provide authority and funding for federal agency(s) to provide or contract for
              technical assistance for state and local grantees.

Perfonnance Measures
            Identify several core measures in legislation, such as increased employment and
             earnings of fathers; increased payment of child support; increased involvement
             with children; reduction in criminal activity/recidivism(?).
            Require Governors to identify additional measures by which they'll hold programs
             accountable.

Waivers
              Allow states to propose waivers necessary to put together a package of services
               that make sense at the community level (similar to EZ/EC).
        .     Explore discussion of special language to permit retroactive modification of child
               support order, for fathers participating in this program where appropriate. This is
               potentially controversial, but may be less so when targeted on low-income fathers.
               (Needs further discussion with ACF and OCSE).

              Consider deferral of arrearages for fathers participating in employment-related
               activities including education and training combined with work, community
               service, and certain parenting activities as incentive for low-skilled fathers to

                                                 5                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

                    build skills and increase earning potential. (Do states have this authority now?
                    Issue is federal share of collections.)

    Other Issues
                    Build in protections for victims of domestic violence and allow batterers
                     intervention services ... Also recognize fathers who were themselves victims.
                    Encourage fathers to get involved before child is born--prenatal and link with
                     in-hospital paternity programs.
                    Sort out how this relates to other WTW funds spent on non-custodial parents --
                   . for example, would MI and MO use this to expand population served by their
                     regular WTW formula grants? Would DOL still award regular WTW competitive
                     grants for non-custodial fathers, or focus those funds on other populations?
                    Encourage links with criminal justice system and incarcerated fathers about to be
                     released.
                    Consider link with child support financing process, including issue of child
                     support disregard or pass through. Also explore link with possible child support
                     assurance demonstrations(?).
                    Be mindful that some fathers have children with more than one women and in
                     more than one household.




                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                     6


