RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-DEC-1998 09:47:13.00

SUBJECT:   Tobacco Farmers fyi

TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice    ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD]
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Tobacco firms quickly rebuff growers'
                   plan

                      By BOB WILLIAMS, Staff Writer


                          Cigarette makers have no interest in funding a $12
billion proposal
                    floated by a tobacco growers group to compensate
farmers and allotment
                    holders for damages they expect to suffer from the land
mark national
                    smoking settlement.
                          "Their plan is absolutely unacceptable," Pinetops
attorney Phil Carlton,
                    lead negotiator for the country's major tobacco'
companies, said Monday.
                    "The companies want to work out a reasonable plan that
makes the
                    growers whole for their losses, but we have no desire
to fund a welfare
                    program like the one they're talking about."
                          In the meantime, tobacco allotment holders are to
get their first solid
                    indication today of how much tobacco the federal
government will allow to
                    be gro'wn next year.
                          Cigarette makers must submit estimates to the U.S.
Department of
                    Agriculture today on how much tobacco they expect to
purchase next year.
                    USDA uses those estimates, along with the amounts of
anticipated exports
                    and of surplus tobacco left over from previous seasons
to calculate
                    allotments for the coming season.
                         Carlton reacted angrily to the $12 billion plan
disclosed Sunday by the
                    National Tobacco Growers Association.


                         .The association's proposal calls for the owners of
tobacco allotments, a
                    government license to grow a certain amount of tobacco
each year, to be
                    paid 80 cents a pound for the next 10 years. It also
calls for growers who
                    don't own allotments, also called quotas, to be paid 20
cents a pound for
                    the next 10 years.
                          In exchange, growers and allotment holders would
agree to ask the
                    USDA to cut the government support price for tobacco by
30 to 40 cents a
                    pound, making tobacco cheaper for the cigarette
companies to buy. The
                    average support price for flue-cured tobacco -- the
variety grown on most
                    North Carolina farms -- was about $1.63 a pound this ye
ar.
                          Cigarette makers have yet to offer a formal
proposal to help growers
                    and allotment holders, but there have been private
discussions on a plan for
                    the companies to pay up to a total of $5 billion into
foundations established
                    in tobacco-growing states. Each foundation would then
dole out the money
                    as it sees fit, presumably through some sort of
payments to growers and
                    quota owners.
                          Carlton was quick to point out Monday that growers
are at the mercy of
                    cigarette makers, even though growers have recently
gained some support
                    from public health groups and the White House. Presiden
t Clinton, in
                    particular, has made protection of tobacco growers
central to any
                    settlement involving the federal government.
                          "The last time I checked, [former Surgeon General]
C. Everett Koop
                    had never bought a single pound of tobacco, and neither
had Bill Clinton,"
                    Carlton said. "It would be a crying shame if these
farmers bought into the
                    line of bull they are getting from the public health
people and Bill Clinton."
                          Carlton also hinted Monday that. growers and
allotment holders could
                    end up with nothing if they persist in demanding more
money.
                          "When we float $5 billion and they come back and
say they want $12
                    billion, it makes me wonder if we should offer anything
at all," he said.
                          "The companies are under no legal obligation to do
anything for the
                    growers and allotment holders."
                          Unlike with most other crops, the government
imposes stiff penalties on


                      tobacco growers unless they participate in the federal
price support
                      program. For all practical purposes,   that means the   0
nly people who grow
                      tobacco at a profit are those who participate in the
program.
                         To qualify, a farmer must hold an allotment or
rent one from someone
                    who does. Only a small fraction of the 82,000
individuals and corporations
                    that own quotas actually grow tobacco; most choose
instead to rent out
                    their allotments each year to growers.
                         Flue-cured quotas were cut more than 17 percent th
is year, and growers
                    and quota owners could get more bad news today if
cigarette makers
                    decide to buy less U.S.-grown tobacco next season.
                         The two other figures USDA uses to determine
quotas -- anticipated
                    exports and surplus leaf from previous seasons -- could
drive down next
                    year's allotments.
                         Exports of flue-cured tobacco have fallen to their
lowest levels since
                    1942, according to USDA.
                         At the same time, more than 182 million pounds of
surplus leaf has piled
                    up at price support cooperatives.
                         "We're hopeful the companies will announce large
purchase intentions
                    and will also agree to buy up a significant amount of
the surplus leaf," said
                    Lionel Edwards, executive director of the Flue-Cured
Tobacco
                    Cooperative Stabilization Corp. in Raleigh. "If we
can't work something out
                    with the companies, we could be looking at some serious
problems."
                         Edwards said private talks between the price
support co-op and
                    cigarette makers have taken place over the last few
weeks, but he would
                    not disclose details of those discussions.
                         There were rumors circulating Monday that the
cooperative has offered
                    to sell all or part of the surplus leaf to cigarette
makers at an 18 percent
                    discount.
                         There also were rumors that Philip Morris, the
country's largest cigarette
                    maker, was holding out for a 25 percent discount on the
surplus leaf.
                         "The companies have shown an interest in buying
some of our tobacco,
                    but it's highly unlikely they will take it all,"
Edwards said. "At this point we
                    aren't sure if they will take any of it."
                         Philip Morris officials did not return phone calls
on Monday.
'.


