RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-DEC-1998 16:31:51.00

SUBJECT:   kerry

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Schoolyard Tussle

 By Dana Milbank

 John Kerry takes on the teachers' unions.

 Boston

 Senator John Kerry displays a glass-encased baseball card in his office
featuring his likeness where a
 slugger's should appear." The card, an award from the National Education
Association, proclaims
 Kerry a member of the union's "Education All-Star Team." In his 14 years
in the Senate, Kerry has
 consistently gone to bat for the NEA, earning a perfect 100 percent in
its most recent rating. He didn't
 vote a single time against the American Federation of Teachers, either,
according to that union's latest
 scoring. Volunteers from the teachers' unions, in return, proved crucial
in Kerry's 1996 reelection
 fight.

 All of which makes John Kerry's latest crusade rather puzzling. In twin
speeches delivered recently in
 Boston and Washington, Kerry ostentatiously defied these same teachers'
unions, declaring that "we
 must end teacher tenure as we know it" and proposing "to make every
public school in this country
 essentially a charter school"--in other words, a school free from· most of
the bureaucratic controls on
 regular public schools. He decried the "bloated bureaucracy" and
"stagnant administration" of schools
 and demanded higher teaching standards and streamlined certification
rules. "Those going into
 teaching have the lowest SAT and ACT scores of any profession in the
United States," he lamented.

 Publicly, union officials reacted to Kerry's speech with talk of "mixed
feelings." Privately, they groused
 about Kerry's "teacher-bashing." One NEA official told The Boston Globe
after Kerry's first speech
 that "we are not pleased with his swipes at teachers' unions." But Kerry,
undaunted, told me in an
 interview that he'd even approve of government-funded vouchers--good for
tuition in any accredited


 private school--as part of an overall education reform, if that's what it
took to make America's schools
 better.

 Just what is John Kerry up to? "I think he's running for president,
that's what," says AFT President
 Sandra Feldman. She's got a point there. Kerry, his aides and confidantes
say, used the education
 speeches as the informal launch of his 2000 presidential campaign. "It's
important to make it a
 component of a national race," affirms Kerry, who hasn't yet committed
himself to a run. "It's a point
 I'd like to take to the country."

 To be sure, John Kerry is not likely to ride this issue to the White
House. Barring s,ome bizarre twist,
 he will not be our next president, and he will not be the Democratic
nominee--even if he spends a bit
 of his wife Teresa Heinz's colossal fortune and makes Vice President Gore
sweat. He lacks anything
 near the infrastructure, name recognition, and popularity of the
front-runner; his image, to the extent
 he has one,is that of a North~astern liberal. Most likely, Kerry is
angling for the higher visibility that
 comes with a presidential run and maybe consideration as vice president
or secretary of state.

 But, by building his campaign around education, Kerry may well provoke a
long-overdue debate over
 the issue within· the Democratic Party. Americans are clearly angry about
the state of public schools.
 And, if the Democrats do not seize the initiative, Republicans may well
prevail with ~ large,
 uncontrolled rush to vouchers. "If we don't come up with real answers for
what ails our schools ,';
 Kerry declared in his Boston speech, "then our defense of public schools
~ill become the defeat of the
 public schools." About this, surely, he is exactly right.

 The new South Boston Harbor Academy Charter School has a physical
presence not quite befitting its
 lofty name. It sits across the street from a power plant and shares an
alley with a corrugated-metal
 warehouse. The school building itself says "computer products power
conversion"; inside, a
 hand-lettered, cardboard sign directs visitors to the second floor. A
young man, not too long out of
 school himself, is at the top of the stairs. "I'm the principal," says
Brett Peiser, 30 years old. Peiser
 isn't the only unusual thing here. Like most charter schools, this one
has smaller classes (about 20
 students per class) and longer days (eight hours a day) than regular
public schools. With no union to
 represent them, the teachers work longer hours and have no tenure
protections. But they get a slightly
 higher wage than starting teachers elsewhere, and they are eligible for
merit bonuses. The union says
 that's no bargain, but apparently a lot of teachers disagree: the school
had 700 applicants for eight
 teaching positions before it opened.



 The person in charge of the school is State Senator Stephen Lynch, whose
South Boston district is one
 of the poorest in the state. Lynch has deep union roots: for 18 years he
toiled as an ironworker,
 eventually becoming president of his union's 2,OOO-member Boston local. A
few years ago, this
 hard-bitten Democrat got himself elected to the state legislature and
promptly won the afl-cio's
 "legislator of the year" award. But now, as chairman of the South Boston
charter school--and one of
 the legislature's fiercest advocates for charters--he has become the
nemesis of the teachers' unions.

 He vows to push for an expansion of charters, as well as for
government-funded vouchers. "When
 you know you're absolutely right about something, that other stuff is
secondary," he says from his
 makeshift office. "I have a great respect for the teachers' unions, but
there's far too much at stake."
 Lynch says other Democrats, driven by the wretched state of public
schools, are joining his
 insurgency. "Ideas that were taboo at one time now have a fighting
chance," he says.

 Indeed, the state's Democrat-dominated legislature, which in 1995 came
within a couple of votes of
 killing charter schools, now gives them overwhelming support. The state's
governor, Republican Paul
 Cellucci, is likely to attempt a further expansion of charters, plus
another assault on the state's tenure
 law, which has already been weakened. Cellucci also wants to loosen the
control unions and local
 districts have over some charter schools. And he may succeed, for even.
some Democrats have found
 it's not fatal to take on the teachers' unions here. Three years ago,
Thomas Finneran described
 members of the Massachusetts Teachers Association as "selfish pigs."
Today he's speaker of the
 state House.

 The teachers' unions, meanwhile, have their backs to the wall. In April,
59 percent of teaching
 candidates flunked a new statewide test for prospective teachers. In
July, 47 percent failed. Cellucci
 responded with a proposal not just to test new teachers for competency
but to test all teachers every
 five years, decertifying those who flunk twice. He made it an issue in
his successful gubernatorial
 campaign this fall. And, in a poll cited in The Boston Globe, 73 percent
of his constituents supported
 Cellucci's proposal.

 "Not only are our teachers alarmed, they're completely demoralized by
this," said Massachusetts
 Teachers Association President Stephen Gorrie when I asked him about the
plan. Gorrie, for his part,
 argued that the union is "in the forefront" of reform, and he says he's
all for higher teaching standards:
 "We view education reform as a huge opportunity." Politicians, he added,


"still come courting our
 endorsement." But Gorrie conceded that several Democrats had broken ranks
with the unions. "The
 political landscape has changed," he said. "They feel they can run a bit
on the public perceptions."                         \

 And public perceptions increasingly favor radical education reforms. A
group of Massachusetts
 community activists, Democrats mostly, has formed the Citizens United for"
Charter Schools. They
 hired a lobbyist and make grants to groups that start charter schools. A
ballot initiative to institute
 vouchers is afoot, though state constitutional hurdles will stop it from
becoming a serious possibility for
 years. Boston's black leaders remain fiercely loyal to the public
schools, but there are cracks in the
 African American community. Judy Burnette, a black former teacher, runs
the United in Spirit
 Coalition in Roxbury, supporting charters and vouchers. Burnette wants to
open her own charter
 school in the near future.

 John Kerry was well aware of the groundswell for education reform in his
home "state before he
 gambled on the issue this year. And, while it might seem odd to make
schools the centerpiece of a
 presidential campaign--states make most of the big policy decisions, and
only seven percent of
 education funding comes from the federal government--the fact that such a
notoriously cautious (some
 would even say opportunistic) politician as Kerry embraces the cause
tells you that it might indeed be
 a potent issue.

 Kerry's most important idea, which he has borrowed from centrist groups
like the Democratic
 Leadership Council (DLC) , is to turn all public schools into charter
schools. He envisions thousands of
 public schools competing fiercely for students and envisions the
competition pushing all schools to get
 better. "Let's have a bold experiment," he says.

 The strongest argument against charter schools is that they skim off the
best students, or at least the
 students with the most involved parents, leaving the rest of the public
schools worse than before. That
 may be so. But the trouble is that the status quo forces all children to
suffer rather than letting a few
 get ahead--to the point where parents want to opt out of the system
altogether", a fact Kerry is quick to
 note. And, while critics say it's far too early to say definitively
whether charter schools work at all,
 there are at least some encouraging signs. A Department of Education
study this year found that
 charter schools had a racial and ethnic mix similar to regular public
schools. And parental demand is
 huge: more than 70 percent of charter schools had more applicants than
they could accommodate.
 There are now 1,129 charter schools in operation, according to the Center
for Education Reform, with


 another 157 approved to open.

 The fact that charter schools are so popular also explains the other,
more calculating, rationale for
 expanding them--it may be the only way to avoid a wholesale switch to
vouchers. A Gallup poll
 released in September found that Americans, by 51 percent to 45 percent,
favor allowing parents to
 send c;hildren to "any public, private, or church-related school" with
government paying "all or part of
 the tuition." Even in the. heavily Democratic District of Columbia, a
Washington Post poll found that 56
 percent of residents favor vouchers for low-income students. In June,
businessmen Ted Forstmann
 and John Walton pledged $100 million for what is essentially a privately
funded voucher program to
 send poor students to private schools; their board includes such
Democratic luminaries as Senators
 John Breaux and Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Representative Charles
Rangel.

 The trouble with vouchers, as Kerry and other Democrats will tell you, is
that they lack accountability;
 the government can't enforce standards at the private schools that get
its money. Charter schools, by
 contrast, operate under contracts with state or local government and thus
remain accountable to the
 government that licenses them. A vast expansion of charter schools,
therefore, is less dangerous--but
 potentially just as rewarding--as a headlong leap into vouchers. "If you
do the things I'm proposing, you
 won't be arguing about vouchers," says Kerry.

 In Washington, the education showdown will likely begin next year, in the
form of the reauthorization
 in Congress of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. Some
Republicans would like to replace
 Title I--a huge program for educating the poor--with a voucher program or
direct grant to the states to
 allow them to establish voucher programs. They may well succeed unless
Democrats present an
 alternative.

 The Kerry plan looks like such an alternative. In addition to expanding
charter schools, it would end
 "social promotion" for underperforming children. It would also end tenure
and introduce national
 educational standards and alternative certification (to allow those with
liberal arts degrees, and not just
 teaching degrees, to teach). Kerry also favors such Democratic (and
union) favorites as increased
 spending for infrastructure and smaller classes but minces no words about
his intentions. "I'm for
 tough love here, folks," Kerry says. "It's time to come in and kick· some
butts. Democrats can't be
 viewed as somehow protecting these practices. You can't do this in some
loosey-goosey, half-assed
 way. II

 Kerry can count on the support of centrist organizations like the DLC.


The Clinton administration is
 also friendly to the idea of expanding charter schools, and it endorses
many of the other reforms. The
 problem, as always, is with the education establishment--and particularly
with the unions.

 On the one hand, the leaders of both major teachers' unions say they want
to put their organizations in
 the vanguard of reform. NEA chief Bob Chase talks about the "new
unionism," an end to the industrial
 model of conflict; AFT's Feldman calls it "one of the great frustrations
of my life" that the union is
 portrayed as opposing alternative teacher certification and alternatives
to tenure. Last year, for
 example, the NEA, hoping to shed its obstructionist image, even
commissioned a report by some image
 consultants, The Kamber Group. The report suggested "co-opting the other
side's turf so the NEA can
 direct reform discussions rather than having them dictated to it." The
Kamber report was very
 specific, calling for "at least two or three substantive measures the NEA
should adopt, or call for, to
 improve public schools .... The campaign should be launched in a speech by
President Chase in which
 he acknowledges the crisis, says some things for their shock value to
open up the audience's minds
  (e.g., there are bad teachers and our job is to make them good or show
the way to another career),
 and then details the Association's substantive programs to improve public
schools."

 Chase followed the script to the letter. A few weeks later, he appeared
at the National Press Club.
 "We must revitalize our public schools from within, or they will be
dismantled from without," he
 declared. "I must publicly speak some rather blunt truths .... There are
indeed some bad teachers in
 America's schools. And it is our job as a union tOo improve those teachers
or, that failing, to get them
 out of the classroom."

 But it's not clear how much of this talk is just talk. Take the
just-enacted Charter School Expansion
 Act, which expands funding and incentives to states to open charter
schools. Both the AFT and the
 NEA opposed the measure in the House. When the measure, sponsored by
Indiana Democrat Tim
 Roemer, passed with significant Democratic support, the unions
concentrated their efforts on the
 Senate, winning some small concessions.

 In the last days of the session, when it came to a vote, the unions tried
to get a senator to place a
 "hold" on it--which would have killed the measure. But not one Democrat
would do their bidding, and
 the measure passed by unanimous consent. Episodes like these are one
reason that Connecticut
 Democrat Joseph Lieberman, who sponsored the charter legislation in the
Senate, says he sees the
 makings of a revolt against the unions and the rest of the education


establishment. "Things are moving
 in that direction," he says. "We just all have to get together and charge
the wall."

 To be sure, there are some serious reformers within the union ranks. Adam
Urbanski, for example, the
 president of the Rochester Teachers Association and a member of the AFT's
executive council, has
 formed the Teacher Union Reform Network, devoted to "injecting market
dynamics into public
 education." Urbanski talks about giving parents a choice of any public
school, and he favors incentive
 pay and replacing tenure with a due process dismissal system. Urbanski,
however, is unusual. Some
 say the problem is the state chapters, which resist the progressive
thinking of the national leaders.
 Some think the problem is the NEA; others say it's the AFT. They may all
be right.

 But the resistance, whatever its source, is becoming less relevant. Last
session, on a student
 savings-account measure that would have helped parents save for private
schools, Lieberman almost
 mustered enough Democratic Senate votes to override President Clinton's
veto. A surprising number
 of Democrats in the Senate, including Moynihan, Mary Landrieu, Joseph
Biden, Bob Graham, Robert
 Torricelli, and Dianne Feinstein, support various heretical education
reforms. Virtually no senator
 voices outright opposition to charter schools. "More Democrats are
looking at more options that                .
 Democrats didn't look at before," says a White House official. The
teachers' unions "realize things
 could slip away from them." Adds Jeanne Allen, president of the Center
for Education Reform, which
 backs vouchers and charter schools: "People have come to realize these
oppone;nts are a paper tiger."

 Ironically, another group of the Democrat faithful--urban minorities--is
fueling this backlash. Howard
 Fuller, a former superintendent of the Milwaukee Public Schools, has
become an outspoken champion
 of the city's voucher program, one of only two in the country. (The U.S.
Supreme Court, in a setback
 to teachers' unions, this month let the Wisconsin voucher program stand.)
Hugh Price, head of the
 National Urban League, warned in a 1997 speech that -parents would "shop
elsewhere" if public
 schools continued to fail. "We Urban Leaguers believe passionately in
public education," he said. "But
 make no mistake. We love our children even more." Other longtime members
of the education
 establishment have come to the same conclusion: this June, Arthur Levine,
president of the Columbia
 University Teachers College, wrote an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal to
say that he, too, was
 "reluctantly" supporting vouchers for poor students.

 While Kerry has been a beneficiary of teachers' union support in the
past, he seems unafraid of their


 wrath. One reason is that he's got his own money to spend on a
presidential campaign. (He doesn't
 accept PAC money anyway.) Another is that confronting the teachers'
unions allows Kerry to
 separate himself from the front-runner, Al Gore, a union ally who has
taken to the stump to call
 vouchers "an illusion wrapped in an insult."

 Chase and Feldman try to put the best gloss on this, minimizing their
differences with the senator. "I
 don't necessarily think some of the things he's been saying should be
interpreted the way everyone's
 been interpreting them," says Chase. Feldman agrees: "We disagree with
some things, but they're not
 life-and-death issues." In fact, Kerry met with union officials before
his big speeches and tried to
 pacify them. When Feldman balked at Kerry's idea of making "every school
a charter school," Kerry
 added more words about accountability and high standards.

 Union officials also believe that Kerry's policies aren't really as tough
as his rhetoric. Though he likes
 charter schools, they say, he favors the Horace Mann version in
Massachusetts, which has collective
 bargaining, not the Commonwealth charter schools, which are nonunion and
sometimes run by
 for-profit companies. He wants tenure reform, they acknowledge, but he's
satisfied with
 Massachusetts's watered-down tenure law. And, they believe, he remains
opposed to vouchers.
 Conservative education activists offer the same opinion of Kerry:
"Rhetoric has value, but, on the
 details, he loses me," says James Peyser, head of the Pioneer Institute,
a think tank in Boston, and a
 member of the state's Board of Education. "I don't think John Kerry
really wants to challenge the big
 interests of the unions."

 But, while it's certainly true that Kerry's proposals aren't as audacious
as his rhetoric, the mere fact
 that he puts out such rhetoric marks a significant milestone in the
party's evolution, if not his own.
 Does Kerry support the Commonwealth schools, which uhions hate?
"Absolutely." Does he care if
 charter schools are run by for-profit companies? "Doesn't matter." Has
tenure been weakened enough
 in Massachusetts? "They need to go a little further, and I've said that,"
he replies. "I know there are
 teachers who can't be fired, and I have to say it." And what about
vouchers? "Clearly it could be part
 of a mix if you're embracing other reforms,"says Kerry, who calls his
vote against vouchers for the
 District of Columbia "very, very hard."

 The DLC, which never considered Kerry one of its .own, is impressed. One
DLC official calls Kerry's
 plan "the most radical statement of support for charter schools I've
heard from any politician in either
 party." Kerry says he's heard some encouragement from Republicans, too.
He also sweetened the


 tougher parts of his legislation with more spending for infrastructure
and teacher salaries. "The
 unions," Kerry says, "are prepared to sit down at the table if they're
met by people who aren't trying to
 destroy them."

 They'd better get to the table quickly, though, because reform will come,
with or without them. If you
 have any doubt, a few minutes at the Neighborhood House Charter School in
Boston's Dorchester
 neighborhood will dispel it. The school was started in 1995 by a group of
angry parents. Now it
 borrows space in a vacant wing of a Catholic school. While public schools
are overcrowded,
 Neighborhood House has 18 students and two teachers in each class. It
saves money by having only
 two' full-time administrators, and its nonunion teachers, who don't have
tenure, work a longer school
 day and school year. The school also raises a third of its budget from
private contributions. And,
 though the teachers' unions may hate the idea, the local construction
trade unions in Dorchester
 refurbished an old building to give the school expansion room, pro bono.

 Before Neighborhood House will admit a student--even though half of its
students live in poverty, it
 has ten applicants for every spot, better than many Ivy League
colleges--parents must sign a "family
 learning contract." This commits parents to attend three conferences a·
year, to do eight hours of
 volunteer work at the school, and to give their children a quiet place
for homework. A parent
 coordinator makes home visits, and, if the parents don't honor the
bargain, their kids are gone. "We've
 turned a lot of parents around," says Kristen McCormack, one of the
parents who founded
 Neighborhood House.

 McCormack is a Democrat from Dorchester who founded the Boston Food Bank
before joining the
 charter-school movement. She decided to start the school when she saw
children in her neighborhood
 failing in school "through no fault of their own," because the public
schools felt "no sense of urgency"
 to reform. So she pulled her kids out of school and put them in
Neighborhood House. "Every school
 commissioner says this is going to be a ten-year process," she says. "In
ten years, my kids are going to
 be out of the system. I can't wait that long." It's a sentiment echoing
across the land--and Democrats
 like John Kerry are beginning to hear it. In McCormack, the teachers'
unions and the education
 establishment have encountered someone even more powerful than they are:
an angry parent.


