RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bradley M. Campbell ( CN=Bradley M. Campbell/OU=CEQ/O=EOP [ CEQ 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-DEC-1998 10:17:32.00

SUBJECT:    Toxic Toys Documents

TO: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera    Tanden/OU=WHO/O~EOP @   EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Sally Katzen      CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Alphonse J. Maldon ( CN=Alphonse J. Maldon/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Bruce McNamer ( CN=Bruce McNamer/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I am attaching my revised versions of the statement and press guidance,
mostly small changes to Jen's excellent draft, which incorporate comments
from Jen provided by voicemail this morning after seeing Ann Brown's Today
show. Also beiow are today's AP and WP articles. As you will see, the
number of companies involved makes it awkward to name them individually in
the POTUS statement. ---------------------- Forwarded by Bradley M.
Campbell/CEQ/EOP on 12/02/98 10:12 AM ---------------------------




  Ariel T. Mendez
  12/02/98 10:04:00 AM
. Record Type:    Record

To:      Bradley M. Campbell/CEQ/EOP
cc:
Subject:         12/2/98 phthalates articles

           Hey there Brad,

        Here are two articles about phthalates in toys. One is from the
Wash. Post, the other is from the AP News services. Just open them from
Netscape.




 ==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================


ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   o   00:00:00.00

TEXT:
<1--    $Id: center_story.wb,v 1.20 1998/11/06 22:36:07 ali Exp $   -->


ATT CREATION TIMEIDATE: 000:00:00.00 TEXT:


                              1= 1-
                                 1-     1- 1- I-I
                                        1-11- I

DECEMBER 02, 04:47 EST                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Commission Won't Seek Toxic To.y Ban

WASHINGTON CAP) - Government safety regulators are asking toymakers to quit using a
suspected carcinogen as a plastic-softening compound in baby ratt lers and teething toys, but
have decided against trying to ban all toys made wi th the substance.

The Washington Post quoted Consumer Product Safety Commission officials in today's
editions as saying studies show that the amount of the chemical- diisononyl phthalate -
ingested by small children "does not even come clo se to a harmful level. "

The agency was scheduled to announce its actions today, along with advice t 0 parents to
discard soft vinyl toys that their children chew or hold in their mouths for long periods of
times.

"Few children, if any, are at risk," Ronald Medford, the commission's ass istant executive
director for hazard identification and reduction, told the Pos t. "But given the number of
uncertainties, we are - as a precaution - ; asking the toy industry ttl take certain steps to
reformulate their products i ntendedto go into children's mouths."

The newspaper said phthalates have been linked in laboratory studies to can cer in mice and
rats. They also are a suspected source ofliver and kidney dama ge in laboratory animals.

The commission identified only one line of pacifiers and nipples - Cle ar and Soft made by
Gerber Products Co. - that parents should immediately discard, the Post said.

Some major retailers, including Kmart and Toys R Us, have already begun pulling plastic
teething toys made with pthalate from their shelves.

, 'We've just been looking at the research and reading up on it," Kmart spo keswoman Michele
Jasukaitis said in an interview with The Associated Press. "Weare going forward in the
interest of our customer safety."

Jasukaitis said Kmart would continue to monitor other products containing p thalate,
including those that might not be explicitly for teething but could en d up in the mouths of
young children anyway.

Toys R Us, the world's largest retailer of children's products, promised la st month to have the
teething toys off its shelf by NOV.18.

The commission said Sears, Roebuck and Co., Wal-Mart Stores and Target Stor es also have


announced plans to remove phthalate teethers and rattlers from the ir shelves.

Several toy manufacturers, including MatteI Inc., Walt Disney Co. arid Littl e Tikes Co., have
said they plan to phase out use of the additive.

Environmental groups had asked the commission to ban the chemical ingredien t and issue an
advisory to parents on its dangers.

At least seven European governments have banned the use of phthalates in ce rtain toys that
commonly are put in children's mouths.
              home] us news] world] business] sports] weather] search] help]

                                                        EJ
                                  Copyright 1998 Associated Press. All rights reserved.
                        This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
                       Send comments and questions about The WIRE to feedback@thewire.ap.org.




                                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                                Hex-Dump Convcl'iion


ATT CREATION TIMEIDATE: 000:00:00.00 TEXT:
                                I~ "CP,"",
                                             STYLE       SPORTS        CLASSIFIEOS         MARKETPLACE
                                             NATION   POLmcs



                                  CPSC Won't Seek Phthalate Ban
                                  Agency Asks That the Chemicals Not Be Used in Some
                                  Toys< p> By Caroline E. Mayer
                                  Washington Post Staff Writer
                                  Wednesday, December 2, 1998; Page C16

                                  The Consumer Product Safety Commission staff has decided against
  o     Click here to
        build the heart of
                                  recommending a ban on soft plastic toys made with phthalates, a
        ·your·                    controversial group of chemic al additives that have been linked to
        NETWORK.                  cancer and kidney and liver damage in ani mals.

                                  In an announcement scheduled for release today, the agency will say
    Partner Sites:                its studies show that the amount of phthalates ingested by small
   -Newsweek.COIn                 children "does not even c orne close to a harmful level."
   -Britannica Intornet Guide
                                  Even so, the agency has asked the nation's toymakers to remove
I r I ...,-,-~- ...   h ___ _
                                  phthalates from soft plastic baby rattles and teething toys because
  Print Edition                   significant uncertainties remain about the chemical used to make
  Busi ness Articles              vinyl toys flexible and pliable.
  Monday's
    Wa shington
    Business                      For products already in the home, the CPSC is advising concerned
 Articles                         parents to dis card any soft plastic teethers, rattles or toys that their
DFron t Page                      children may chew or hold in their mouths for long periods of time.
 Articles
                                  "Few children, if any, are at risk," said Ronald L. Medford, the
    On Our Site                   CPSC's assista nt executive director for hazard identification and
    Stocks Page
    Business
                                  reduction. "But given the n umber of uncertainties, we are -- as a
                                  precaution -- asking the toy industry to take certain steps to
                                  reformulate their products intended to go into children's mouths,"
                                  such as teethers and rattles.

                                  The agency says about 90 percent of the nation's toymakers have
                                  indicated that they will stop making phthalate teethers and rattles by
                                  early next year.

                                  Many of these companies, including MatteI Inc., Walt Disney Co. and
                                  Little Tike s Co., have already announced plans to discontinue using
                                  phthalates in some toy s, including rattles and teethers, after an
                                  aggressive pUblicity campaign by th e international environmental
                                  group Greenpeace questioned the safety of childre n's toys made with
                                  phthalates.

                                  In early November, Toys R Us Inc., the nation's largest toy retailer,
                                                                                     Automated Records r.1anagement System
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


                   also anno unced it would pull all phthalate teethers and rattles from its
                   shelves -- a mo ve that was more critical to toy manufacturers'
                   decisions to reformulate their products than the CPSC request,
                   according to an industry official who declined to be named.

                   The CPSC also is asking toymakers to reconfigure other soft vinyl
                   toys containi ng phthalates -- such as bath toys and squeeze toys --
 o   Free
     real-time
               ·   intended for children un der age 3 that could end up in a child's
                   mouth.
     quotes
     for
     E*Trade(      But the Toy Manufacturers Association indicated yesterday it is
     custome,
                   doubtful that m any companies will comply with that request.

                   "We believe vinyl toys are safe for children of all ages," said
                   association Pre sident David Miller. Individual companies have
                   agreed to reformulate their teet hers and rattles ."not because they're
                   being precautionary but because Greenpeac e has managed to frighten
                   parents. We as an industry are proud to make safe pro ducts and this
                   [soft vinyl toys] is a safe product. We will not sit idly by and let them
 o   Crown Books
                   do us in over a safe product."

                   In addition to Toys R Us and Kmart Corp., CPSC said Sears,
                   Roebuck and Co., Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and Target Stores Inc. also
                   have announced plans to remove ph thalate teethers and rattles from
                   theiF shelves.
                                         ,
                   The CPSC found that almost all baby-bottle nipples and pacifiers are
                   made with latex or silicone and therefore do not pose health concerns.
                   There was, however, one exception: the Clear and Soft line of
                   pacifiers and nipples, made by Gerb er Products Co., which contain
                   phthalates. The CPSC said parents should immedia tely discard these
                   products, which Gerber has stopped making and had retailers pull
                   from their shelves.

                   Gerber also has decided to eliminate any phthalate products designed
                   for childr en's mouths -- less than 10 percent of its entire line -- "not
                   because they are harmful but because there are some doubts and we
                   build our business on trust a nd we're doing what's right for babies,"
                   said Alfred A. Piergallini, Gerber's CEO.

                   In recent weeks, the CPSC has come under mounting criticism from
                   environmental and consumer groups for failing to take action on toys
                   made with polyvinyl chlo ride (PVC). Two weeks ago, Canada issued
                   a health advisory, urging parents to dispose of PVC toys and rattles.
                   Meanwhile, several European countries have anno unced plans to ban
                   PVC toys.

                   PVC toys often contain high levels ofphthalates to make them soft
                   and pliable. But laboratory studies have shown that phthalates may
                   damage the liver, kidney s and other organs a'nd cause cancer in mice
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


                   and rats.

                   Rick Hind, legislative director for Greenpeace's toxics campaign,
                   called CPSC's action "only a baby step because the agency fails to
                   definitively require any action by toyrnakers." He said "we'll have to
                   pursue litigation for any companie s that are not responding," under
                   California's Proposition 65 product-labeling law. That law requires
                   health warnings on all products sold in California conta ining
                   ingredients that can cause cancer or birth defects.

                   Twelve years ago, the toy industry decided to limit the use of one
                   particular phthalate, diethylhexyl-phthalate (DEHP), in vinyl toys
                   because it was found to be carcinogenic.

                   The industry replaced DEHP with diisononyl phthalate (DINP) and
                   other phthalate s, which more recent studies have linked to cancer and
                   other health concerns.       .

                   Laboratory animal studies show phthalates to be "clearly toxic,"
                   Medford said. But even so, he said, that finding, doesn't permit the
                   CPSC, under its legal au thority, to ban the product.

                   "The agency also needs to prove that there is significant exposure to
                   the chemi cal to ban the product," he said. "And so far, our data
                   shows that exposure is not at a significant health risk to justify a
                   mandatory ban."

                   CPSCsaid it relied on its own tests and two Dutch studies to come to
                   its concl usions.

                   In one CPSC laboratory test, 35 PVC toys were placed in stainless-
                   steel beakers with artificial saliva and then pounded by a piston for
                   six hours. Only a mode rate amount of phthalates were released.

                   But another study, in which 10 human volunteers chewed a PVC toy
                   and then spit out the accumulated saliva, showed that the amount of
                   phthalates released was nearly 40 times higher than the beaker test.
                   Even then, the commission found tha t the level released was far less
                   than what it considered the acceptable daily intake. Even so, the
                   commission's scientists were concerned because they found that the
                   amount ofDINP released from a product varied widely -- and could
                   not be predicted with any consistency.

                   "We had expected we would be able to predict how much DINP
                   would come out, base d on how much DINP was in a product or how
                   a product was made but there was abs oluteiy no correlation,"
                   Medford said.

                   Meanwhile, a Dutch study that closely observed 42 children showed
                   that babies, 3 to 12 months old, mouthed toys (excluding pacifiers) an
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


                   average of 12 minutes a day. Children 13 to 26 months old chewed
                   toys (excluding pacifiers) an avera ge of 2.1 minutes a day.

                   Based on that study, the CPSC calculated that daily exposure to
                   'phthalates was far less than it had expected -- and consequently few if
                    any children were at risk from DINP.

                   Because the study was so small, however, the commission wants to
                   run a larger human observation test, using about 200 children.


                               © Copyright 1998 The Washington Post Company

                                STYLE        SPORTS         CLASSIFIEDS               MARKETPLACE
                                IIAnON   POlmcs    METRO   BUSINESS & TECH   HEAlTH    OPlIIION   WEATHER




  Yellow Pages
                 G NextCard Internet Visa - Apply Now      10 D".,     0""""




                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                         Commission Report on Phthalates in Toys
                                      December 2, 1998


          I congratulate Chairman Ann Brown a_ndJhe Consumer Product Safety Commission on
  the release of a comprehensive and thoughtful report examining the potential exposure and health
  risks to children from teethers, pacifiers, rattles and toys containing chemicals called phthalate~
  that are used to soften plastic. The report makes clear that children are not at risk of harmful
  ~~posure to th_ese ~hemicals, provides information to consumers about the safety ofthese
  products t1mt mav contan phthalates. and outlines the Commission's plans to for [Uliher study. I
  nJso_.£QXm.Den(Uhe Ill?Jly_manufacturers and [et'l.ile.r~ who arc taking the additional. precautionary_.
  mcasure of discontinuing the sale of products containing the phthalate DINP that are designed for
  children to put in their mouths. This should all~'y any remaining fears that J~lmili.9'!? hax:£.llQout
. these products.

          The CPSC report and supporting measures by manufacturers will gO a long way toward
 calming .concerns about the safety of products used everyday by our nation's youngest children.
 It also commits the Consumer Product Safety Commission to pursue additional rigorous work in
 this area. Ihe Administration will support both the Commission's continued efforts to
 investigatc health issues relatcd to phthalates, as well as governmental and private efforts both
 ber~.mlit'lhlQmt!~~l(!ke J:1PQfOl2D.nte precautionary measures.

                                                   ###




                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion




                 Questions and Answers on Release of Consumer Products Safety
                            Commission Report on Phthalates in Toys
                                           December 2, 1998


     Q.   What is the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) releasing today?

     A.   The CPSC is releasing a report examining the potential exposure and health risks to
          children from teethers, pacifiers, rattles and toys containing chemicals called phthalates
          (pronounced fal-ates) that are used to soften plastic. The report includes new data on the
          release or migration ofDINP -- the most widely used phthalate -- when children bite,
          chew or suck on products containing the chemical, as well as a review of existing science
          on migration of phthalates. The report also evaluates all existing data on the health
          effects of ingesting phthalates. The report concludes that the~)laSlic does of concern do
          not release the phthalates. and so children are not exposed to phthalates, at levels even
          ~hft.tmjgl1_LI29_ co_nsi~L9Ie(LQot~ntiallyJmJl!liul. The r~l1'prt also provides information to
          consumers about the issue, and outlines the CPSC's plans for fUl1her study.

          The CPSC also announced the plans of [names of manufacturers and retailers] to
          discontinue selling products containing DINP that are designed for children to put in their
          mouths in order to allay any fears that their customers may have about buying these
          products.

     Q.   What is the Administration going to do in response to this report, which seems to
          indicate that we don't really know whether products containing phthalates are
          harmful to children?

     A.   The report shows that, based on all available evidence, DINP used in toys, teethers and
          pacifiers is not released at levels from the plastic at levels that could ever be considered
          pgj,fn1!..;:tIJ.Y_Di1J!llfL!l!o children. That said, the report also commits the CPSC to do
          additional research on this issue. The Administration will support in every way possible
          the CSPC's efforts to continue to look at DINP and to study alternative methods to soften
          plastic for use in children's toys.

     Q.   If this report shows that there is no risk to children, why are toy manufacturers
          agreeing to phase out the use of the chemical and why are retailers removing
          products containing it from store shelves?

     A.   Although there has been no definitive scientific evidence to support removal of these
          products, toy manufacturers and retailers are acting with an abundance of caution. which
          we believe is commendable. While this question is better directed to them, I assume that
          these companies want to make clear to their customers that they take special precautions
          to protect children, even where there appears to be no risk.

     Q.   Environmental groups and others claim that the Commerce and State Departments
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
     decision not to ban phthlates. Is this true?

A.   The report released today states that the Consumer Product Safety Commission does not
     believe that there is need for a ban on phthalates in children's toys and other products .
     .wJ1ile the Q.)lnmerce and State Departments initially e~pressed coqcerns about whether_
     the product bans considered (but rejected) bv the Europefm Union were scientiJically
     justified. the AdmininistratioruecQgnizes that each country has the right to take whatever
     precautionary measures thev deem appropriate to protect public health. The President
     has made it clear to the Commerce and State Departments that they should be ~portive
     of ,lilY precautionary steps that foreign countries believe to be appropriate under their
     ~h2.m9~1ifJrr~Y?_,




                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 041 - FOLDER -005


[12/03/1998 - 12/04/1998]
