RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey M. Smith ( CN=Jeffrey M. Smith/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-DEC-1998 18:33:33.00

SUBJECT:   Heads-up on Washington Post story on stem cell research

TO: Neal Lane ( CN=Neal Lane/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OSTP ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joanne S. Tornow ( CN=Joanne S. Tornow/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Clifford J. Gabriel ( CN=Clifford J. Gabriel/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christopher C. Jennings    ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings!OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Holly L. Gwin ( CN=Holly L. Gwin/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rachel E. Levinson ( CN=Rachel E. Levinson/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kerri A. Jones ( CN=Kerri A. Jones/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
December 8, 1998'

NOTE TO ELENA KAGAN AND CHRIS JENNINGS:

         Rick Weiss of the Washington Post is writing an article about embryonic
stem cells that may appear in the Wednesday, December 9th edition.     weiss
contacted our office with questions about the Advanced Cell Technology,
Inc. (ACT) experiments using somatic cell nuclear transfer to fuse a human
somatic cell with a cow egg. weiss reports that ACT apparently will
contend that those types .of experiments can generate a "dedifferentiated"
cell that is not an embryo, and thus, can provide a means to produce stem
cells without either creating or destroying an embryo.     We advised weiss
that " .. we are awaiting NBACO,s assessment ... " on this and other issues
associated with stem cell research.   It is not at all clear if that
approach actually gets around the ethical concerns.

        ACT is a company focusing on the development of transgenic and
other technologies, including somatic cell nuclear transfer, for producing
farm animals with specific desirable characteristics. Rachel Levinson, of
our office, has spoken at length on two occasions to Michael West, CEO of
ACT.  She is not convinced that anyone at ACT took the ethical issues into
consideration when they first did this experiment. She speculates that it
is likely that one of ACTO,s researchers (Dr. Cibelli) conducted a very sim
pIe experiment using materials on hand (cow eggs and his own fibroblasts)
simply as proof of principle to support filing a patent application in
Europe.  Virtually no analysis was done on the product cells to determine
their viability, their cell surface markers, or their ability to continue


to divide in an organized way.

        There may be those who may claim that there may actually be merit,
from the ethics point of view, in using this method to produce human stem
cells -- if it can be shown that fusing human cells and cow eggs cannot
produce a viable human or chimeric embryo. ACT says that they are willing
to take a "time out" on this technology, but there is no indication that
they were actively engaged in further development since the first
experiment.

        In the event you havenO,t seen them, the following articles
describe some new policy developments in Europe on cloning.

     DECEMBER 08, 10:25 EST

     Brit Embryo Cloning Research Urged

     By EMMA ROSS
     Associated Press Writer

      LONDON (AP) 0* Britain should allow continued research into the cloning
of
   human embryos to treat diseases but should uphold the ban on using
cloning to
   create babies, scientists told the government today.

   The experts were asked in January to advise on the legal and ethical
implications
   of the technology after Scottish scientists created the world's first
cloned mammal,
   Dolly the sheep, by cloning a cell from an adult sheep in 1996.

   British law bans human reproductive cloning 0* where the genetic
information in
   an egg is replaced with that from another cell and then inserted in the
womb 0*
   and restricts research conducted on human embryos for medical purposes.

   Embryos less than 14 days old may 'only be used for research into the
treatment of
   infertility and congenital disease, but research cannot be aimed at
developing
   replacement tissue.

      The scientists at the Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority and
the
   Human Genetics Advisory Committee advised that the purposes for which
   research can be carried out be extended to include tissue growth, and
suggested
   the policy should be reviewed in five years.

   That recommendation followed resea"rch from the United States, where
scientists
   have succeeded in isolating and growing cultures of human embryonic
stem cells
   0* the undeveloped "parents"   of all the tissues in the body.

   It is hoped this could lead to the growth of replacement tissue in
laboratories from
   cells taken from patients, avoiding the problems of transplant


rejection.

   The recommendations drew praise from other scientists, but condemnation
from
   those who fear cloning for medical treatment will inevitably lead to
the creation of
   identical copies of human beings.

   Dr. Harry Griffin, assistant director at the Roslin Institute in
Edinburgh, which
   created Dolly, applauded the report's position rejecting reproductive
cloning.

    "We are also pleased that the report recognizes that there are other
applications
    of cloning in human medicine that have great potential to benefit
mankind, " he
    said. "The use of cloning in cell therapy promises to provide radical
new
    treatments for a number of common diseases like Parkinson's, diabetes
and
    strokes. ' ,

   But Patrick Dixon, author of "Futurewise,"  a book warning of the
dangers of
   unrestrained research, said: "This is the perfect·Christmas present
for those who
   want to press ahead with human cloning. ' ,

   He called for an international moratorium on such research.

   The government will respond to the report early next year, the Health
Department
   said.

   Last week, U.N. officials called for a universal code of ethics for
cloning and
   genetic engineering.

    In the United States, a five-year moratorium announced by President
Clinton to
   ,ban cloning has apparently been observed by most mainstream scientists,
although
    Congress has failed to act on the legislation.


Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
DAILY MAIL (London)

November 30, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 16

. LENGTH: 493 words

HEADLINE: Babies may be cloned for spare parts

BYLINE: David Derbyshire

BODY:



    HUMAN cloning could be legalised in Britain within four months, it
emerged last night.

    Under plans likely to be approved by medical watchdogs, scientists
would be able to use the technique for research but not to produce babies.

    A leading embryo expert says this would allow doctors to create cloned
'body repair kits' for patients needing transplants or suffering from
life-threatening diseases.

      Dr Austin Smith, of Edinburgh University, predicts that one day every
child could have their own cloned 'twin' from which the genetic material·
needed for spare parts could be extracted and kept frozen.

    It follows the discovery that stem cells, the body's master cells from
which muscles, skin, bone, nerves and organs grow, can be isolated in an
embryo which has been developing in the laboratory for only six days. It
should be possible to remove these cells and use them to grow the organs or
tissue needed.

    Muscle cells could be used to patch up failing hearts, bone marrow
cells could be given to leukaemia victims and brain cells could be used to
halt the onset of diseases such as Parkinson's or Alzheimer's, Dr Smith
believes. He has submitted proposals to the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Authority to show how 'therapeutic cloning' could help millions
of people.

    The HFEA and the Human Genetics Advisory Commission have been reviewing
the laws governing cloning for the past year. They are said to support the
proposal for spare-part cloning while coming down firmly against
reproductive cloning - replicating a living human.

    Their report will go to Ministers shortly before Christmas arid be
published in the ne~ year. The Government will then have a couple of months
to decide whether to follow its recommendations.

    A spokesman for the HFEA stressed yesterday: 'The science behind this
is still a long way away and it would first have to be shown possible in
animals.' Although scientists have cloned mice and sheep, the technique is
still hit and miss.

    But they believe it will be possible to clone a human embryo from a
single cell within a couple of years.

    The nucleus of the cell - which contains the person's complete DNA
blueprint would be inserted into an unfertilised egg to produce a clone
embryo.

    After a few days, the embryo's stem cells would be removed. They could
then be grown on a dish, using the relevant hormones to convert them into
whatever type of body tissue was required.

    It is the technology needed in the final stage which is still years
away.

    Because it uses foetal material, even therapeutic cloning will be
fiercely opposed by antiabortion organisations and church groups.

    'This is a type of technological cannibalism,' said a spokesman for


Life.

    'The idea that you could store siblings that are genetic copies of
yourself and then convert them into particular types of tissue is
abhorrent. '

    The idea of doing this is abhorrent

    science Correspondent


