RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Devorah R. Adler ( CN=Devorah R. Adler/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-DEC-1998 19:46:20.00

SUBJECT:   discretionary priorities.

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
this is a draft -- more comments are coming in the morning.

thanks for your patience.

Devorah

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D28]MAIL49029734B.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043B0060000010A02010000000205000000C69E000000020000E24AE4A09FB6488C11D5C9
010182A8E54B08DAEC4BC74AA97B67343608222A761B76CE60A43715A14EB04254DB8470E513D6
4BF74C98011C371D72477CB553ECD5A33BF7A7852FCF4C6097EBCCEE91AFF4E22B15A4A7D67E8C
0890F340808CEAB1B8816BFD2A44C2AF78147E762999FF979C291FO8BEE7515BA72054E489ED5F
C74277993F765D7B62F18F736189E69780D5F728D9EA78BA4205799352A64D8EA294267FCDE9BE
834009A0672376CA5C166A1510FBE70AOA4F1037F2F2065A09CCDFAIAC5B2017C7C101ECDDDD02

Detecting and managing bioterrorism. (new initiative)              Bioterrorism is becoming an
increasing threat that has the potential to injure or kill millions of Americans through deadly
diseases, such as anthrax. This proposal funds HHS to train epidemic intelligence officers who
identify and respond to attacks, develop a mass casualty emergency response system, maintain a
stockpile of pharmaceuticals, and develop new vaccines and antibiotics that could be used in the
event of an attack. It is strongly supported by HHS, OMB, DPC and the Vice President's Office.

Cost. Original HHS cost estimate: $370 million

Issues. OMB believes that research and product regulation are primarily Federal
responsibilities, while public health surveillance, laboratory and epidemiological
capabilities, and medical response systems are areas that are primarily State
responsibilities. Therefore, NIH, CDC, FDA, and SAMHSA did not receive the full
funding amount requested.

Response. Although States play an important role in public health surveillance and
emergency medical response activities, it is clear that the current local public health
infrastructure is unable to support these essential surveillance and response activities.
Budget cutbacks and increasingly limited resources have forced many public health clinics
and public health departments to close their doors permanently, and the Federal-State
communications netWork is so inadequate that a recent test demonstrated that CDC was
unable to contact nearly half of local health departments within a day's time. Depending
on local public health entities to independantly meet the challenges of detecting and
managing the repercussions of a bioterrorist attack will place the country at risk. The
OMB passback level prevents CDC from developing improved suryeillance and overall
emergency preparedness plans and delay FDA's development of new vaccines for anthrax
and botulism. The passback level also eliminates SAMHSA's ability to assess the mass
behavioral psychological, and socioeconomic response to a bioterrorist event.

Status.        OMB passback: +$152 million; WH Need: additional +$90 million; HHS
               appeal addtional +$218 million.

Combating resistance to antibiotics (superbug). (new DPC proposal.) Recent reports have
indicated that resistance to antibiotics is increasingly becomirlg,a public health crisis,
causing prolonged illnesses and even death. Currently, hospitals spend over $600 million
each year treating infections caused by bacterial strains that are resistant to antibiotic
therapy. This proposal funds CDC to develop and implement public health strategies that
combat bacterial strains that are resistant to antibiotic therapies. This policy is supported
by DPC and the Vice President's office.

Cost. Original DPC cost estimate: $20 million

Issues of Concern. OMB would prefer to subsume this proposal in a new public health
                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                           HeK-Dwnp Convc:rsion ~
proposal. In addition, they believe that some of the infrastructure investments that are necessary
improve our ability to respond to antibiotic resistance are similar to the steps we are proposing to
respond to bioterrorist attacks.

Response. Although the surveillance efforts associated with this initiative can be subsumed
under this new public health surveillance initiative, we believe that the implementation of
public health strategies to prevent resistance are important enough to be funded separately.

Status. OMB passback: +0 (subsumed in surveillance initiative); WH Need +$10 million

Family Caregiver Support Program. (new initiative) Approximately 7 million family
caregivers currendy enable their elderly relatives to remain in the community, providing care that
would cost betWeen $45 and $75 billion annually if provided by home health care aides. This
proposal creates a new national program through the Administration on Aging to support
Americans who care for chronically ill or disabled family member or friends. It provides State
grants for "one-stop-shop" access point to provide services, such as information and counseling
as well as respite services and adult day care. This proposal is a priority for the Vice President,
DPC, and NEC, and is generally supported by OMB.

Cost. Original HHS cost estimate: $150 million

Issues. OMB only provided $10 million for this initiative, far less than what is necessary for it to
be creditable. Barbara Chow has indicated, however, that this would be her first funding priority
if she could get additional resources.

Response. The OMB passback level prevents the establishment of a national program,. providing
only enough funds to establish systems in a limited number of States. This policy is a critically
important component of the long term care initiative, as it complements the long term care tax
credit. Funding of this proposa.1 is necessary to obtain broad based validation from the advocacy
community for our entire long term care package.

               OMB passback: +$10 million; WH need: additional +$140 million; HHS
               appeal: additional +$140 million

Nursing home quality initiative. (orginally a WH proposal; HHS has expanded it) On July
21, the President announced his committment to addressing the current shortcomings in nursing
home quality of care. This initiative provides mandatory and discretionary funds to HCFA to
help States strengthen nursing home enforcement tools and increase Federal oversight of nursing
home quality and safety standards. Funding will be provided for new enforcement provisions
and increased surveys of repeat offenders and improve surveyor training. This proposal is
strongly supported by DPC and the Vice President's office.

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

Issues. OMB funds $50 million of this initiative through user fees. The pass back also assumes
that HCFA will assume the survey and certification costs ($12.5 million) associated with the
initiative within its current funding levels.

Response. The user fees used to fund a large part of this initiative will rapidly be discarded by the
Hill, placing the initiative in jeopardy. Requiring HCFA to absorb the survey and certification.
costs associated with this initiative would significantly reduce the level of these important
activities. In addition, there is currently another GAO investigation on nursing home quality
underway, which underscores the need for a significant investment in this area.

Status.        OMB passback: +$107 million; WH Need: additional +$37.5 million ($12.5
               million + $25 million to reduce the unrealistically high user fees from $50 million
               to $25 million); HHS appeal: additional +$12.5 million

Educating Medicare beneficiaries about long term care options. (new WH initiative) Medicare
beneficiaries are often unaware that Medicare does not provide long term care services. This
proposal provides funds to RCFA to use the Medicare +Choice marketing materials to educate
beneficiaries about long term care options outside of the Medicare program. This proposal is
strongly supported by DPC and has been validated by the aging community, as they believe
this proposal is necessary to assure beneficiaries have the information they need to
understand their options.

Cost: Original DPC cost estimate: $25 million.

Issues. OMB believes this is a solid policy worth funding, particularly if it is used to promote
high quality long term care products. HHS has concerns with this proposal because it fears that it
will be perceived as an endorsement of private long term care insurance ..

Response .. We need this initiative to convince the private sector that we believe it has an
important role to play in this area and to also indirectly affirm that the Federal
government cannot and should not be relied on by the public at large to meet the
overwhelming long term care needs facing the nation.

Status.        OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: additional +25 million

Improving access to Ryan White programs. (existing program) Low income individuals
infected with HIV often have to wait up to a year in order to access the comprehensive
range of drugs needed to effectively treat HIV. This proposal will increase our current
proposed investment in the Ryan White program and the AIDS Drug Assistance Program,
which provide a range of critical services for people with HIV/AiDS. OMB and HHS are
not advocating for an increase but do not oppose one. Increasing this investment is a top
priority for the AIDS office and the Vice President's office.
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

Issues. OMB has concluded that it does not have the resources necessary to meet the AIDS
Office recommendation of an additional $165 million for the Ryan White program.

Status.          Ryan WhiteOMB passback: +$72.2 million; WH Need: additional +$50
                 million; no HHS appeal

Addressing HIV/AIDS in minority communities. (existing WH initiative) This past October, in
response to the Congressional Black Caucus, the President declared HIVjAIDS in minority
communities to be a "severe and ongoing health crisis." This proposal seeks emergency funding
to strengthen substance abuse treatment and prevention programs that include an HIV
component and enhance funding for 60 Ryan White planning grants. It is strongly supported by
DPC, HHS and the Vice President's office.

Cost.     Original HHS cost estimate: $50 million

Issues. OMB's official position is that this initiative was limited to a one time investment and that
there was no committment to future funding. However, they unofficially have acknowledged that
it will be difficult to discontinue this funding priority in the face of extreme pressure by the
Congressional Black Caucus. As such, they. would not oppose additional funding if dollars could
be made available.

Response. The OMB pass back completely eliminates funding for this initiative and prevents us
from sustaining our commitment to the Congressional Black Caucus and minority communities
throughout America.

Status. OMB passback: +(0); WH Need:+$50 million; HHS appeal: +$50 million

Building on the President's Race and Health Initiative. (existing WH initiative) Minorities
suffer as much as five times the rate for certain diseases and mortality rates, such as
cancer, diabetes, heart disease, immunizations, HIV/AIDS, and infant mortality. Last year,
the President announced a $400 million commitment over 5 years to eliminate racial health
disparities in six critical areas by 2010. This proposal funds public health programs designed to
prevent diseases experienced disproportionately by minorities and a grant program to test and
replicate innovative approaches that address these disparities. It is strongly supported by DPC,
HHS, and the Vice President's office.

Cost.     Original HHS cost estimate: $50 million

Issues. The OMB pass back suggests that HHS earmark $50 million of community health center
funding for this initiative, rather than providing new funds.

                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
in order to deliver on the President's committment. Dedicating dollars already earmarked for
CHCs will be viewed as ineffective and unresponsive by the minority community. In addition,
since they only provide direct services, CHCs are unable to adequately address the significant
public health infrastructure issues that currently prevent minorities from accessing effective health
care services that could arrest disproportionate rates ofinfection and disease.

Status.          OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: +$80 million; HHS appeal + $50 million

Enhancing mental health services. (existing program) Approximately 44 million adults
and 14 million children suffer from a mental disorder annually. This proposal increases
funding to SAMHSA in order to enable states to provide critical mental health services,
including access to prevention and treatment services and providing new incentives to
communities who have implemented effective mental health programs. This proposal
increases funding to SAMHSA as well as raising awareness about mental health through
enhancing the current level of funding provided to States through the mental health block
grants. This proposal is strongly supported by the Vice President's office.

Cost. Original HHS cost estimate: $146 million

Issues. The OMB passback refocuses mental health activities within the PHS, concentrating
on mental health research at NIH, and State grants and specialized service delivery. OMB
has stated that the reduction in mental health research grants is justified in the context of
large increases for mental.health research at NIMH.

Response. Mrs. Gore's office is recommending a White House Conference on Mental Health
for this spring to raise awareness about mental illness and to take the next steps to
improving access to and treatment of mental health. In addition, next year, HHS will
release a Surgeon General's report documenting the widespread incidence and impact of
mental illness.

Status.          OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: +$100 million; HHS appeal +$116 million

Preventing and treating asthma.   (new initiative) Over the past 15 years, the number of children
afflicted with asthma has doubled to total about 6 million. The most rapid increase in prevalence
over this time period has occurred in children under the age of 5, with rates increasing over 160
percent. The steep climb in rates of morbidity and mortality classify asthma as an illness with
significant public health implications. This proposal funds HHS and EPA to educate patients and
providers about new treatment guidelines for asthma, conduct a national asthma awareness
campaign, reduce asthma triggers in homes, and establish school based asthma programs in every
community. This proposal is strongly supported by both the First Lady's office and DPC.

Cost.     Original estimates: $50 million for HHS and $25 million for EPA

                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
Medicaid program to disseminate. new treatment guidelines for asthma, but eliminates the
research and public health strategies that are integral to the HHS proposal. They believe that
those components of the proposal could be supported through existing sources of funding.
Response. Although OMB's disease management strategies can and should be incorporated into
the HHS proposal, to eliminate the research and wider components of the proposal would
greatly inhibit our ability to alleviate the morbidity and mortality associated with this illness.

Status.          OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: +$25 million for HHS; HHS appeal: +$50
                 million

 Promoting Medicaid de-institutionalization. (new initiative) One ofthe biggest
Jrustrations for people with severe disabilities and their families is the "institutional bias"
 in Medicaid --meaning the tendency to simply put people with great health care needs in
 nursing homes rather than develop viable, community-based alternatives. This proposal
 builds on a current demonstration program that by develops and propagates models that
 give people residing in a nursing home a choice of care settings after a "date certain". This
 proposal is strongly supported by HHS.

Cost. Ot:iginal HHS cost estimate: $38 million

Issues. OMB and DPC believe that this program is not well designed and would not be
validated by the disability community, which is already complaining about the current
demonstration program.

Status.          OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: +(0); HHS appeal: +$38 million

Improving Emergency Medical Services in Rural Areas. (new initiative) The presence of viable
EMS systems is critical for residents in rural and frontier areas. Because of the high rates of
occupational injury associated with employment unique to rural areas, such as farming, mining,
and fishing, rural residents experience disproportionate rates of trauma and medical emergencies.
Many rural and frontier communities face challenges in obtaining ambulance equipment and
communication systems· and recruiting, training, and retaining EMS personnel. This proposal
provides grant funds to States and local communities through HRSA to promote EMS systems
development, integrate EMS systems into local primary care services, and enhance provider
recruitment, retention and education efforts. It is supported by HHS and DPC, and has been
endorsed by the National Rural Health Association.

Cost.     Original HHS estimate: $50 million

Issues. OMB would prefer to fund this program through the Medicare program rather than
through a PHS grant program. They believe that this initiative would do little to improve access
to health care services or address the many health problems facing rural communities.


                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
communities and allows States to design systems that work for their individual constituencies. In
addition, the proposal is a way to relieve some financially burdened rural hospitals of the
extraordinarily expensive burden of 24-hour a day ER coverage.

Status. OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: +$25 million; HHS has not appealed

Providing needed education funds to children's hospitals. (new WH initiative) Medicare
has invested billions of dollars in graduate medical education to hospitals since 1966.
However, because of its current distribution formula, free-standing children's hospitals are
forced to shoulder the majority of the cost of training pediatricians, placing them at a
severe financial disadvantage. This proposal creates a ne~ discretionary grant program to
provide GME funds through the PHS in order to provide freestanding children's hospitals with
Federal financing for the cost of providing direct graduate medical education. This proposal is
strongly supported by the First Lady's office, DPC, and the National Association of Children's
Hospitals. HHS does not oppose this proposal, as long as it is not funded through the
Medicare trust fund.

Cost. Orignal DPC cost estimate: $40 million .

Issues. OMB is strongly opposed to this proposal because they believe that the children's
hospitals are financially stable and do not need additional federal assistance.

Response. We believe that there is a legitimate equity argument here, as these hospitals
shoulder much of the responsibility for training the nations' pediatricians and pediatric
subspecialists.

Status. OMB: +(0); WH Need: +$40 million

Investing in DoD cancer research programs.    (new DPC proposal) Every year the Congress funds
programs at DoD for prostate and breast cancer research. While every White House principal
has highlighted these innovative, widely acclaimed research programs, we have never proposed a
single dollar for them in our budgets. We are also proposing an investment in osteoporosis
research at the DoD. This is a priority for the Vice President.

Cost. Original DPC estimate: $250 million

Issues: DoD is resistant to this concept as they believe that although they have developed a
model program in response to a Congressional mandate, cancer research is not within their
military mission. They are more open to the concept of osteoporosis research because there are
many military stress fractures. However, we think it could be highly problematic if the first time
we ever invested in these programs we ignored the prostate and breast cancer programs and only
funded osteoporosis.

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Convorliion




    Response: Given the high level of commitment to cancer research and the fact that these
    programs are already up and running, it is important that we underscore our support for them.
    Also, DoD is .likely to receive generous increases in the budget and this is a good way to invest
    in cancer priorities in a tight budget.

    Status.          OMB: +(0); WH Need: earmark $200 million of DoD increase

    Investing in Promising Biomedical Research.

    Cost.     Original HHS request: $1.5 billion

    Issues: While both HHS and DPC support more generous increases, OMB has suggested that
    NIH reduce the amount of research started in FY 1999 in order to adjust to this new funding
    level. Many argue that this is not the best use of resources in a tight budget given the already
    generous funding at NIH.

    Response. Funding NIH at the OMB passback level would allow the agency to fund only
    6,600 new research project grants, which is a 28% decrease from the number of projects
    funded in 1999 and the lowest level of new research since 1994. OMB suggested that NIH
    reduce the amount of research started in FY 1999 in order to adjust to this new funding
    level, which is not a reasonable or responsible path to advocate. It is also important to note
    that both the President and Vice President have both spoken in great detail about the
    importance of investments in biomedical research.

    Status. OMB: +$49 million; WH Need: additional +$750 million; HHS appeal $1.5 billion.




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Convel1ion
.;,



