RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-DEC-1998 10:18:17.00

SUBJECT:   education budget issues

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
In the process of working through the teaching and reform issues for the
budget exercise, since our conversation yesterday, several things have
become more clear to me. Most importantly, I think it is strategically
wiser for us to put $200 million into a Title 1 accountability initiative
than into a handful of teaching initiatives. Here's why:

1. Given the uncertaintly about where we are (more importantly, where the
President is) on a teacher quality piece in ESEA, the various teacher
initiatives we have been working on make less and less sense to me as
FY2000 initiatives.  Simply put, in order for a handful of teacher quality
initiatives to add up to something, they have to be leading toward a
larger effort in ESEA. But since we don't quite know what ESEA will look
like, its hard to take the first step. And we run the danger of proposing
initiatives that are either too small to make much of, or too big
(particularly in the out years) to commit to right now.  A couple of
examples:
We've proposed a teacher recruitment initiative, focused on providing
scholarhsips to the best high school kids if they would go into teaching.
On its own terms, its a good idea.   But by its very nature it has to be a
long term initiative (you have to get the kids through 4 years of college
and into the schoolhouse), and it has to grow over time in order to add
new cohorts. A $50 million proposal in the first year then becomes a $250
million item in the 5th year (about 1/6 to 1/3 of our overall teacher in
itiative, depending on what we finally decide).   I think thic could turn
out to be too big a commitment to make now, without knowing the scale and
shape of our over teaching package.
At the other end of the spectrum, we've proposed a $50 million initiative
to reduce the number of high school teachers teaching out of field.   This
could stay at $50 million a year, for 3-5 years, and probably get folded
into most things we might do on teacher quality--and if not, just phase
itself out after 3 years or so. However, on its own it lacks much sex
appeal, and there aren't any compelling reasons I can think of for not
just dealing with this in ESEA, and still getting the message value out of
it now.

2. In contrast, a new Education Excellence and Accountability Fund for the
same $200 million or so would be a bigger deal on its own terms, and would
clearly point to where POTUS wants to go .on this issue.  It would help on
message grounds, and give us something good to fight over on approps.   I
while it would lock us into a direction on ESEA before we have that all
nailed down, in this case it would lock us into a direction that the
entire WH wants to go in--a helpful development in our continuing discussi
ons with ED.


