RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Ce,rda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-DEC-1998 15:47:55.00

SUBJECT:   JUSTICES EXPRESS DOUBT ON LEGALITY OF ANTI-GANG ...

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI ... SCOTUS update on Chicago gang ordinance ... jc3
---------------------- Forwarded by Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP on 12/09/98
03:46 PM ---------------------------



        CERDA J @ Al
        12/09/98 03:42:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Jose Cerda III
cc:
Subject: JUSTICES EXPRESS DOUBT ON LEGALITY OF ANTI-GANG ...

Date: 12/09/98 Time: 15:01
SJustices express doubt on legality of anti-gang loitering law

    WASHINGTON (AP)   A majority of Supreme Court justices, although
told Chicago street gangs threaten "enormous evils, " voiced
doubts Wednesday about a city law aimed at preventing gang members
and their friends from hanging out in pUblic.
    "There is a concern here ... for arbitrariness of the police,"
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor said after being told the
anti-loitering law resulted in 45,000 arrests in the three years it
was enforced.
    In all, six of the nine justices criticized the sweeping power
the 1992 ordinance gave to police.
    In a case watched closely by states and communities across the
nation, the court must decide by July whether the ordinance is
constitutional. State courts struck it down.
    "Gang crime is different from most every other form of criminal
activity, " city lawyer Lawrence Rosenthal argued in seeking the
ordinance's reinstatement. "Street gangs rely on their ability to
terrorize the community."
    Police officers most often arrive on the scene only to see gang
members "pretending to innocently loiter," Rosenthal said.
    Harvey Grossman, representing 66 people arrested under the
ordinance, argued that personal freedoms' must limit crime-fighting
efforts. "If you try to regulate conduct in a public forum,
..
     you have to understand you will sweep in a multitude of human
      activity that this court would give protection to, " he said.
          He called the invalidated law too vague and overbroad.
          The ordinance required police to order any group of people
      standing around "with no apparent purpose"    to move along if an
      officer believed at least one of them belonged to a street gang.
     Those who disregarded the order would be arrested.
          Justice David H. Souter found fault with the ordinance's
      "silent assumption"   that "some purposes are worthy and some are
     not. I I
          "There usually is an apparent purpose for that which we call
      loitering, " he said, adding that such a purpose might be to sit
     down and watch the cars go by.
     ·    Justice Stephen G. Breyer worried that gang members' presence on
      street corners intimidates "people who are poor and honest"    and
     wondered aloud whether any ordinance could help the city rein in
      street gangs.
          But he confessed "some concern"   that the ordinance itself·
     might hassle some innocent people.
          During the 60-minute session, several justices seemed to search
      for workable alternatives.
          Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg asked about an ordinance that would
     allow arrests of gang members only.
          O'Connor said a better law would "focus on some action,
      intimidation or seeking control of a physical area."
          Breyer asked whether the ordinance would be stronger if police
     could act only after seeing three or more gang members in one
     place. Souter suggested five or more and Justice John Paul Stevens
     upped it to 10 in one of his hypothetical questions.
          Justice Anthony M. Kennedy noted that the ordinance does not
     require police to tell people who are not gang members why they are
     being ordered to move and asked how such people should know they
     are doing something illegal.
          Only Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Antonin
     Scalia voiced sympathy for the city's argument that the ordinance
     is a valid attempt to deal with what Rosenthal called "the
     enormous evils associated with gang loitering."
          Justice Clarence Thomas asked no questions .and made no comments.
          Rosenthal said, "Gang crime has been rising. More people are
     getting shot."
          Scalia offered him help by stating, "Gangs perpetuate
     themselves by showing themselves publicly. ' ,
          But Grossman said the city failed to "make a distinction
     between innocent loitering and criminal loitering."
          The Clinton administration, 31 states, the National League of
     cities, U.S. Mayors Conference and National Governors Association
     are among those siding with Chicago in friend-of-the-court briefs.
          The ordinance's opponents include the NAACP and other civil
     rights groups, the National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty
     and the National Black Police Association.
          A more liberal Supreme Court in 1972 struck down a Jacksonville,
     Fla., ordinance that prohibited "persons wandering or strolling
     around from place to place without any lawful purpose or object. ' ,
          Such general anti-loitering ordinances, once common, were viewed
     by many as thinly veiled attempts to keep blacks out of certain
     towns and neighborhoods.
          Stevens, the highest court's only Chicago native, asked at one
     point how the city's black aldermen had voted. He was told six
     voted for the ordinance; eight opposed it.
     APNP-12-09-98 1515EST
,   '.


