RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elizabeth Drye ( CN=Elizabeth Drye/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-FEB-1997 18:44:27.00

SUBJECT:   Status of Events

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Seat Belt Report.  DOT expects to deliver to the White House March 10 a
report the President requested suggesting ways to increase seat belt use.
We could announce it later that week.  The report may recommend the
President:  set an ambitious national goal for seat belt use; challenge
the states to pass "primary" seat belt laws (allowing cops to stop
passengers not wearing belts); and provide $9 million in incentive grants
to states (consistent with our 1998 budget).

Ban on Cloning.   Congress banned the use of Federal funds for cloning in
both FY96 and FY97, but privately-funded research is not similarly
restricted. The President could call on the scientific community to
institute a self-imposed moratorium on human cloning research -- at least
while the National Bioethics Advisory Committee implements the President's
request to study the issue over the next 90 days. We will make a
recommendation next week on this possible action.

Actions responding to the President's Advisory Committee on Human
Radiation Experiments.     In response to key recommendations of the
Committee, ·we have prepar.ed (1) an Executive Order strengthening
protections for human subjects of secret research; and (2) legislation
expanding compensation for Cold War-era uranium miners.     With one week's
notice, we can be ready to announce these policies and release a summary
report detailing the Administration's full response to the Committee's 18
recommendations.

Tobacco Advertising on Web Sites We recommend against the President's
commenting now on this subject.    Because of the First Amendment, FDA's
rule focuses on advertising that already reaches kids.  The rule also
requires companies to notify FDA when initiating advertising in media -- in
cluding the internet -- not addressed by the rule, so the FDA can monitor
the ads.   Industry has challenged FDA's rule in the courts in part on
First Amendment grounds. Any statement now prejudging internet ads--
and their effects on kids -- may compromise our efforts to defend the
rule's carefully drawn provisions.


