     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 15-DEC-1998 20:14:45.00

     SUBJECT:   Social promotions options paper

     TO: Ann O'Leary ( Ann O'Leary @ ed.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN]      )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Broderick Johnson ( CN=Broderick Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Diane_Rogers ( Diane_Rogers @ ed.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN]        )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Mike Smith    Mike Smith @ ed.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN]   )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Cecilia E. Rouse ( CN=Cecilia E. Rouse/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Shirley S. Sagawa ( CN=Shirley S. Sagawa/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Attached is an options paper on ending social promotions, for Wednesday's
     1:00 pm meeting in Bruce's office. ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ============
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D8]MAIL493531259.326 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF57504322050000010A02010000000205000000073D000000020000122C6913147248E26F43AD
     OE790B4E217ABAB2F47AFF06F7065948104F49E20008985548867478C09183C71EBD0365B6C2C4
     F380261C160C86EDDF90CC80A501CD3AF0597871394AB154A412985211DD1B5D30674BAD6E0334
              Options for Requiring StateslDistricts to "End Social Promotion"
                          as a Condition of Participation in ESEA

What Do We Mean by "Ending Social Promotion and What Education Changes are We
Trying To Promote?

Students must meet academic standards in order to progress through the system. We want
states/local school districts to adopt policies that (1) require students to meet academic
performance standards at key transition points (e.g., 4th and 8th grade, for high school
graduation) before being promoted; (2) uses a test valid for these purposes as the primary tool to
determine if a student has met the standards; (3) permits other factors to be taken into account in
determining whether an individual student should be promoted.

The education system is responsible for implementing steps to help students meet promotion
standards. While requiring students to meet standards sends them an important message that
"performance counts", the more important message in this policy is that schools and school
systems must devise and implement strategies for helping students meet the standards -- on time.
 Accomplishing this requires acting on what we know: (1) starting early, by providing students
with needed preschool opportunities; (2) strengthening learning opportunities in the classroom,
with clear grade-by-grade standards, small classes with well prepared teachers, high quality
professional development, use of proven instructional practices, early identification and
intervention for kids who need help; (3) providing extended learning time for kids who need
extra help, including after-school and summer school; (4) providing appropriate programs for
kids who still do not meet the standards, rather than simply having them repeat an entire grade;
and (5) holding schools accountable for results.

Schools should not markedly increase retention rates. The debate about social promotion in the
education community typically assumes that the alternative is to hold large numbers of student
back and make them repeat a grade -- a practice which itself rarely improves student achievement
and is often associated with an increased probability of dropping out. However, our approach is
predicated on the assumption that, with adequate time, resources, guidance and accountability, a
mandatory end to social promotion should drive schools to take the steps necessary to increase
the percentage of students who m!!et the standards on time, rather than increase the retention rate.
The biggest educational challenge this proposal faces is to create the conditions under which this
assumption is borne out.

Design Issues
In the next section I outline a series of options for a requirement to end.social promotion. The
following design features apply to each of them:
       State and local standards: Promotion standards, assessments and specific transition
        points will be determined at state/local level, not nationally.

                                                 1           Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
        so that "centralized" states can design and implement policies statewide, while "local
        control" states can let districts make the key policy design and implementation decisions.
       Phased in implementation: States/districts will have to develop a plan for implementing
        this policy, with implementation phased in over 3-5 years and with particular attention to
        the steps the state or district will take to help all students meet the. standards. This time
        is necessary to allow for the development or adoption and validation of assessments,
        particularly in states and districts currently without validated "high stakes" tests. It is
      . also necessary to phase in the policy in order to provide time to strengthen learning
        opportunities, and to ensure that the first cohort of students affected by the policy had full
        access to appropriate learning opportunities early on.

Options

1. Focus on Early Reading: Make sure every 8 year old can read before being promoted.
The best way to start on ending social promotions is to make sure that every student gets a solid
foundation in reading before they leave the early elementary grades. We would require states
and school districts participating in ESEA to adopt a policy requiring each student to demonstrate
proficiency in reading by the end of grade 3 (or another elementary grade determined by the state
or district) in order to be promoted. The state or district would determine the assessment and
performance standard used to define and determine proficiency. Each state would be required to
submit an implementation plan to the Secretary, which would include information on the grade
level, performance standard and assessment, as well asa specific plan to help all students meet
the standard. The plan would address issues such as the provision of appropriate
pre-schooVreadiness services, challenging academic standards and a rich curriculum aligned with
the standards, ensuring students have qualified teachers, providing for early identification and
intervention for kids who need help, and extended learning time for students who need it,
including after-school and summer school.

The state or district would be required to show how funds from Title 1, Class Size Reduction, the
Reading Excellence Act, 21 st Century Community Learning Centers, and from various
professional development programs (e.g., Eisenhower, Bilingual Education, Special Education)
are being used to support the state or district's approach. While there is no assumption that
these federal programs would cover the full implementation cost~ we should send a clear signal
that federal funds can and should be used in a coherent manner for this purpose.

Pro's
     Focusing on early reading is the right way to start--ifthis approach succeeds it should
      help improve student performance in later grade levels as well.
     This approach supports and builds, on our overall focus on early literacy, and provides a
      powerful incentive for states, districts and schools to use all of our program funds in a


                                                 2                Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
      Because there is a relatively large federal investment behind this goal, it provides the best
       protection against charges of federal intrusion and unfunded mandates.
      The same federal investments give us some (perhaps the best available) protection with
       liberals -- we can credibly argue that we are matching requirement that students meet
       standards with the investments to back it up.

Con's
      One subject and grade level is a pretty limited approach to ending social promotion.
      Ifthis proposal is not designed and implemented well it would harm the youngest and
      톗ost vulnerable students.
      May create difficulties for states and districts that have developed new assessments
       aligned to challenging standards if the assessments were not designed and validated for
       high stakes purposes. States/districts in this situation may need to select an additional
       test that would be weakly aligned with new standards,. or modify and revalidate their new
       assessments.               .                                .
      Likely to spur additional civil rights suits and complaints over test policy.
      The review and approval of plans will be difficult:
               Unless the state plans are very specific and focused on how the needs of high
                poverty schools will be addressed, there may not be enough information to judge
                the adequacy of the plans.
               Producing plans that are specific enough to permit careful evaluation and provide
                assurances that students would be provided adequate learning opportunities will
                be seen as burdensome and intrusive by states and districts.
               Dealing with local district plans provides additional problems--we could either be
                overwhelmed by the task, or delegate the responsibility to States, with the result of
              . providing uneven quality controls.
               We could reduce the review and approval burdens by requiring a state or local
                assurance rather than a plan-~but that would erode quality control and protections
                for kids even further.
               Finally, what do we if a state or local plan is inadequate -- withhold ESEA funds?
                 Prohibit its implementation?

2. Make the High School Diploma Mean Something: Require Students to Pass a
Competency Test for High School Graduation. Twenty-two states now require some kind of
competency test for high school graduation. A requirement that all states have a competency
test would have a substantial impact. As in the above proposal, states/districts would be free to
determine the subj ect areas to be tested and the performance standards students must meet. In
addition, the state/district plan would address strategies for providing students with the learning
opportunities to meet the standards, and would show how students would have multiple
opportunities to take the test and meet the standards.

                                                 3                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


         Pro's
                A focus on high sC;hool graduation keeps the proposal simple and easy to understand.
                A focus on high school graduation means places the accountability for students and the
               . education system at a critical point -- making sure students meet standards before they
                 leave the system. It has the potential to create pressure earlier in the pipeline, to provide
                 students with the foundation for meeting higher standards.

         Con's
              All of the ones for the early reading proposal (except that it is not targeted to the youngest
               and most vulnerable students).
              Many ofthe states that currently meet this requirement use low level, minimum
               competency tests. While a number are phasing these out in favor of higher standards, we
               don't know the extent to which other states will respond to this requirement with low
               level tests, and thereby undermine the move to higher standards.
              Because we have relatively little federal investment at the high school level, we will be
               more open to criticism from the right that this is an unfunded mandate, and from the left
               that we are not providing an opportunity to learn.

         3. Require a Comprehensive Approach to Ending Social Promotions. In this approach,
         states and districts would be required to adopt a policy requiring students to meet standards at 3
         transition points--in elementary school, middle school, and for high school graduation. Again,
         states would pick the grade levels, subject areas and performance standards, and would be
         required to submit an implementation plan ..

         Pro's
              This approach would have the most powerful impact on students and schools, by
               requiring students to meet standards throughout their schooling career.
              If implemented well over time, it would do the most to improve achievement, because it
               would ensure that schools don't let anyone fall through the cracks.

         Con's
              In addition to those above, this is most likely to be attacked as unwarranted federal
               intrusion, because of its more sweeping impact.




                                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                            4                   Hex-Dump Conversion


