RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-DEC-1998 15:52:38.00

SUBJECT:   Prisoner Rehab Programs

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

cc: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Bruce:

 Per your request:

What we've done:

Over the past couple of years, most of our efforts to train and educate
prisoners have come in the form of improvements in the Federal Bureau of
Prisons (BOP) programs and grants to the states for comprehensive
treatment (The Republican majority in Congress has not supported funding
for other programs, such as the boot camps we originally proposed) .
Specifically, we've accomplished the following:

-- BOP.  Last year BOP, through its Federal Prison Industries (FPI)
employed about 20,000 inmates -- or about 25% of its prison population.
BOP inmates also spent more than 11 million classroom hours in such
programs as literacy, occupational/vocational training,
English-as-a-Second Language, parenting, health promotion, release
readiness and other continuing adult education.   In fact, on a typical
day, about 35% of the federal inmate population is involved in some type
of education program. And in 1998, more than 6,000 federal inmates
received their GED -- an increase of 25% from the previous year.

-- Residential Substance Abuse Treatment (RSAT) in the States. The Crime
Bill authorized between $30 and $75 million per year for long-term
residential drug treatment in state prisons.  These programs fund between
6 and 12 months of substance abuse treatment -- set apart from the general
prison population -- and are required to provide aftercare services that
include education and job training.

What we propose doing in FY 2000:

 The FY 2000 budget offers several opportunities to expand education and
 training for prisoners.  These include:

-- Certainty of Punishment. This $40 million initiative, designed to
promote alternatives to incarceration for young offenders (up to age 25),
will allow us to fund innovative community-based correction programs that
can include long-term community service, work programs linked to victim
restitution, and other alternatives to incarceration that link job
training with accountability (drug testing, compensating victims, day
reporting, electronic monitoring, passing GED, paying child support).   If
,.                                                                           Page 2 of2


the President wants, we can specifically design a program under this
initiative that is focused on employing offenders.

-- Coerced Abstinence. The FY 2000 budget will include some $200 million
in drug testing and treatment that can be further linked w/education and
training. Although the $50 million in Drug Courts and $65 million in
RSAT funds can be strengthened to specifically include education and
training components, the $85 million in new funds offers the best
opportunity to do what the President wants.  Since most of these will go
to fund state drug testing and treatment plans, we can essentially use
this new program to replicate much of what the Federal BOP already does
(see above).

-- Prison Work Demonstration. We can also add to the budget a proposed
DOJ initiative to fund a $6 million Prison Work demonstration program
that: (1) develops model "Prison at Work" programs that systematically
improve prison employment in the states (only about 10% of state prisoners
work); and (2) funds· "Model Industry" innovation grants to test new
methods to increase inmate employment (i.e., new production methods,
targeting new portions of the prison population, etc.).

Other ideas to consider:

Finally, there are a few more avenues that we can look into that don't
necessarily require new funds or legislation.  They include:

-- Fatherhood programs. An estimated 60% of the persons in prisons are
fathers.  How can we tap into the support for fatherhood programs to work
w/this population.

--- Welfare-to-work.  Localities can chose to use their welfare-to-work
grants to target ex-offenders. What more can we do to get cities to focus
on this population. Already, the Mayors are saying they want to focus on
keeping ex-drug offenders clean when they are released from state.
prisons. Are they will to commit some of their W2W dollars for this
purpose?


