    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:1B-DEC-199B 19:44:36.00

    SUBJECT:   SOTU Event Memo

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D62]MAIL43251106I.326 to ASCII,
     The following is a HEX DUMP:

    FF57S0430D060000010A0201000000020S000000B4690000000200002ABEF4020110BBB04ECB72
    8B15BBE361383C9C11A7E36BAOA34503SDBC3343FBBDCOA67317A77E1SDC7BC53FD63547D527CF
    SD1B183E1290D65A2C4D913D6EC5405371D7047COE77B2171077EBOS907A69376E4EF339BOB2D6
    632FDBCB2151B2F67DC5AF45AOOC3B84D214B792CB1F267FB4BBC51B13A3B2277CODDF7100AAFC


MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

FROM:                      BRUCE REED

SUBJECT:                   DPC STATE OF THE UNION ROLLOUT

Following is a list of possible announcements that the President could make prior to the State of
the Union.

HEALTH CARE:
Week 1 Anti-Asthma Initiative
             The President could unveil a new budget initiative that includes new funding
             for States to develop disease management programs through Medicaid and
             for EPA to conduct a national asthma awareness campaign, initiate
             community based activities to reduce asthma triggers in homes, and establish
             school based asthma programs in every cominunity. This initiative is
             especially critical as the number of children afflicted with asthma. has
             doubled to total about 6 million over the past 15 years.

WeekI          Bioterriorism Event
               The President could announce a new budget initiative to protect the country
               from the devastation of disease outbreaks due to bioterrorist attacks or·
               bacterial strains that are resistant to treatment. The new program provides
               funding for a new disease surveillance system to collect and analyze
               epidemiological information on disease outbreaks, training epidemic
               intelligence officers to identify and respond to attacks, developing a mass
               casualty emergency response system, maintaining a stockpile of
               pharmaceuticals, and developing new vaccines and antibiotics that could be
               used in the event of an attack.

Week 1         New Work Incentives initiative for people with disabilities.
               The FY 2000 budget includes a historic workers incentive program that
               provides for continued and enhanced access to programs that empower
               people with disabilities to work. This package includes the Jeffords-Kennedy
               Work Incentives Improvement Act, which enables people with disabilities to go
               back to work by providing them with the option to buy into Medicaid and
               Medicare, a tax credit for' work-related expenses for people with disabilities, a
               new program to integrate local employment-related and support services for adults

                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
             disabilities. The unemployment rate among the 30 million working-age
             adults with disabilities continues to be much higher than that of the general
             population --close to 75 percent for people with significant disabilities, who
             cite their inability to retain their health coverage as their main impediment to
             returning to work. These' announcements will reflect many of the
             recommendations included in the President's Task Force on Employment of
             Adults with Disabilities, and the overall initiative is strongly supported by the
             disability community. We may be able to coordinate the event with the
             bipartisan introduction of the Jeffords-Kennedy legislation.

Week 2Nursing Home Event: Unveiling new sanctions and investments in quality
                   oversight for nursing homes. To preempt the release of a GAO report in
             early January by Senator Grassley that criticizes our riursing home quality
             enforcement record, this event could highlight our aggressive efforts and a new
             investment of over $90 million dollars to implement effective nursing home
             enforcement tools and improved nursing home quality and safety standards. These
             include proposing new Federal legislation imposing civil and criminal
             penalties on nursing homes committing repeated and egregious violations of
             Medicare or Medicaid regulations,increasing monitoring of facilities that are
             repeatedly in violation of quality standards, and establishing a new national
             commission to study the quality of care providing in nursing homes and assisted
             living facilities:

Week 2       Long Term Care Initiative
             The President could release new budget initiatives designed to address the
             growing national need for high quality long term care services, including a
             new multibillion dollar long term care tax credit, proposals that provide
             FederaI.employees the option of purchasing private long term care insurance,
             educate Medicare beneficiaries about available long term care options,and
             invest $125 million dollars (if included in budget) in a new national program to
             support Americans who care for chronically ill or' disabled family members or.
             friends. About 2 million Americans live in nursing homes and another 5 million
             Americans live in the community, but have health problems that make them
             dependent on others for basic activities of daily living, such as bathing or dressing.
             This multi-faceted initiative addresses a growing problem and represents our first
             significant effort to introduce new long term care policy that is extremely
             important to the aging community.                                        .

Week 3New Labeling Requirements for Over-The-Counter Drugs
             The President could announce the releij.se of a new regulation requmng


                                              .2         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
              understandable language, ensuring that millions of consumers understand how to
              take medication safely and effectively. Presently, labels for over the counter drugs
              are often printed too small to read and in language that is often difficult to
              understand. (This regulation will be ready for release in January; however, since it
              is not budget related it would be timely regardless of when it is released.)

Week 3 Preventing Genetic Discrimination
              The President can challenge the Congress to pass bipartisan legislation that ensures
              that insurers and employers do not inappropriately utilize genetic information to
              discriminate against enrollees and employees. Presently, Americans are not
              adequately protected against companies who use this information as an excuse to
              deny them employment. (This is not budget related and could be held for a later
              time.)

Week 4        Children's Health Insurance Outreach Initiative
or Feb. The President would announce several new activities to identify and enroll eligible
              children in Medicaid or CHIP, including launching a national ad campaign that
              includes a 1-800 number sponsored by the NGA and announce other private
              sector initiatives. Last year, we created a $24 billion Children's Health Insurance
              Program -- the largest health expansion for children in 30 years. However, over
              10 million children are eligible for either Medicaid or CHIP but are not enrolled.


CRIME:
WeekI         Crime Statistics and COPS II Launch
              The President could announce his budget proposal for COPS II in a large
              ceremony with the law enforcement community before the State of the Union. The
              President could hold this event on the same day the of the release of the Justice
              Department's 1997 National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), which will
              show a continued decrease in crime victimization rates to the lowest point since
              the survey first began. The NCVS will show that violent and property crime rates
              have dropped more than 20% since the President first took office and will provide
              the opportunity to highlight the success of the COPS program and build support
              for COPS II.

Week I        "Zero Tolerance" for Drugs in Prisons
              Following up on his directive calling for "zero tolerance" of drugs in prisons, the
              President could make a series of ann()Uncements reinforcing the Administration's
              strong commitment to using the coercive power of the criminal justice system to
              reduce drug use and crime.


                                               3             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
              (1) The availability of up to $50 million in FY 99 for prison drug
              testing/treatment. As part of the recent budget deal, the Administration fought
              for and won the flexibility for states to use their federal prison grants to drug test
              and treat prisoners/parolees. A state-by-state break-out of this funding could be
              released, as well as the official solicitation for funds. Also, MD Governor
              Glendening or Lt. Gov. Kennedy-Townsend -- who already plan to use these
              funds to test parolees -- could attend and speak in support of this initiative.

             (2) $200 Million in additional funding for FY 2000. The FY 2000 budget will .
             include $200 million to support drug testing, treatment and sanctions throughout
             the criminal justice system, and this information could be leaked as part of -- or
             just prior to -- the event.

              (3) $4 Million for Drug Detection in Prisons. ONDCP is prepared to release $4
              million in grants for 8 states (MD, CA, AZ, AL, FL, NJ, NY and KS) to
              implement drug detection technologies to help keep drugs from being smuggled
              into prisons.

              (4) Report on Drug Testing/Treatment. The Justice Department is preparing a
              report that shows that more than 3/4 of prisoners have abused drugs in their past
              and that approximately 113 of state prisoners committed their crimes while under
              the influence of drugs. These rates are an increase since 1991.

Week 2        Gun Show Recommendations
              The President can announce his support for Administrative actions and legislation
              to crack down on the sale of guns at gun shows. The Attorney General and
              Treasury Secretary will submit their report of recommendations for cracking down
              on gun shows to the President by January 7. The President could hold an event
              where he announces new Administrative actions that follow the recommendations
              in the report and his support for legislation to combat the sale of guns at gun
              shows.

WOMEN, CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES
Week 1   Title IX Executive Order
         The President could sign an executive order as early as next week prohibiting
         discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, or sex in education
         programs conducted by the federal government. This includes schools operated
         by the Defense Department for military dependents, schools operated by the
         Department of the Interior for Native Americans, and numerous training and
         educational programs run by federal departments. This is a follow up to an
         Executive Memorandum the President issued last year asking the Department of
         Justice to lead an effort to identify all federally-conducted education programs and
         to recommend appropriate action to end discrimination.

                                                4                Automated Records !l1anagement System
                                                                 Hex-Dwnp Conversion
              The President and First Lady could host a ceremony with child care advocates
              where the President previews the entire child care initiative in the State of the
              Union.

Week?Kids Aging Out of Foster Care
           The President could join the First Lady in an event announcing the new budget
           initiatives on independent living/transitional livinglMedicaid for children aging
           out of the foster care system.

Week 2-4      Mentoring Event
              The President could join the First Lady in hosting a mentoring event in which he
              would announce $16 million in mentoring grants, release a report on the
              effectiveness of mentoring, as well as promote a new PSA campaign on
              mentoring. We are also exploring additional mentoring announcements from the
              Department of Education.

Week 2        Equal Pay
              The President could announce his budget proposals for the Administration to take
              action on this issue (without legislation). Specifically, the President could
              announce his budget proposals for an education program for employees; new
              outreach to businesses to provide information on current law and offer technical
              assistance; and upgrading training for EEOC employees and resources for
              increases in enforcement capabilities. As a result of the initiative, EEOC states it
              will reach over 10 million workers through public service announcements and
              reach over 3000 small, medium, and large employers by providing technical
              assistance. The President could also announce his proposed funding for a Women
              in Non-Traditional Occupations Initiative within the Department of Labor, which
              will identify best practices, emphasize anti-discrimination and anti-harassment
              activities, and explore incentives to improve access for women into glass ceiling
              and nontraditional opportunities such as construction, technology, and
              manufacturing.

Week 3 or 4 Ca·r Seat Announcement
            The President could announce the final Department of Transportation rule for
            universal child safety seats. Under the new rule, every seat would be required to
            fit in every car the same way -- eliminating the current confusion caused by the
            existence of 100 kinds of child seats and 300 kinds of passenger vehicles. The
            National Highway Transportation Safety Administration estimates that 80 percent
            of the children strapped into safety seats are at risk because seats are improperly
            connected. Approximately 600 children under 5 years old are killed and more
            than 70,000 are injured in vehicle crashes every year. The new rule would make


                                               5
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
             child safety seats.

EDUCATION:
Week 2   Ending Social Promotions
         The President can visit a school system that is ending social promotion and roll
         out the after-schooUending social promotion FY2000 budget initiative. At this
         event, the President could release the Department of Education Guide to Ending
         Social Promotions. (A D.C. or Boston are both options.)

Week 2       School Accountability.
             The President could roll out the FY2000 Excellence and Accountability Fund
             proposal that seeks to tum around failing schools. He could visit a school that
             exemplifies the policy. Maryland is intervening in schools in Baltimore and PG
             County, and there are a number of places in NYC we could go to as well.

Week 2       Class Size Reduction.
             The President could announce Department of Education guidance for states and
             school districts for reducing class size. The President could visit a school with
             large classes to dramatize how much we can help or a school with small classes
             to hear parents and teachers talk about how wonderful small classes are. If the
             President can travel, visiting a Tennessee school would underscore that this really
             works.

Week 2-4     1000 New Teachers for Native American Students.
             The President could announc:e his budget proposal to train 1000 new Native
             American teachers. The Department of Education proposal has three parts: (1) a
             fellowship program that will support the training of 1000 new American Indian
             and Alaska Native teachers over 5 years by providing for their expenses while
             attending school, including child care; (2) funding for 25 grants to educational
             institutions, with priorities for partnerships with tribal colleges, to create teacher
             training programs in Native American communities; and (3) providing continuing
             education for in-service teachers to improve the quality of teaching in Native
             American communities.

WELFARE:
Week 1   Work Participation Rates and Welfare to Work Initiatives
         The President could visit a welfare-to-work program or make an announcement
         from the White House on: (1) new state work participation rates, showing that
         almost all states are meeting the welfare law's single-parent requirements,
         although some are failing to meet the law's separate two-parent requirement
         (these rates, for July - September 1997, are the first available under the new
         welfare reform law) ; (2) new caseload data showing continuing declines; and (3)


                                               6                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion




                      new data on the number of people who were on welfare in 1997 and working in
                      March 1998. This event could also be used to: (4) preview Welfare-to-Work
                      reauthorization, including Responsible Fatherhood Grants.

        Week 1 Child Support Law Enforcement Initiative and PSA
                      Unveil a new child support law enforcement initiative to double the number of
                      prosecutions of egregious child support violators by providing resources to
                      identify, investigate, and prosecute these cases. This effort will be part of a
                      challenge to law enforcement in every state to join our national effort to ensure
                      America's children receive the support that they need and deserve. At this event,
                      the President could also unveil a new national public service announcement
                      underscoring fathers' ~esponsibility to pay child support.

        FOOD SAFETY:
        Week 2-4  . Nationwide Crackdown on Food Safety
                    The President could announce his proposed budget initiative that would
                    highlight safety standards and enforcement. Included in this initiative are
                    (1) a repackaged and somewhat modified legislative proposal giving the FDA
                    and USDA additional enforcement powers ~, mandatory recalls and civil
                    penalties); (2) additional food-specific regulations and/or guidelines ~, for
                    certain fruits and vegetables); and (3) more extensive adoption of our model
           )
                    codes for restaurants and food service workers. In addition, we will focus
                    on improving coordination with state and local agencies that regulate food
                 . safety in order to develop a wholly integrated national inspection system.

        TOBACCO:
        Week?    Announceme.,.t on Recovering Federal Costs                                     .
                 Announce that we will seek to recover federal costs caused by tobacco, through
                 our budget and through a federal lawsuit.

        Week 2-4      Cessation Event
                      The President could issue a directive to the OPM requiring enhanced coverage for
                      federal employees of smoking cessation services, either by raising coverage limits
                      (now only $100 for most fee for service plans) or waiving deductible and
                      copayments. At the same time, he could unveil his plans to provide improved
                      smoking cessation services to veterans and members of the armed forces. New
                      cessation coverage will be part of a comprehensive anti-tobacco plan to increase
                      military readiness.




                                                      7                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


