RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-DEC-1998 09:41:34.00

SUBJECT:   ESEA memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a draft ESEA memo for POTUS. It reflects Bruce's edits on an
earlier version, and some additional work Bruce has not had a chance to
review.

I'd like to share this with the group we have been working with --
Barbara Chow, Shirley Sagawa, Jen Klein, Neera Tanden, Jon Schnur, and
Broderick Johnson--for quick comment.

I'd also like to share it with Mike Smith for the same purposes. Mike
knows we are working on this and has asked to see a copy before it goes to
POTUS. Bruce and I discussed this again last evening, and he has no
strong objection, as long as it is clear to Mike that this is our memo,
not his, that we are looking for quick feedback that points out serious
problems rather than lengthy negotiations over each section.==================== ATT
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D53]MAIL47613455U.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504360070000010A02010000000205000000018F00000002000050B6760B41935FDB2F5D46
CC8C461D73A1012712779575D86A12FE291615BF4B1AOB0398541BC65096AB888223F496EF7D17
OC48019E02ABA2B199093FOCF2358510620D1F224099687B651F684338F095368766363816CCOE
839C55AED090158E4CA897417951046A05122D44EC199FC19D10F3F391DE22913E09FB4iB7560C
5C2B669A869E7B96649AEFFC882859B86EB5691F087BA12AC1732CB42D074C9BBDDB603E7857F4
                                                                    Automated Records Manao
                                                                    Hex-D                 "ement System
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT                                              ump Conversion

FROM:                  BRUCE REED
                       MIKE COHEN

SUBJECT:               Progress on ESEA Reauthorization Proposal

        We have been working with the First Lady's office, OMB, the Vice President's office and
the Education Department to develop the strongest possible proposal to reauthorize the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act, with the objective of transmitting it to Congress by
March 1. While there is still much to be done to shape arid finalize this proposal, we have made
strides in addressing some of the most significant issues. This memo looks at how the 1994
reforms are working, where they are falling short, and what improvements we are considering ..
We are planning to meet with you in early January.

I.  Progress Report on the 1994 Reauthorization and Goals 2000
        This reauthorization proposal will build on the new framework for federal aid to
elementary and secondary education established in Goals 2000 and the Improving America's
Schools Act, the 1994 reauthorization ofESEA. In principle, both of these Acts overhauled
federal elementary and secondary education programs by:

·       Insisting that every state set challenging academic students that all students would be
        expected to reach. Goals 2000 helped states raise academic standards for all students
        and develop assessments aligned to those standards. Title 1 required the state to use these
        standards for disadvantaged students, ending the federally supported practice of setting
        lower expectations for low income students.

·       Providing schools, school districts and states with the flexibility to determine how best to
        educate students to meet high standards. Goals 2000 provided states and districts with
        tremendous flexibility in how funds could be used, and for the first time allowed the
        Secretary of Education to waive federal requirements if they impeded state or local
        reform efforts. ESEA reduced regulations, paperwork and reporting requirements,
        launched your initiative to establish 3,000 charter schools, and permited high poverty
        schools (with 50% or more students eligible for Title 1) to combine funds from separate
        streams and use them to improve the whole school.

·       Helping to provide schools with the tools they need - well-trained teachers and
        up-to-date technology in particular - to effectively educate their students.
        Approximately 28% of Goals 2000 funds are used to support teacher training and
        professional development. The Eisenhower Professional Development program was
        rewritten to encourage school districts to adopt proven practices for providing
        professional development. Through the Technology Literacy Program in ESEA, the
       teachers to use it, and incorporate technology into the overall effort to improve teaching
       and learning to high standards.

·      Holding schools accountable for the results they achieve, rather than for compliance with
       rules and regulations. Along with expanded flexibility and fewer regulations, Title I
       requires states to define the annual progress each school and district must make with
       respect to the number of students reaching state academic standards, report progress
       annually for each school (disaggregating data by demographic subgroups), and to
       intervene in schools that fail to make adequate progress.

        These programs have sparked considerable state and local education reform activity. In
practice, however, there is still far more to be done to achieve any significant improvement,
especially in high poverty schools. The key lessons from the implementation of Goals 2000,
ESEA, and related state and local reforms include:

·      Standards-based education reform works. A recent Rand study of education reform in
       North Carolina and Texas, the two states with the best track record of improving
       achievement and closing achievement gaps between minority and white students, shows
       that a sustained, statewide approach of raising academic standards, providing schools
       with the flexibility and tools they need, targeting reSl;lUrces for extra help to low
       performing students and schools, and holding schools accountable for results, produces
       results, particularly for disadvantaged students. Urban school districts such as
       Philadelphia, Boston, San Francisco, Seattle and Chicago that have adopted similar
       approaches have also shown important gains in student achievement. Other studies have
       also shown that states and school districts that use academic standards as a tool for
       classroom instruction have shown significant gains in reading and math. The
       experience ofthese states and districts shows that our overall approach is sound. Ifwe
       maintain the direction of federal education policy and intensify our efforts, we can make a
       positive difference in education nationally.

·      State standard-setting efforts are beginning to take hold, though do not yet go far enough.
        Forty-eight states have set new, more challenging academic standards, and most states
       are working to develop or adopt new assessments aligned with these standards.
       However, fewer states have adopted accountability systems along with the standards.
       Approximately 25 states provide for intervention in low performing schools, and only 5
       require students to demonstrate they have met the standards as a condition for promotion.
        Seventeen states provide extra help, such as summer school or tutoring, for students who
       do not meet the standards.

·      Title 1 requirements for standards, assessments and accountability have not yet had their
       intended effects. Title I includes a series of deadlines for the implementation of state
       standards, assessments, and accountability provisions. The implementation deadlines


                                                2                 Automated Records \1anagement System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
    clear that many states are not on track to meet these deadlines. Nor are many states
    implementing these provisions as envisioned. For example, many states have failed to
    address significant requirements in defining "adequate yearly progress" for students and
    schools, and have thereby weakened the overall approach to accountability or limited the
    incentive for schools to invest in improving the achievement oflow achieving and/or
    disadvantaged students. And while half the states have accountability laws that provide
    for intervention in low performing schools, it appears that in most states the Title 1
    requirements operate independent of these requirements, and with less impact on the
    schools with the greatest need. In addition, current law envisions that states would
    establish - and Congress would fund -          intervention teams to work with schools in
    need of improvement. However, Congress has not provided the program improvement
    funds (requested at $10 - million per year) and there is considerable variation among
    states in their capacity for significant intervention.

·   Improvements in the quality of teachers and teaching are key to the success of
    standards-based reforms. Gov. Hunt's National Commission on Teaching and
    America's Future has underscored the importance of highly qualified teachers to the
    overall success of education reform, and the difficulty in attractil!g and retaining talented,
    well-prepared individuals to the classroom. Recent evidence underscores the extent of
    the problem and its particular severity in schools with the most disadvantaged students,
    where students have the greatest need for highly qualified teachers. For example, 50,000
    teachers per year enter the profession with emergency or substandard licenses. Nearly
    one quarter of secondary school teachers lack even a minor in their main teaching field,
    and in schools with the highest minority emollment, students have less than a 50%
    chance of having a math or science teacher with a license and degree in the field. On
    average, 22% of new teachers leave the field within 3 years, and in urban areas 30%-50%
    leave within 5 years. Paraprofessionals are widely and increasingly used to provide
    instruction to low achieving students in Title 1 schools, and as many as 20% of Title 1
    instructional aides provide instruction without a teacher's supervision. By one estimate,
    instructional aides account for roughly half (67,000) of the entire Title 1 instructional
    workforce, and Title 1 aide~ are being hired at twice the rate of Title 1 certified teachers.

    Beyond the problems posed by unqualified teachers, there is a gener~l consensus that
    ongoing professional development for all teachers is often ineffective and disconnected
    from schoolleaming goals or new standards for students. Schools are rarely organized
    to give teachers time for working together and professional development. . And teacher
    evaluation systems are still quite primitive in most school districts, failing to identify and
    support teachers who need help, or reward outstanding teachers.

    The Eisenhower professional development program, the main federal program to improve
    teacher quality (Goals 2000 and Title 1 also provide some funds for this purpose), has not
    had the impact necessary to overcome these hurdles. Recent evaluation data suggest that


                                              3              Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
       oflimited effectiveness. Few states have adopted perfonnance indicators for the program
       that would enhance accountability and effectiveness.

·      Access to technology in schools has skyrocketed over the past five years, though high
       poverty schools still lag behind on a number of indicators. Further, recent studies show
       that the effectiveness of technology depends on how it is used to support instruction.
       Teachers in high poverty schools were less likely to use the most effective practices
       compared with those in more advantaged schools. The Technology Literacy Challenge
       Fund plays an important role in the acquisition of hardware and, along with the e-rate, in
       connecting schools and classrooms to the Internet. Our experience to date suggests that
       in the future, federal program funds should be better targeted to high poverty
       communities, more effectively used to promote teacher training, and continue to promote
       innovative, cutting edge approaches.

II. Major Changes to ESEA
        Our budget contains a number of initiatives to expand educational opportunity in K-12
education: school modernization, class size reduction, after-school funding, charter schools, and
an increase in Title 1 funding. ESEA is our best chance to insist on what the studies suggest we
need, which is accountability--for teachers, students and especially for low perfonning schools.
With this Congress, we may not be able to enact every single ESEA refonn we have in mind, but
we can put forward a bold vision of the future of school refonn.

         We recommend a new set of accountability requirements as a condition for any state or
district to receive ESEA funds. States and school districts would be required to produce annual
school report cards, end social promotions, intervene in the lowest perfonning schools, and end
the use of unqualified teachers. Taken together, these new requirements represent a fundamental
change in federal aid to elementary and secondary education. For the first time, the federal
government would continue to invest in state and local education systems only if they live up to
their fundamental responsibilities to set high standards and be accountable for taking steps
necessary to enable all students, teachers and schools to meet them. In effect, we are saying that,
from now on, the best way for the federal government to help disadvantaged students is to insist
that states and local school districts live up to their responsibilities, rather than simply continuing
to compensate f@r their failure to do so.

        We hope this overall approach will also be compelling enough to unite Congressional
Democrats, the education community and the public, and effectively counter an expected
Republican push for vouchers and block grants. Along with the investments in your budget, it
represents a significant effort to close the opportunity.gap by lifting achievement in
low-perfonning schools and making sure disadvantaged students are not left behind. Over the
past several weeks, we have worked with other White House offices and Mike Smith to reach
tentative agreement on these proposals. However, some important issues still need to be worked
out, and Secretary Riley has not yet reviewed our progress in detail.


                                                  4                                   anaaement System
                                                                  Automated Recorcis M c
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
widely distributed to parents and the public, would be required for each school, school district
and state. The report cards would include information on student achievement, teacher quality,
school safety, and class size. Where appropriate, data--especially on student·
achievement--would be broken down by subgroups, so that public attention could be focused on
the gaps between minority and majority, low income and more advantaged students.

        B. Ending Social Promotions. States and districts would be required to adopt
policies that (1) require students to meet academic performance standards at key transition points
in elementary and middle school and for high school graduation; (2) use mUltiple measures,
including a test valid for these purposes to determine if a student has met the standards; and (3)
permit other factors, including teacher judgment, to determine if a student has met the standards.
States and school districts would have to show how they will help students meet promotion
standards by (1) strengthening learning opportunities in the classroom with steps such as clear
grade-by-grade standards, small classes with well prepared teachers, high quality professional
development and the use of proven instructional practices; (2) early identification and
interventions for students who need help; (3) providing extended learning time, including
after-school and summer school for students who need extra help; and (4) providing an effective
remedial plan for students who do not meet the standards on time, rather than requiring them to
repeat the same unsuccessful experiences. This requirement would be phased in over 5 years,
designed to fit state governance systems (allowing "local control" states to delegate
responsibilities to the local school district) and based on state or local rather than national
standards. The Secretary would review and approve each state's plan, and contin~ed, funding
would be linked to adequate annual progress in phasing in the plan..

        To reinforce this requirement and encourage local school systems to address it even
before the enactment of ESEA, your FY2000 budget contains a $400 million increase in funding
for the 21 st Century Learning Center program, half of which will be reserved for after-school and
summer school programs in school districts implementing policies to end social promotions.

        C. Accountability for Teachers. We would require states and local school districts
participating in ESEA to phase out the use of unqualified teachers over 5 years. In particular,
states and school districts would be required to end the use of (1) teachers with emergency rather
than full certification; (2) secondary school teachers teaching "out of field" -- teaching subjects
for which they lack an academic major or minor; and (3) instructional aides serving as lead
instructors. Ending these practices will be particularly important for high poverty schools, where
they are most prevalent. States will be required to adopt teacher competency tests for new
teachers, including tests of subject matter expertise for secondary school teachers. States and
school districts would be able to use funds from a number of ESEA programs, including Title 1,
bilingual education, and a new grant program focused in part on teacher quality, to help meet
these requirements.



                                                 5                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex·Dump Conversion
states and school districts to deal with low performing teachers. We are exploring a number of
approaches, including requiring periodic recertification of teachers, and requiring school districts
to adopt procedures to identify low performing teachers, provide them with needed help, and
remove them fairly and quickly ifthey do not improve. We will work closely with NEA and
AFT over the coming weeks to try and fashion a provision that will meet our objectives and
address their concerns.

        D. Accountability Fund for Title"} Schools. We recommend significantly
strengthening accountability requirements in Title 1 in order to require and adequately fund
immediate and significant state and local intervention in the lowest performing schools.
Because the schools of greatest concern are invariably Title 1 schools and because current law
already contains related accountability provisions, we believe it makes more sense to incorporate
these provisions into Title 1 than make them a broader ESEA requirement.

        Our proposal would retain current provisions for states to adopt performance standards
and assessments by 2001. In addition, it would: (1) require the immediate public identification
of and intervention in the lowest performing schools in each state -- those with the lowest
absolute levels of achievement and which have made little or no improvement over the previous
3 years; (2) set aside 2.5% of Title I funds to support aggressive intervention in these schools,
including an external assessment of each school's needs, the implementation of needed
improvements (such as addressing school safety and security needs, teacher training, the
acquisition of up-to-date textbooks, technology or curriculum materials, and extended learning
time to help students catch up academically.); and (3) require states to provide recognition or
rewards to Title 1 schools showing the greatest improvements. These requirements would be
structured to encourage and enable states to adapt existing state accountability requirements
where possible.

       To increase the appeal of this approach, your FY2000 budget contains an increase in Title
1 funding, of which $200 million [ck1is specifically dedicated to this initiative.

III.   Other Changes in ESEA

        A. Charter Schools and Public School Choice. Earlier this fall you signed into the
law the Charter Schools Expansion Act of 1998, which strengthened incentives for states to (1)
increase the number of high quality charter schools they create, (2) strengthen accountability for
charter schools, (3) maximize flexibility for charter schools, and (4) provide charter schools with
their share of federal program funds. We believe, along with most in Congress, that no further
changes are required in the Charter Schools authority in the reauthorization process.

       However, we are proposing new authority in ESEA to enable the Education Department
to support other, new approaches to expanding public school choice. At present, the Department
has authority only to support specific approaches to choice, such as magnet schools in the context


                                                 6
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
high schools on community college campuses. We will propose a new competitive grants
program that will give the Education Department the authority to support a wide range of choice
approaches, including postsecondary enrollment options, interdistrict magnet schools and other
interdistrict approaches, work-site schools, schools-within-schools, and district-wide public
school choice.

,       As a first step in this direction, your FY2000 budget proposal will contain funds for three
specific choice initiatives: $10 million in grants to school districts and tax incentives for
employers for the establishment ofwork-sjte schools; $10 million to supportinterdistrict choice
within the magnet school program, and $10 million to establish high schools on community
college campuses. [check budget figuresJ

        B. Other Changes in Title 1. In addition to the accountability provisions above, we
are considering several other changes to Title 1. The most significant include reducing the
poverty threshold from 50% to 35% (students eligible for Title 1 services) to permit Title 1
schools to become "schoolwide projects", enabling them to combine funds from a number of
ESEA programs into a unified approach to whole school reform, and limiting eligibility for
Comprehensive School Reform Demonstration (Obey-Porter) funds to schoolwide projects.
Together, these changes could make Title 1 a more powerful force for school reform. However,
some are concerned that making it easier to use Title 1 funds for schoolwiqe reforms will weaken
its focus on the most disadvantaged students. And Rep. Obey is likely to resist any effort to
focus his program on high poverty schools, prefering instead to retain its universal applicability.

        C. Bilingual Education. We recommend changes to the Title VII Bilingual Education
program and to Title 1 (which serves xxx thousand LEP students) consistent with the basis on
which you and Secretary Riley opposed California's Unz Initiative. These principles. called for
(1) expanding flexibility for local communities to determine their own approach to educating
LEP students; (2) making sure teachers are well trained to teach LEP students; and (3)
strengthening accountability for all programs serving LEP students with the goal that LEP
students reach English proficiency after three years.

         To expand local flexibility and parental choice, we would remove the Title VII provision
in current law that limits expenditures on special alternative English programs (instead of
bilingual education programs). to 25% of the funds available. We would also require parental
approval for participation in programs funded under Title VII. To improve teacher quality, we
would phase in a requirement that Title 1 programs provide LEP students with appropriately
trained teachers, and permit them to use some Title 1 funds to pay for teacher training. We
would strengthen the teacher training provisions in Title VII by giving funding priority to
institutions of higher education and school districts with the strongest approaches to preparing
new ESL and bilingual teachers, increasing the supply of qualified teachers, and providing
mentors and other support to new ESL and bilingual teachers, in order to improve retention
rates ..

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                 7
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
accountability requirements for each school, and that they be assessed in their language of
instruction. We would also require that students be assessed in English after 3 years of
schooling in the United States. Data would be disaggregated, so that in their annual report
cards, schools would report academic achievement and English language proficiency ofLEP
students, and schools would be accountable for making progress each year in improving the
performance ofLEP students (as well as all other students) in academic subjects and in English
language proficiency. Schools in Title I programs would be required to provide alternative
instructional strategies for LEP student who do not make adequate progress in English
proficiency after three years. We would also require school districts with Title VII grants to
conduct and report annual (rather than current requirement for biannual) evaluations of student
performance, and to report rates for moving students into regular English classrooms. In
addition, the continuation of Title VII beyond three years would be contingent on significant
achievement gains in English and in academic sUbjects.

        D. Safe and Drug Free Schools Program. As you announced at the White House
Conference on School Safety, the Safe and Drug Free Schools Program will be significantly
overhauled in order to improve its effectiveness at promoting drug-free, safe and disciplined
learning environments and passageways to schools. Our proposal will accomplish this by (1)
concentrating the funds in larger amounts by requiring the states to allocate the funds to local
school districts on a competitive basis, with funds going to school districts with the greatest need
and highest quality proposals; (2) requiring local school districts receiving program funds to
develop and implement a rigorous, comprehensive approach to drug and violence prevention
based on proven practices; (3) requiring every school district receiving funds to have a full-time
prevention program coordinator; and, (4) requiring report cards for every school that makes
public data on incidents of crime, disorder and substance abuse.

         E. Class Size Reduction. We will include authorization for our Class Size Reduction
initiative in our ESEA package, since the provisions in last year's Omnibus Appropriations Act
provide both funding and authority for only one year. While we do not expect the ESEA
reauthorization to be enacted this year, we believe that transmitting authorization legislation will
strengthen our ability to fight for additional funds in the FY2000 appropriations bill. Unlike the
provision already enacted, our original proposal required local school districts to provide
matching funds (an average of20%, with a sliding scale based on poverty levels.) We intend to
include the matching requirement again, because it is needed in order to reach our goal of
100,000 teachers within 7 years. Otherwise, the substantive differences between our original
proposal and the provisions in the appropriations act are minor. We are consulting with
Congressional supporters in both houses to determine if our best strategy is to submit the
proposal we transmitted last year, or to submit one based on the language that the Republicans
have already agreed to.

       F. School Modernization. We also intend to include our School Modernization


                                                 8               Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


        G. Ed-Flex. Our proposal to expand Ed-Flex (which gives states the authority to
waive many statutory and regulatory requirements in ESEA) to an SO states died last year, caught
between Democrats who opposed granting greater flexibility, especially outside the context of
ESEA Reauthorization, and conservative Republicans who opposed it because of its connection
to Goals 2000, or because they feared its enactment would limit the case for more sweeping
block grant proposals. Governors of both parties aggressively promoted Ed-Flex until the very
end of the last session, and Gov. Carper has indicated that NGA will forcefully take up the cause
again. While we believe we should continue to support some version of Ed-Flex, we will need
to review this after we have completed work on other provisions. We think it would be a
mistake to allow states to waive either the accountability provisions described above, or the
requirement for using class size funds to reduce class size to 18 in the early grades.

        H. Preschool Education. Title 1 funds can be used to provide pre-school for eligible
students, (approximately 2% of the Title 1 population are pre-school students), and the Even
Start Family Literacy program focuses on children from birth through age 8. We would retain
these provisions and expand the Even Start program to reach greater numbers of children and
adults. We would also propose to help strengthen the quality of pre-school programs and
improve their ability to help students arrive at school ready to learn by providing funds to local
school districts, on a competitive basis, to (1) provide professional development for childcare
providers and other providers of early childhood services to help children build basic language
and literacy skills; and (2) work with Head Start and other pre-school programs to identify the
basic language and literacy skills that children need when they enter school and design
curriculum to help students acquire these skills.

IV. The future of Goals 2000 and continuing support for standards-based reform.

       Goals 2000 has been the flagship Administration initiative promoting standards-based
refonn; recent studies show that it has been successful as well. . We do not believe we should let
the program expire simply because of the political opposition it faces in the Congress. At the
same time, we do not believe it is wise to take on the fight for a straight reauthorization of the
program, and in the process refight the battles of the past. Instead, we are looking for a
fonnulation that will be in fact and in perception a step forward for the standards movement.

        The most critical next step is to make sure that the standards move from the development
process at the state or local level to effective implementation in the classroom. This requires
that schools have talented, well prepared teachers, and that'teachers have the tools - curriculum
materials, instructional approaches, technology and the like - to effectively engage all students
in learning to higher standards.

       There are four fonnula grant programs -       Goals 2000, the Eisenhower Professional


                                                 9
                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion·
-    that can contribute to this objective. We are considering a number ofapproaches to moving
these programs forward, including the possibility of consolidating some or all of them into a
larger program, designed to help move standards into the classroom and with a strong emphasis
on improving teacher quality. This would be a "responsible block grant" with clear purposes
and clear accountability. Some Congressional Democrats are also looking at this approach, in
part because it provides a way to respond to the strong push for block grants we anticipate from
Republicans, and to create a large funding stream to address public concerns over teacher quality.

       We will outline options on this issue in another memo.

        At the same time, we will also outline options for dealing with the National Education
Goals. Both the Goals and the authorization for the National Education Goals Panel are part of
Goals 2000, and expire in 1999. Clearly, we will not achieve these ambitious goals by the year
2000. We have been working with other interested members ofthe Goals Panel in finding an
effective strategy for continuing to have education goals for the nation and a means of reporting
on our progress in achieving them.




                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


                                               10


