     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:23-DEC-1998 18:40:37.00

     SUBJECT:   esea

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D23]MAIL45217006X.326 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF5750435F070000010A02010000000205000000128300000002000037BADCBF27CFE1A935C996
     67504B220D2531B5B1A3BD99084903FEBE361A6B788CB850603824299E1CBOCED81827D372511A
     D9DFFDAF11DEFE97E3DCAC5B02D3C777284C31F789A4918B8E9551F5069B76F81C6360898B6182
     E3ECCAB7868BB87A43618D3F3A7FBCOA742056BC6B7EFB6F084C9EB5335D10039ACF44B167713D
     D63C90D7A3AED7FB5E7935D84366B2F1F796A8B7479A1A29D54F2D869053B02A1A75E65F59C7DO
     8821818D6DC555CDEE78299ED327F7E478C091E520F5357BBF105ED4270841D342A4AEFAB425F4
     46C4B43090CDD750E15FOF0264009915FA37D6A963575C566BA1E1Dl17C50166575E63140C88E4
     B93373571EF2D336872385AE469B390DA3F2B05655170E09CACAA9178271FE22BC1B910917E134
     05DC7EFOD537A8EF27516D6E816D33561BF05B7D77FC182503761266DB7EBED4E633EF52D7A70B




                                                                    Automated Records Management Sy~tem
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
FROM:                 BRUCE REED
                      MIKE COHEN

SUBJECT:              PrOgress on ESEA Reauthorization Proposal

        We have been working with the First Lady's office, OMB, the Vice President's office and
the Education Department to develop the strongest possible proposal to reauthorize the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act, with the objective of transmitting it to Congress by
March 1. While there is still much to be done to shape and finalize this proposal, we have made
strides in addressing some of the most significant issues. This memo looks at how the 1994
reforms are working, where they are falling short, and what improvements we are considering.
We are planning to meet with you in early January.

I. Progress Report on the 1994 Reauthorization and Goals 2000

       Our reauthorization proposal will build on the framework for federal aid to elementary
and secondary education established in Goals 2000 and the Improving America's Schools Act,
the 1994 reauthorization of ESEA. In principle, both of these Acts overhauled federal
elementary and secondary education programs by:

      Insisting that every state set challenging academic students that all students would be
       expected to reach. Goals 2000 required states to set academic standards for all students
       and develop assessments aligned to those standards. Title 1 of ESEA built on this
       requirement by mandating that use these standards for disadvantaged students, thus
       ending the practice of setting lower expectations for low income students.

      Providing schools, school districts and states with the flexibility to determine how best to
       educate students to meet high standards. Goals 2000 provided states and districts with
       tremendous flexibility in how funds could be used, and for the first time allowed the
       Secretary of Education to waive federal requirements if they impeded state or local
       reform efforts. . ESEA reduced regulations, paperwork, and reporting requirements;
       launched your initiative to establish 3,000 charter schools; and permited high poverty
       schools (with 50% or more students eligible for Title 1) to combine funds from separate
       streams and use them to improve the whole school.

      Helping to provide schools with the tools they need - well-trained teachers and
       up-to-date technology in particular - to educate their students effectively.
       Approximately 28% of Goals 2000 funds are used to support teacher training and
       rewritten to encourage school districts to adopt proven practices for providing
       professional development. Through the Technology Literacy Program in ESEA, the
       federal government is investing $2 billion to help schools acquire technology, train
       teachers to use it, and incorporate technology into the overall effort to improve education.

      Holding schools accountable for the results they achieve, rather than for compliance with
       rules and regulations. Title I now requires states to set annual progress goals for each
       school and district relating to the number of students who reach state academic standards;
       report progress annually for each school (disaggregatirig data by demographic subgroups);
       and intervene in schools that fail to make adequate progress.

       These programs have sparked considerable state and local education reform activity.
There is, however, still much more to be done to achieve significant improvement in elementary
and secondary education, especially in high poverty schools. The key lessons from the
implementation of Goals 2000, ESEA, and related state and local reforms include:

       Standards-based education reform works. A recent Rand study of education reform in
        North Carolina and Texas -- the two states with the best track record of improving
        achievement generally and closing achievement gaps between minority and white
        students -- shows that a sustained, statewide approach of raising academic standards,
        providing schools with the flexibility and tools they need, targeting resources for extra
        help to low performing students and schools, and holding schools accountable for results
        itself produces results, particularly for disadvantaged students. Other studies also have
        shown that states and school districts ~- including urban school districts like Philadelphia,
        Boston, San Francisco, Seattle and Chicago -- that have adopted similar approaches have
        shown significant gains in reading and math. These data indicate that our overall
        strategy is sound. If we maintain the direction of federal education policy while
        intensifying our efforts, we can improve elementary and secondary education across the
      . nation.

      States have adopted policies effecting standards-based education reform, but these
       policies do not go far enough. Forty-eight states have set new, more challenging
       academic standards, and most states are working to develop or adopt new assessments
       aligned with these standards. Fewer states, however, have adopted accountability
       systems along with the standards. Only about 25 states provide for intervention in
       low-performing schools as required by Title 1. Only seventeen states provide extra help,
       such as summer school or tutoring, for students who do not meet the standards, and only
       5 require students to demonstrate they have met the standards as a condition for
       promotion.

      Implementation of state policies providing for standards, assessments and accountability
       is not proceeding as envisioned under Title 1. Title 1 includes a series of deadlines for


                                                 2         Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex.-Dump ConverSion
      . all of the implementation deadlines have been reached, it is already clear that many states
        are not on track to meet them .. In addition, many states are failing to implement these
       policies as envisioned. For example, many states have evaded the full extent of their
        responsibility to set goals for "adequate yearly progress" for students and schools. And
        although half the states have policies that provide for some kind of intervention in low
        performing schools, many states have shown themselves unable or unwilling to take the
        actions necessary to tum around these schools so that they provide an acceptable
        education.

      Improvements in the quality of teachers and te(lching are urgently needed. Governor
       Hunt's National Commission on Teaching and America's Future has underscored the
       difficulty of recruiting and retaining talented, well-prepared teachers. As the
       Commission found, the dearth of quality teaching is especially severe in schools with the
       most disadvantaged students. About 50,000 teachers each year enter the profession with
       emergency or substandard licenses. Nearly one quarter of secondary school teachers lack
       even a minor in their main teaching field, and in schools with the highest minority
       enrollment, students have less than a 50% chance of having a math or science teacher
       with a license and degree in the field. On average, 22% of new teachers leave the field
       within three years, and in urban areas 30-50% leave within 5 years. Paraprofessionals
       are widely and increasingly used to provide instruction to low achieving students in Title
       1 schools, with as many as 20% of Title 1 instructional aides providing instruction
       without a teacher's supervision. By one estimate, instructional aides account for roughly
       half(67,000) of the entire Title 1 instructional workforce, and Title 1 aides are being
       hired at twice the rate of Title 1 certified teachers.

       The Eisenhower professional development program, the main federal program to improve
       teacher quality (Goals 2000 and Title 1 also provide some funds for this purpose), has
       failed to improve the situation in any significant way. Recent evaluation data suggest
       that in many districts the Eisenhower program funds activities oflimited effectiveness.
       And even where the activities are effective, the program often fails to fund them at an
       adequate level.

II. Major Changes to ESEA

        Our budget contains a number of initiatives to expand educational opportunity in K -12
educati.on: school modernization, class size reduction, after-school funding connected to social
promotions policy, and an increase in Title 1 funding. Our ESEA reauthorization can build on
these initiatives by insisting on what the studies suggest we most need, which is
accountability--for teachers, students and especially low performing schools. With this
Congress, we may not be able to enact every single ESEA reform we would want, but we can put
forward a bold vision ofthe future of school reform.



                                                3               Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
district to receive any ESEA funds (not just Title 1). States and school districts would be required
to produce annual school report cards, end social promotions, intervene in the lowest perfonning
schools, and end the use of unqualified teachers. Taken together, these new requirements
represent a fundamental change in federal aid to elementary and secondary education. For the
first time, the federal government would link investment in state and local education systems
with their acceptance ofthe need to take the steps necessary to enable all students, teachers and
schools to meet high standards. In effect, we are saying that, from now on, the best way for the
federal government to help students is to insist that states and local school districts live up to
their responsibilities, rather than simply continuing to compensate for their failure to do so.

        We hope this overall approach will also be compelling enough to unite Congressional
Democrats, the education community and the public, and to counter an expected Republican push
for vouchers and block grants. .Along with the investments in your budget, it represents a
significant effort to close the opportunity gap by lifting achievement in low-perfonning schools
and making sure disadvantaged students are not left behind. Over the past several weeks, we
have worked with other White House offices and Mike Smith to reach tentative agreement on
these proposals. Some important issues, however, still need to be worked out, and Secretary
Riley has not yet reviewed our progress in detail.

         A. Annual School Report Cards. Our proposal would require annual report cards,
easily understood by and widely distributed to parents and the public, for each school, school
district and state. The report cards would include infonnation on student achievement, teacher
quality, school safety, and class size. Where appropriate, data -- especially on student
achievement -- would be broken down by subgroups, to allow a greater focus on the gaps
between minority and majority, low income and more advantaged students.

         B. Ending Social Promotions. Our proposal would require states and districts
participating in ESEA to adopt policies that (1) require students to meet academic perfonnance
standards at key transition points in elementary and middle school and for high school
graduation; (2)use objective measures --M, tests valid for these purposes -- to make an initial
detennination if a student has met the standards; and (3) pennit (or possible require) other,
non-objective factors, including teacher judgment, to enter into a final detennination as to
whether the student has met the standards. States and school districts would have to show how
they will help students meet promotion standards by (1) strengthening learning opportunities in
the classroom with steps such as clear grade-by-grade standards, small classes with well prepared
teachers, high quality professional development and the use of proven instructional practices; (2)
 identifying students who need help a the earliest possible moment; (3) providing extended
learning time, including after-school and summer school for students who need extra help; and
(4) providing an effective remedial plan for students who do not meet the standards on time, so
that they do not repeat the same unsuccessful experiences. This proposal would phase in this
requirement in over five years, design it to fit state governance systems (allowing "local control"
states to delegate responsibilities to the local school district) and base it on state or local rather


                                                  4
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
continued funding conditional on adequate annual progress in phasing in the plan.

        To reinforce this requirement and encourage local school systems to address it even
before the enactment of ESE A, your FY2000 budget contains a $400 million increase in funding
for the 21 51 Century Learning Center program, half of which will be reserved for after-school and
summer school programs in school districts implementing policies to end social promotions.

         C. Accountability for Teachers. Our proposal would require states and local school
districts participating in ESEA to phase out the use of unqualified teachers over five years. In
particular, states and school districts would have to end the use of (1) teachers with emergency
rather than full certification; (2) secondary school teachers teac;hing "out of field" -- i.e., teaching
subjects for which they lack an academic major or minor; and (3) instructional aides serving as
lead instructors. Ending these practices is particularly important for high-poverty schools, where
they are most prevalent. States also would have to adopt teacher competency tests for new
teachers, including tests of subject-matter expertise for secondary school teachers. States and
school districts would be able to use funds from a number of ESEA programs, including Title 1,
bilingual education, and a new grant program focused in part on teacher quality, to help meet
these requirements.

         In addition, we are working with the Education Department to fashion a requirement for
states and school districts to deal with low-performing teachers. We are exploring a number of
approaches, including (1) requiring periodic recertification of teachers, and (2) requiring school
districts to adopt procedures to identify low performing teachers, provide them with needed help,
and remove them fairly and quickly if they do not improve. We will work closely with the NEA
and AFT over the coming weeks to try and fashion a provision that will meet our objectives
while addressing their concerns.

        D. Accountability Fund for Title 1 Schools. We recommend significantly
strengthening accountability requirements in Title 1 so as to require and adequately fund
immediate and significant state and local intervention in the lowest performing schools.
Because the schools of greatest concern are invariably Title 1 schools and because current law
already contains certain accountability provisions, we believe we should incorporate these
provisions into Title, rather than imposing a broader ESEA requirement.

        Our proposal would retain current provisions for states to adopt performance standards
and assessments by 2001. In addition, it would strengthen the current provisions in Title 1
relating to low-performing schools by: (1) requiring the immediate public identification of and
intervention in the lowest performing schools in each state -- i.e., schools with very low absolute
levels of achievement that have made little or no improvement over the previous three years; (2)
setting aside 2.5% of Title 1 funds to support aggressive intervention in these schools, including
an external assessment of each school's needs and the implementation of needed improvements
(such as addressing school safety and security needs, providing better teacher training, acquiring


                                                   5
                                                                  Autnmated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
 students catch up academically); and (3) requiring states to provide recognition or rewards to
 Title 1 schools showing the greatest improvements.

        To increase the appeal of this approach, your FY2000 budget contains a significant
 increase in Title 1 funding, of which $200 million is specifically dedicated to this initiative .

. III.   Other Changes in ESEA

         A. Charter Schools and Public School Choice. Earlier this fall you signed the
 Charter Schools Expansion Act of 1998, which strengthened incentives for states to (1) increase
 the number of high-quality charter schools, (2) strengthen accountability for charter schools, (3)
 maximize flexibility for charter schools, and (4) provide charter schools with their proper share
 offederal program funds. We believe, along with most in Congress, that no further changes
 relating to charter schools are needed in the reauthorization process.                                  '.

         We do recommend, however, proposing new authority in ESEA to enable the Education
 Department to support other, new approaches to expanding public school choice. At present, the
 Department has authority only to support specific approaches. to choice, such as the use of
 intra-district magnet schools in the context of desegregation efforts, and (as oflast year) high
 schools on community college campuses. We will propose a new competitive grants program
 that will give the Education Department the authority to support a much wider range of ways to
 expand choice, including district-wide public school choice systems, postsecondary enrollment
 options, interdistrict magnet schools and other interdistrict approaches, work-site schools, and
 schools-within-schools.

        As a first step in this direction, your FY2000 budget proposal will contain funds and
 necessary authorizing language for three specific choice initiatives: $10 million in grants to
 school districts to establish work-site schools; $10 million to support interdistrict magnet
 schools, and $10 million to establish high schools on community college campuses.

         B. Bilingual Education. We recommend changes to the Title VII Bilingual Education
 program and to Title 1 (which serves more than 1.1 million LEP students) consistent with
 statements you and Secretary Riley made in opposing California's Unz Initiative. These
 statements called for (1) allowing local communities to select programs they believe will best
 educate LEP students; (2) making sure teachers are well trained to teach LEP students; and (3)
 strengthening accountability for programs serving LEP students by including a goal that LEP
 students reach English proficiency after three years.

         To expand local flexibility and parental choice, we would remove the Title VII provision
 in current law that limits expenditures on primarily English-language (rather than bilingual)
 programs to 25% of the funds available. We also would require parental approval for
 participation in programs funded under Title VII. To improve teacher quality, we would phase


                                                   6
                                                                  Autom!lted Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
trained teachers. We also would strengthen the teacher training provisions in Title VII by giving
funding priority to school districts and institutions of higher education that have proven programs
to hire, train and support new ESL and bilingual teachers.

        In Title 1, we would require that LEP students be included in the assessment and
accountability requirements for each school. Assessments would be in their language of
instruction and, after three years of schooling in the United States, in English. We would require
schools to disaggregate data, so that they report -- and be accountable for ~- both the academic
achievement and the English language proficiency ofLEP students. We would also require
schools receiving Title 1 funds to provide alternative instructional strategies for LEP student who
do not make adequate progress in English proficiency after three years. Finally, we would cut
off Title VII funding to ap program after three years ifit could not show that students made
gains in English and academic subjects.

        C. Safe and Drug Free Schools Program. As you announced at the White House
Conference on School Safety, we will significantly overhaul the Safe and Drug Free Schools
Program to improve its effectiveness at promoting drug-free, safe, and disciplined learning
environments. Our proposal will accomplish this by (1) requiring states to allocate funds to
local school districts on a competitive basis, with funds going to the districts with the greatest
need and highest quality proposals; (2) requiring local school districts receiving program funds to
develop and implement a rigorous, comprehensive approach to drug and violence prevention
based on proven practices; (3) requiring every school district receiving funds to have a full-time
program coordinator; and (4) requiring all schools to issue report cards that include data on
crime, disorder and substance abuse.

         D. Class Size Reduction. We will include authorization for our Class Size Reduction
initiative in our ESEA package, since the provisions in last year's Omnibus Appropriations Act
provide both funding and authority for only one year. Although we do not expect Congress to
enact the ESEA reauthorization this year, we believe that transmitting authorization legislation
will strengthen our ability to fight for additional funds for class size reduction in the FY2000
appropriations bill. Unlike the provision enacted last year, our original proposal required local
school districts to provide matching funds Om average of 20%, with a sliding scale based on
poverty levels). We intend to include the matching requirement in our ESEA authorizing
proposal, so that we can reach our goal of providing 100,000 teachers within 7 years. In all
other aspects, our proposal will reflect the agreement reached with Republicans last year, which
itself was fully consistent with our original proposal.

       E. School Modernization. We also intend to include our school modernization
proposal, with only minor changes from the one introduced last year, in our ESEA package.


       F. Ed-Flex.     Our proposal to expand Ed-Flex (which gives states the authority to waive


                                                7
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  HeX-Dump Conversion
between Democrats who opposed granting greater flexibility, especially outside the'context of
ESEA Reauthorization, and conservative Republicans who would settle only for more sweeping
block grant proposals. Governors of both parties aggressively promoted Ed-Flex until the very
end of the last session, and Governor Carper has indicated that the NGA will take up the cause
again next year. Although we believe we should continue to support some version of Ed-Flex, .
we will need to think carefully about the scope ofthe proposal. We think it would be a mistake
to allow states to waive either the accountability provisions described above or the requirement
for using class size funds to reduce class size to 18 in the early grades.

        G. Preschool Education. Title 1 funds can be used to provide pre-school for eligible
students, (approximately 2% of the Title 1 population are pre-school students), and the Even
Start Family Literacy program focuses on children from birth through age 8. We would retain
these provisions and Our ESEA proposal would expand the Even Start Family Literacy program
to reach greater numbers of children and adults. We also would strengthen the quality of
pre-school programs and enhance school readiness by providing funds to local school districts,
on a competitive basis, to (1) work with Head Start and other pre-school programs to identify the
basic language and literacy skills that children need when they enter school and to design a
curriculum to help students acquire these skills; and (2) provide professional development for
child care providers and other providers of early childhood services to help children build basic
language and literacy skills.

IV. The future of Goals 2000 and continuing support for standards-based reform.

       Goals 2000 has been the flagship Administration initiative promoting standards-based
reform, and recent studies show that it has been successful. We do not believe we should let the
program expire simply because of the political opposition it faces in the Congress. At the same
time, we do not believe it is wise -- either for substantive or for political reasons -- to submit a
proposal that simply extends the current program. Weare instead looking for a way to
advance standards-based reform in a somewhat different form -0 a kind of second-generation
proposal that will reflect the current state of the standards movement.

       Most educators agree that while states have made significant gains in developing
standards, they still face great challenges in actually putting those standards into place in the
classroom. This requires that schools have talented and well prepared teachers and that
teachers have the tools - curriculum materials, instructional approaches, technology, and the
like - to engage ali" students in learning to higher standards.                            .

        Four currently existing formula grant programs - Goals 2000, the Eisenhower
Professional Development program, the Title VI Block Grant, arid the Technology Literacy
Challenge Fund -- can contribute to this objective. We are considering a number of approaches
regarding these programs forward, including proposals to consolidate some or all of them into a
                                            .
larger program, which is designed to help move standards into the classroom and has a strong


                                                 8
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
  grant" with clear purposes and clear accountability. Some Congressional Democrats are also
  looking at this approach, in part because it would respond to the Republican push for block .
. grants and in part because it would create a large funding stream to address issues of teacher
  quality.




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion




                                                9


