 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN;Sarah A. Bianchi/O;OVP [ UNKNOWN]      )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JAN-1999 02:15:25.00

 SUBJECT:   long term care event

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP    @   EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   o 00:00:00.00
 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D59]MAIL45014220K.036 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DU~lP:




                                      P6/(b)(6)
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                          January 3, 1999


      NEW INITIATIVE TO ADDRESS GROWING LONG-TERM CARE NEEDS AND
                       SUPPORT FAMILY CAREGIVERS

                               DATE:          . January 4, 1999
                               TIME:            10:30 am to 11 :00 am (Pre-brief)
                                                11 :00 am to 11: 15 am (Meet and Greet)
                                                +11:15 am to 12:10 pm (Event)
                               LOCATION: Oval Office (Pre-brief)
                                                Blue Room (Meet and Greet)
                                                Grand Foyer (Event)
                               FROM:            Bruce Reed / Chris Jennings

I.    . PURPOSE

You are unveiling a new long-term care initiative to support Americans with long-term care
needs and the millions of family members who care for them.

II.     BACKGROUND

You will unveil anew, four-pronged $6.2 billion (over five years) initiative that takes important
steps to address the complex needs of Americans with long-term care needs and their family
members through:

       Supporting families with long-term care needs through a $1,000 tax credit. This initiative,
        for the first time, acknowledges and supports millions of Americans with long-term care
        needs or the family members who care for and house their ill or disabled relatives
        through a $1,000 tax credit. This new tax credit supports the diverse needs of families
        by compensating a wide range of formal or informal long-term care for people of all ages
        with three or more limitations in activities of daily living (ADLs) or a comparable
        cognitive impairment. This proposal, which supports rather than supplants family
        caregiving, would provide needed financial assistance to about 2 million Americans,
        including 1.2 million older Americans, over 500,000 non-elderly adults, and
        approximately 250,000 children. It costs $5.5 billion over five years and the credit
        phases out beginning at $110,000 for couples and $75,000 for unmarried taxpayers.

       Creating a new National Family Caregiver Support Program.         Recent studies have found
        that services like respite care can relieve caregiver stress and delay nursing home entry,
        and that support for families of Alzheimer's disease patients can delay institionalization for
        as long as a year. This new nationwide program, strongly advocated by the Vice
        President, would support families who care for elderly relatives with chronic illnesses or
        disabilities by enabling states to create "one-stop-shops" that provide: qualitY respite care
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

       and other support services; critical information about community-based long-term services
       that best meet a families' needs; and counseling and support, such as teaching model
       approaches for caregivers that are coping with new responsibilities and offering training
       for complex care needs, such as feeding tubes. This program, which costs $625 million
       over five years, would serve approximately 250,000 families nationwide.

      Launching a national campaign to educate Medicare beneficiaries about the programs' limited
       coverage oflong-term care and how best to evaluate their options. Nearly 60 percent of
       Medicare beneficiaries are unaware that Medicare does not cover most long"term care,
       and many do not know what long-term care services would best meet their needs. This
       $10 million nationwide campaign would provide all 39 million Medicare beneficiaries
       with critical information about long-term care options including: what long-term care
       Medicare does and does not cover; how to find out about Medicaid long-term care
       coverage; ~hat to look for in a quality private long-term care policy; and how to access
       information about home-and community-based care services that best fit beneficiaries'
       needs.

      Having the Federal government serve as a model employer by offering quality private
       long-term care insurance to Federal employees. You will also call on the Congress to pass
       a new proposal that authorizes OPM, as the nation's largest employer to use its market
       leverage and set a national example by offering non-subsidized quality private long-term
       care insurance to all federal employees, retirees, and their families. This proposal, that
       costs $15 million over five years, will provide employers a nationwide model for offering
       quality long-term care insurance. OPM anticipates that approximately 300,000 Federal
       employees would participate in this program.

Expected Response From Validators_ We expect aging advocacy organizations, like AARP
and the Alzheimer's Association to be very supportive of your policy. The advocates appear to
be impressed that your proposal recognizes the multi-faceted nature of the problems facing the
nation's chronically ill and are pleased that you are focusing the initiative on all age groups rather
than just the elderly. They will caution, though, that however positive this proposal is, it does not
address all of the long-term care challenges facing the nation. We have assured them that we will
not make such a claim; indeed, it would hurt us among independent validators as well as the
Republican Congress, if we were proposing a much more expansive approach.

Role of the Vice President and Mrs. Gore. The Vice President and Mrs. Gore are
participating in this event from the Triple "R", an adult day care program that is part of a
successful California statewide caregiving program and that serves approximately 30 families in
the Sacramento area. The California program, one of the four model caregiver support programs
that currently exist, is similar to the National Family Caregiver Support Program that the
Administration is launching nationwide today. The Vice President and Mrs. Gore, who will meet
with a number of families with long-term care needs during your remarks, will join you via
satellite at 11 :40 am to discuss the experiences of these families and they validate the need for
