      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: June Shih ( CN=June Shih/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-JAN-1999 19:28:58.00

      SUBJECT:   Re: Speech

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
       Draft 1/4/99 7:30 pm
      Lowell Weiss/ June Shih

      PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
      REMARKS ON BREAKING THE CYCLE OF DRUGS AND CRIME
      THE WHITE HOUSE
      January 5, 1999

              Acknowledge: Atty. Gen. Reno, Gen. McCaffrey, Lt. Gov. Townsend.  I want
      to thank her for pioneering a tough program of drug treatment and testing
      in her state that has been an inspiration for our efforts today.

               Six years ago, America was at peace, but many of our communities
      were at war. Illegal drugs were ravaging cities on both coasts and in the
      American heartland in between.   Crack and methamphetamine use were at
      near-epidemic levels. Drug dealers who controlled whole neighborhoods
      thought nothing of opening fire on passing police cars.   Too many
      communities lived in terror. Too many children feared they would not live
      to march in their high school graduations.

              I took office determined to give all those children back their
      futures and all those communities back their peace of mind.   In"every
      successive year of my presidency, I have proposed and passed the largest
      anti-drug budget ever. Between 1996 and 1999 alone, we have increased
      funding for anti-drug efforts by more than 30% -- even as we produced the
      first balanced budget in a generation. And under the leadership of Gen.
      McCaffrey, we have put these resources to very good use: Unprecedented new
      tools for domestic law enforcement.   Unprecedented new campaigns to
      convince young people that drugs kill. Unprecedented new efforts to stem
      the flow of drugs across our borders.  Unprecedented new efforts to stop
      the revolving door between prison and the street, between drug use and
      criminal activity.

              As you've heard from Gens. Reno and McCaffrey, our strategy is
      working. Not only do we have the lowest crime rates in 25 years. At long
      last, overall drug use is falling.  Even drug-use among young people is
      beginning to decline.

              But now is not a time to rest. Now is the time to work harder
      than ever to build on these very encouraging trends. At this time of
      prosperity, we have the resources, the proven strategies, and the
      confidence to make this new year the best year ever.for reducing drugs and


      crime.

                I believe that there is no better way to meet this ambitious goal
      than to expand our efforts to force our prisoners to make a clean break
      from drugs.    Today, we are releasing a new study by the Department of
      Justice that offers more convincing evidence that drug use stokes all
      types of crime, from property crimes like burglary and auto theft to
      violent crimes like assault and murder.    It shows that one in six
      offenders landed in prison for a crime he committed just to get money for
      drugs ... that nearly a third of all prisoners were using drugs at the time
      they committed their crimes ... and that more than 80% of all prisoners have
      a history of drug abuse. There is no question that if we are to continue
      reducing the rate of crime, we cannot afford to continue releasing
      criminals with their dangerous drug habits intact.

               As you have heard from Gens. Reno and McCaffrey, we have already
      done much to expand drug-testing and treatment in federal prisons and to
      encourage states to do the same. But today, we will make a quantum leap
      forward.   I am proud to announce that the balanced budget I will submit to
      Congress will contain a $215 million zero-tolerance drug-supervision
      initiative, our nation's most comprehensive effort ever to test and treat
      not only criminals in prison, but also those out on probation and parole.
      To inmates in every state we will say: If you stay on drugs, then you'll
      stay behind bars. And to probationers and parolees the message will be
      equally clear: If you want to keep your freedom, you have to keep free of
      drugs.

              Through this initiative, we will also expand our efforts to help
      communities build and administer drug courts. As you have heard from Gen.
      Reno, drug courts are one of the most effective ways of making offenders
      give up both drugs and a life of crime.  When I took office there were
      four drug courts in operation, including the one Gen. Reno launched in
      Miami.  Today, there are more than 400. And if my budget proposal is
      approved by Congress, we can have more than a thousand up and running by
      the end of next year.

               I am also proud to announce that on top of these new budget
      proposals,we will free up another $120 million for drug-free prison
      initiatives this year -- to help eight states purge their prisons of drugs
      with advanced new technologies.

              In these final years of the 20th century, America made tremendous
      progress in our efforts to free our children and our communities from the
      dangerous threat of drugs and crime. Now, as we begin a new century, we
      have a remarkable opportunity to use the power of the courts, prisons,
      prosecutors, probation officers, and police to break the drug habits of
      our prisoners     and break the cycle of drugs and crime once, and for all
      time.  Let us seize it. Thank you and God bless you.


