RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:27-FEB-1997 16:48:40.00

SUBJECT:   Special education and discipline

TO: Elena Kagan
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a long background note about an issue that may arise in the next
few weeks.

The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, which governs special
education, is up for reauthorization. The Hill got close to enacting this
last year, but negotiations among all the parties fell apart -- disability
groups, teachers' unions, school boards, administrators, etc.  Now Sen.
Lott has announced he will run a 4-6 week process to see if all the
parties can reach an agreement.

Just one issue rises to high-level attention: discipline. The unions and
school boards want schools and teachers to have more authority to remove
disruptive students from classrooms or schools. The disability groups
view this as a veiled way to let schools get rid of kids who are tougher
to educate by discriminating against them and scapegoating them for all
the discipline problems.  Parent groups view IDEA as sacred, and get very
mobilized at the drop of a hat.

The Administration supported some changes to the law making it easier to
remove disabled kids from classrooms under appropriate circumstances.
These changes are a bit controversial with the groups, but can be worked
out. However, there is one change that Riley draws the line at:   whether
school districts can stop all services to disabled students who bring guns
or other weapons to school -- i.e., no education offered in any
alternative setting.

The Federal government has no role in this question for non-disabled
students. We only have a say for disabled students because of IDEA.
Riley's position is that no child should go without an education, disabled
or not.

Last year, Congress was on the verge of letting schools stop all
services.  Education wanted to keep opposing it, so Leon held a meeting.
We agreed at that time that Education could keep fighting until the full
Senate passed it, and then back down.  But that never happened, and now
the issue is back.

Finally, we are in court with Virginia over this issue, threatening to
take away all their money if they don't capitulate. We had been winning
all the decisions, but we just lost in the appeals court. We have to
figure out how that affects our strategy.
'.   .
         It's not clear when/how this issue will corne up for your review, but I
         wanted you to be aware of it given Lott's expedited timeframe (and Elena's
         disability involvement).

         In terms of who would stand with us (other than advocates) if we keep
         fighting, even Senators like Harkin (who is a real disability champion)
         voted for this crackdown in committee.

         My own judgment is that we should probably give in on this quietly
         whenever the appropriate opportunity arises. Groups will definitely be
         very disappointed in us, but as long as we don't brag about it and it
         appears inevitable in Congress anyway, I don't think it will be viewed as
         a huge betrayal.  I never thought this was as important a right to protect
         as other discipline questions, like making sure teachers use objective
         criteria for misbehavior when they pull disabled kids from individual
         classrooms. I think most states don't allow cessation of services
         anyway.  But Mike says Riley will fight very hard on this.

         Mike:   would you add anything to this description?


