 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Paul J. weinstein Jr.     ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JAN-1999 18:35:35.00

 SUBJECT:   BAS one and two pager

 TO: Elena Kagan       CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Ronald Minsk ( CN=Ronald Minsk/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Charles R. Marr ( CN=Charles R. Marr/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Paul J. weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP on
 01/08/99 06:36 PM ---------------------------




 Pieter J. Boelhouwer @ OVP
 01/08/99 06:23:46 PM
 Record Type:    Record

 To:      David A. Bernell/OMB/EOP
 cc:      Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP
 Subject:         BAS one and two pager

 These should both be final -- cleared by OMB and Treasury       is my
 understanding.
  contains OMB edits as of 6:25 pm today -- should be done
  - att1.unk




 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D39)MAIL455174903.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043B6040000010A02010000000205000000E0150000000200009A7AE5E71CD75EAOB82B6B
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    LIVABILITY:
                               BETTER AMERICA BONDS

To help communities reconnect with their land and water, preserve green space for future generations,
and provide attractive settings for economic development, the Clinton-Gore Administration is proposing a
new financing tool generating $9_5 billion for investments by state, local and tribal governments. Better
America Bonds can be used to preserve open space, clean up brownfields and protect water quality.

Across America, communities are searching for ways to keep growing while preserving a high quality
of life. Among their concerns are revitalizing older neighborhoods, curbing water pollution, and
protecting farmland and other green space close to home. Last November, voters in hundreds of
communities passed state and local ballot measures to manage growth and preserve vital green spaces.
While each community must chart its own destiny, the federal govermnent can be an important partner
in building healthy, livable communities for the 21st century.

To provide communities with additional resources to achieve their "smart growth" objectives,
President Clinton's proposed budget will include a total of$700 million over five years for Better
America Bonds. This funding will support federal tax credits enabling state, local and tribal
governments to issue $9.5 billion in bonds over 5 years. Communities will have access to zero-interest
financing because investors who buy these fifteen year bonds will receive tax credits in lieu of interest.

Better America Bonds can be used to:

       Preserve and Enhance Green Space. State, local and tribal governments, working alone or in
       partnership with land trusts and other nonproft organizations, can create or restore urban parks,
       preserve suburban green spaces, and protect threatened farmland and wetlands. Land can be
       protected either by acquiring title or purchasing permanent easements. Proceeds can also be
       used for reforestation, replanting and other types of environmental restoration or enhancement.

       Protect Water Quality. Rivers, lakes, coastal waters, and wetlands -- and drinking water
       sources -- can be restored or protected through measures to reduce pollution runoff and land
       acquisition to reduce polluted runoff. Eligible projects include "passive" controls, such as
       settling ponds, or the creation of planted or forested buffer strips along waterways that filter
       contaminants from runoff.

       Clean Up Brownfields. Pressure to develop green space can be eased by preparing brownfields
       -- abandoned industrial sites -- for new economic uses. Better America Bonds would
       supplement the Administration's existing brownfields inititiaves by providing new resources to
       assess and clean up brownfields for use as open spaces or for development under limited
       circumstances.

To become eligible for a bond allocation, state, local and tribal governments will submit proposals to
the Environmental Protection Agency for initial review in consultation with other agencies with .
programs and expertise in the competing communities. EPA will award bond allocations in conjunction
with the Vice President's Community Empowerment Board and other cognizant agencies. Preference
will be given to regional proposals that reflect collaborative planning by neighboring communities,
particularly partnerships among cities, suburbs and rural areas.
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                BETTER AMERICA BONDS

        President Clinton's budget proposes new resources and a new tool-- Better America
Bonds -- for state and local governments to reconnect their communities to the lands and water
around them, preserve open space for future generations, cleanup abandoned industrial sites
and make them available for new uses, and improve the quality of life in their communities.
This proposal provides $700 million in new resources over five years that will generate $9.5
billion of investments in our communities.

Communities are increasingly concerned about the loss of open space and farmland, as well as
declines in water quality, attributable to unchecked development and sprawl. The public is
demanding more effective efforts to manage sprawl and promote "smart growth." In the 1998
election, more than two hundred communities debated -- and most adopted -- measures to
address this issue. While land use decisions and planning are almost exclusively areas of local
concern, communities often lack the resources to meet their goals and need Federal help. This
need is becoming greater as the scarcity of open space increases the cost of preservation for state
and local governments.

Modeled on President Clinton's school construction proposal, this bond initiative would provide
new resources to local and state governments (including U.S. possessions and Indian tribal
governments) seeking to preserve and restore open space, cleanup and redevelop brownfield
sites, and restore community parks. Like qualified zone academy bonds, this program would
allow state and local governments to issue zero interest bonds to lenders who could claim a tax
credit for the life of the bond in lieu of interest. The issuer makes no payments on the bond until
maturity (15 years).

The allocation of the limited amount of Better America Bonds issuance authority would be made
through an open competition, with State and local governments submitting plans for use of the
bond proceeds to EPA for initial review which would include comprehensive consultation with
other agencies on the Vice President's Community Empowerment Board for review with·
programs and expertise in the relevant communities. After consultation, EPA would then
designate the awards with the consent of the Community Empowerment Board. This approach is
analogous to the manner· in which the Department of Housing and Urban Development makes
decisions about Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities.

The annual competition among cities would give preference to regional proposals reflecting
partnerships and comprehensive planning among local governments, particularly where cities
partner with suburbs and rural areas on a coordinated strategy. This will ensure that the bond
proceeds support the long term economic and environmental goals of a broad range of
communities. State and county governments also will be encouraged to partner with land
trusts, conservancies, and other nonprofit organizations in developing their strategies. EPA
would monitor compliance with the plans.

Ninety-five percent of the proceeds from sale of Green Bonds would have to be spent for the qualified
uses outlined in this proposal. Proceeds would have to be used in accordance with the plans
submitted by the qualified applicants, and within three years of issuance of the bonds.
                                                                                 Hex·Dump Conversion

Under the proposal, a menu of projects would be eligible for assistance. Projects available for
assistance would include:

·      Open Space. Green Bonds will enable state and local governments to acquire and conserve
       open space subject to development pressure, to create parks or to preserve farmland and
       wetlands. Government acquisition of title and of qualified easements to preserve open space
       would be included as eligible activities, as would government-sponsored acquisitions oftitle
       and easements through land conservancies and similar nonprofit organizations. Reforestation,
       replanting, and other environmental restoration, or enhancement efforts on lands already
       acquired by governments or non·profits. The property must remain an open space.

·      Clean Water. Clean water and safe drinking water are essential to environmental quality and
       economic future of our communities. Better America Bonds could be used by state and local
       governments to support the following eligible activities: (1) passive infrastructure to control
       polluted runoff, such as settling ponds, and greenways (specifically, this would not include
       capital-intensive treatment plants funded under other mechanisms); (2) financing of water
       pollution reduction measures such as buffer and forest strips and other activities that include
       purchasing land and other permanent improvements on the land to prevent polluted runoff; and
       3) wetlands acquisition and restoration.

·      Brownfields Redevelopment. Pressure to develop open space is eased significantly by
       preparing abandoned industrial sites for new development, thereby meeting both economic and
       environmental goals. While the Clinton Administration's brownfields initiatives have helped
       state and local governments to meet this challenge, the sheer number of brownfields sites
       requiring assessment or cleanup far outstrips the resources available to state and local
       governments. Better America Bonds would provide another tool in meeting this challenge, and
       would support assessment, and cleanup of abandoned brownfield sites owned by State and
       local governments -- whether for future development or for other uses supported by the
       community.

Acquisition ofland and facilities is only a qualifying purpose if the property is intended to be available,
and is in fact reasonably available, for use by members of the general public. Any agreement
conveying priority rights or other preferential benefits to a private person violates the general public
use provision and would not constitute a qualified purpose. Furthermore, repayment of Better
America Bonds principal may not be secured or paid with monies derived from private persons in any
                           .               .
capacity other than that of the general public (with the exception of qualifying brownfield sites).

Bonds would cease to be qualified bonds and would accrue no further tax credits after the date the use
of any bond financed facilities changes to a non-qualifying use. The issuer would be obligated to
reimburse the federal government (with interest) for any credits accruing prior to that date. If this
obligation is not timely paid by the issuer, the federal government has the right to recover the credit
amount from the current holder of the bonds.

Cost: the revenue cost would be limited to $700 million over 5 years by setting the annual cap
appropriately. The volume of authority to issue Better America Bonds that may be allocated the
EPA Administrator in each of the five years, beginning in 2000, would be $1.9 billion. Amounts
unallocated out ofthe annual limit for any year may be allocated in the following year. Allocated

                                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

             amounts unissued in the year of allocation may be issued up until the end of the third following year.


