RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Nanda Chitre ( CN=Nanda Chitre/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

'CREATION DATE/TIME:10-JAN-1999 15:55:05.00

SUBJECT:   fyi - NY Post story on Rangel

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)     )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:

   NEWS


                     RANGEL: BILL WANTS 'EM TO STAY BRONX BOMBERS

                     By DAVID SEIFMAN

                     President Clinton favors keeping the Yankees in
                     The Bronx and using a rejuvenated stadium to
                     anchor redevelopment of the area, Rep. Charles
                     Rangel (D-Manhattan) told The Post.

                     The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
                     Development has prepared a document for Clinton
                     detailing a number of development plans involving
                     the House That Ruth Built, including proposals put
                     forward by Mayor Giuliani, Yankee owner George
                     Steinbrenner and Bronx Borough President
                     Fernando Ferrer, Rangel said.

                      The congressman said Clinton told him Jan. 5,
                      "We need Yankee Stadium and we need it in The
                      Bronx. It's a national monument."

                     He said Clinton also said, "You know the Yankees'
                     victory has put new gusto into baseball. When you
                     think about [Mark) McGwire and [Sammy) Sosa
                     and you think about the whole season, and with
                     the NBA problems, we need the Yankees."

                      Last week Rangel met with the president's budget
                      advisers to discuss including money in the next
                      federal budget for a Harlem-South Bronx
                      empowerment zone that would include Yankee
                      Stadium.

                      "We're looking at this as not just a city problem,
                      but that Yankee Stadium is a national landmark
                      within a federal empowerment zone," Rangel said.

                      "This goes beyond Yankee Stadium. We're talking


                    about that whole area," he said.

                    Rangel sponsored a 1993 law that put parts of
                    Harlem and the South Bronx in an empowerment
                    zone that would give tax breaks to companies that
                    build in the area and provide jobs for local
                    residents.

                    Because the Stadium is in the zone, any
                    development there could take advantage of those
                    breaks.

                    Clinton is rumored to be considering unveiling a
                    South Bronx development plan in his State of the
                    Union Address on Jan. 19, one source said.

                    The president also may say something about the
                    Stadium when the Yankees visit the White House
                    in March to be acknowledged as the World Series
                    champions, Rangel said. But he added that he
                    does not know if the president's enthusiasm will
                    translate into a willingness to commit federal
                    money.

                    Clinton is far from advocating a specific plan.

                    "He wants to support any plan he could with city,
                    state and private sector support to keep Yankee
                    Stadium in The Bronx," Rangel said.

                    Rangel, whose congressional district does not
                    include the Stadium, stressed that the important
                    players in the Stadium question are Giuliani,
                    Steinbrenner, Ferrer and state economic
                    development chief Charles Gargano.

                    Ferrer has advocated a "Yankee Village" plan that
                    calls for renovating the Stadium by adding luxury
                    boxes and other amenities, revitalizing a
                    commercial strip nearby, and building a new
                    Metro-North rail station, 10,500 parking spots and
                    a regional retail center at the Bronx Terminal
                    Market.

                    The mayor's office did not return calls for
                    comment on the Stadium.

                    New York magazine reports in this week's issue
                    that the congressman had dinner with the Boss
                    the same day he spoke with the president.

                    "I hope the president gives [Steinbrenner] an offer
                    he can't refuse," Rangel told trie magazine.

                    Steinbre'nner spokesman Howard Rubenstein told
                    The Post the Yankees owner is excited by
                    Clinton's interest but will consider Giuliani's wishes
                    before committing to any plan.

                    "The Yankees are certainly pleased that the
,   '.Il10




                                 president has recognized the national importance
                                 of the South Bronx and the Yankees as a national
                                 treasure.

                                 "This might be a tremendous boost to not only the
                                 Yankees but to housing, transportation and full
                                 economic development of that area," Rubenstein
                                 said.
