RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/o=Ovp [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-JAN-1999 20:52:14.00

SUBJECT:   VP announcements/leaks

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The following are events that the VP and Mrs. Gore are currently scheduled
to participate plus a couple that I am hoping to get on VP's schedule.
Would like to coordinate these events with leaks in whatever way works
best. Let me know.

Mental health. (Jan 14th) Mrs. Gore is ~cheduled to announce the new
mental health increases in the budget in her speech at Dartmouth along
with the WH conference on mental health (that the President signed off on
last week). As this is the same day of the President's disability event,
she will also highlight some of the proposals he is unveiling that help
people with rental illnesses.

Small housing/long term care. (Jan 21st) The VP is hosting his first
long-term care forum in Florida. At this event, there is a HUD initiative
that we are scheduled to unveil to help Americans get into assisted living
facilities (essentially it gives money to low-income housing facilities to
convert to assisted living) .

Immigration. (Jan 25th)  Per our discussion today, VP would like to make
announcement in LA on the 25th in conjunction with a broader WH leak.

Equal Pay. (still need date). We are interested in unveiling the budget
initiative and the new legislation if it does not make the President's
schedule. although don't yet have final commitment from Ron and Pat. Do
you have any thoughts on timing on this? Any time before the budget. Would
this need to be done with Daschle's folks? Please advise.

Events w/ First Lady

Family planning. (Jan 22th)    As they did last year, the VP and HRC are
scheduled to meet with the women's groups/family planning community to
discuss the increase in the budget.    HRC would like this to be before her
NARAL speech on the 22nd so she can highlight the increase there, but both
offices are interested in getting unveiling with women's groups more
broadly . . Both have confirmed to do and schedulers are working on
agreeable date that will likely be on the 22nd itself.

Asthma. (still need date) Both the First Lady and the VP want to do this
event and we are trying to find date before budget that works for both. If
we can't then one or other will definetely do. will let you know as this
gets resolved.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 042 - FOLDER -007


[01/11/1999]
