     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Todd A. Summers    ( CN=Todd A. Summers/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-JAN-1999 15:05:32.00

      SUBJECT:   International AIDS Funding ..

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      CC: Sandra Thurman ( CN=Sandra Thurman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      During his meeting with the AIDS Council, they expressed concern about the
      level of US support for international AIDS activities through USAID.  In
      response, the President said that he would "put some money in there" (see
      relevant dialogue from transcript at end) .

     We had requested that OMB respond to this commitment; unfortunately, to
     our knowledge, USAID is being level-funded for FY2000.  Moreover, OMB
     tells us that USAID may cut AIDS funding by $3-4 million if they receive
     no new money overall (allocations to AIDS programs are at the USAID
     Administrator's discretion and are not typically earmarked here or in
     congress).  We are concerned that the President's commitment to the
     Council will be unfulfilled, and that funding may in fact be cut instead
     of increased.

     Another issue is the AIDS orphan funding announced by the President on
     December 1,  This $10 million was part of a $50 million emergency plus-up
     for child welfare at USAID (Rep. Callahan pushed it, Rep. Pelosi got the
     AIDS orphan cut).  The fact that this money was "one time only" was also
     raised by the Council.  Sandy is about to set off for a trip to Africa to
     prepare for the larger visit requested by the President.  USA Today is
     accompanying Sandy on the trip, and is expected to do a major piece on the
     issue.  Our ability to provide some kind of responsive funding would be
     very helpful; conversely, with PM Blair just announcing a $185 million
     increase in their AIDS support to southern Africa, the lack of increased
     US support will be a vulnerability.

     Our suggestions
     Given that the budget numbers are locked down, we suggest that USAID be
     asked to provide a modest (+/- $5 million) increase for FY2000 in its AIDS
     budget, and that we commit to work with them to obtain additional
     appropriations in congress.
     An effort should be made during Congressional negotiations to support a
     $50 million increase in the child-survival funding at USAID, with a
     portion allocated to AIDS orphan relief.

     Relevant Se·ctions from Transcript of AIDS Council Meeting (12/18/98)
     MR. ISBELL:  Mr. president, six million people become infected
     with HIV each year around the world, half of them under the age of 25.
     More than 90 percent of the infections in the world happen in the


 developing world where there is little or no access to the drugs that
 have made such a big difference to people in this country.
        We were extremely impressed and heartened by your use of World
 AIDS Day to highlight the need for American leadership in the global
 fight against HIV.   We strongly support the $10 million program that you
 announced to address the needs of women and orphans of AIDS. And we
 would strongly support you making this one-time funding a permanent part
 of USAID.       Despite this initiative, Mr. President, u.S. funding for
 global
 AIDS activities has declined in real dollar terms since 1993. Just last
 year the administration proposed a 10 percent cut in federal support for
 funding for infectious disease programs throughout the world.    We
 believe that we cannot turn the tide against HIV throughout the world
 without the aggressive, bold, energetic leadership of the United States.
 And we would strongly encourage in your next budget, Mr. President, that
 you're about to send to the Hill, that you include substantial increases
 for international AIDS programs at USAID and the CDC.
        Just also to close, we'd also strongly support an improved
 coordination of the many federal programs that happen all across the
 government that have a role to play in the international AIDS efforts.
 Secretary Albright has announced, as you know, a plan to draft a U.S.
 international AIDS strategy, and we would hope that you would look to
 this as a first step toward making sure that all the federal agencies
 are reading off the same page and that they're part of the same team --
 because it's an urgent problem and it requires an urgency of the entire
 U.S. government.
        THE PRESIDENT: Well, in general, let me say I think the budget
 should reflect better attention both to prevention at home and to the
 communities of color. And I've been trying to get more money for the
 USAID mission and we'll put some more money in there.   I think I'd like
 to make two points.
        One is that this budget year will be more difficult than the last
 one because we got such big increases in everything last time and
 because of the global economy kind of slowing down, we don't expect the
 same amount of revenues to come in this time.   And we have to fund all
 the big increases we got last time again.   But we'll do the best we can.
        The second thing I would like to say is I think that it would be
 very helpful to have all of you using your, whatever influence you have,
 with members of Congress in both parties to support more global efforts,
 because eventually all this is going to a menace to the United States.
 So it's not only a moral imperative, it's also very practical over the long
 run.
        One of the things that has kind of bothered me is that in the
 aftermath of the Cold War we were able for several years to reduce our
 defense budget, and that was a good thing and everyone --and even the
 Pentagon wanted to do it.   There reduced like by about 300,000 the
 number of civilian employees. And they plan for further reductionsthere.
        But during that time, we actually needed to make a larger
 commit~ent on the diplomatic front or in the non-defense security areas,
 if you will. And with the exception of the special efforts we made in
 the former Soviet Union to dismant'le and destroy nuclear weapons,
 basically there's been a wholesale effort to cut back on our diplomatic
 budget, even though, contrary to popular wisdom, the United States
 spends a smaller percentage of our income on international affairs than
 any other major country.
        And one of the things that I have seen -- almost no one knows
 this, but it's true -- one of the things that I have -- now, to be fair,
 we also spend more on defense and a lot of our defense goes to protect
 other countries, as you see in the last couple of days. But, still, for
 the numbers -- are so much more modest, not only for -- if you just look


at the USAID program, the health programs, the empowerment of women and
children, especially young girls, initiative, the small scale
microeconomic development -- all that stuff that doesn't cost much money
and it has a huge impact. And especially a lot of the things we can do
in public heath.
       And, interestingly enough, a lot of the preventive activities that
we would engage in with regard to AIDS, for example, would go quite well
with other things we need to be doing out there with these large
populations anyway in a lot of countries that have severe public
healthproblems.
       So we've been sitting here meeting in our -- I've been having each
of the last three or four days rather long, detailed budget sessions,
trying to figure out how to get more blood out of-that turnip. And one
of the things that I'm trying to do is to figure out how to make the
case to the Congress in an effective way that the United States has
enormous interest, as well as obligations, in making these kinds of
investments beyond our borders.
       And I think anything you can do to help that, I would appreciate
it.   I mean, there is this sort of general awareness in Congress that
the world is becoming more interdependent. There's a much more
sophisticated understanding of the economics, for example.   But it's not
just economics.   It's the environment, it's the public health, it's all
these other things where we are becoming more and more caught up witheach
other.
       Our major military mission in the last six months, before the
operation in Iran, has been to send several thousand of our uniformed
personnel to Central America to help them rebuild after Hurricane Mitch.
It's not only the right thing to do from a humanitarian point of view,
it is in our national interest.   Because if those countries don't
rebuild they will become highly vulnerable to all the drug traffickers.
And if they don't rebuild then all their people will have to come here.
And if they can't get here legally will try to come illegally. So
there's all these things that we need to begin to see our relationships
beyond our borders, as more of an extension of our relationships with
one another, rather than as something totally different and apart from
our relations with one another.
       And, anyway, I don't mean to give you a speech on that; I know you
believe that. But the point I want to make is, most people who run for
Congress never have to think about these things unless they have a large
immigrant population within their district from a particular place. So
it doesn't -- this kind of discussion we're having, because you
understand the HIV/AIDS issue -- I'm preaching to the choir here.    But
anything you can do to sort of just sit down and walk through this with
congressional delegations, or their chiefs of staff, or whoever the
appropriate people are from around the country, I would reallyappreciate.
       Because I think there is a lot of support.  For example, you can
always get good support in Congress, bipartisan, for a big increase in
the Ryan White Act. And now, we've finally got pretty good support in
Congress, this whopping increase we had to help people purchase the
drugs, the medicines. But it drops off markedly when you try to talk
about the connection between what we're doing here at home and beyond
our borders. And I really think you could help, because this is one
example of a more general challenge the country will have to face --
more every year for the next 20 years. Maybe forever, but certainly for
the next 20 years.


Full Transcript
THE WHITE HOUSE


 Office of the Press Secretary

 For Immediate Release                               December 18, 1998,


 REMARKS OF THE PRESIDENT
 IN HIV-AIDS ADVISORY COUNCIL MEETING

 The Cabinet Room


  5:45 P.M. EST


              MS. THURMAN: Good afternoon, everybody.   I want to
 thank you all for joining us this afternoon. Those of ,us who are
 gathered in this room today are partners in a battle that, while
 we've had significant successes in recent years, has no end in sight.
 Our victory over AIDS will require incredible resolve, persistence,
 and steadfast leadership.

              This is a struggle which we all know has had all too few
 national leaders, but has always had the support of this leader.  It
 is my distinct honor to present to you our leader, the President.

              THE PRESIDENT:   I want to get right to the subject of
 listening to all of you, but I would like to say that, as all of you
 know, we had a very good couple of days when we finally made the
 budget last year -- we've had a lot of good increases, a lot of
 things that I know you care so much about. But we've got a lot of
 work to do, especially in prevention and in the vaccine development I
 think we're going to -- (inaudible) -- pretty soon.

              I would prefer, I think, because we've met before and
 I'm trying to stay familiar with your concerns -- I think we've done
 a good job of getting the money into the programs this time, but
 there's a lot more we can do -- (inaudible.)  However you organized
 this -~ (Laughter.)

              DR. HITT:                        Okay, we want to start
 off by having Reverend Mother Altagracia Perez lead us in a short
 prayer.

              REVEREND PEREZ: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. President,
 for this moment where we can gather our thoughts and especially bring
 to mind all those who today are in need of courage and strength, so
 if we could have a moment of silence.

              Spirit of life and justice and power, we welcome you in
 our midst. We've been brought together by a desire to improve the
 quality of life for all the people that we serve and represent.
 We're especially conscious at this moment of the men and women, that
 right now, are in harm's way. Our thoughts are with them and their
 families, as we await their safe return.

              We're also ever-mindful of those who are gathered here
 with us and, through us, all those who struggle daily with a virus
 that has no cure and is hard to live with. They are here with us;
 the people who called us to this work; those who have gone and who
 have left us their legacy of courage and perseverance.



              We especially gather in a spirit of gratitude for our
 President. We remember all too well those dark years, when a meeting
 like this would have never happened. We are grateful for his life
 and for his leadership, and we pray that you sustain him through the
 power of your spirit. Give him strength and courage, and stamina,
 and wisdom, as he continues to lead us through this dark time.

              There's still so much that we have to do.  Let us
 especially remember our communities of color and those most
 vulnerable throughout the world who today, and every day, are living
 in a state of emergency.  May each of us leave this encounter with
 our vision of what we can do together restored, and our strength
 renewed, to go forward and face the challenges that await us.
 In the name of the One who came with hope and brought us light, we
 pray. Amen.

              DR. HITT: Mr. President, on behalf of the Council I
 want to thank you for meeting with us, especially so close to your
 recent high profile events regarding the Congressional Black Caucus
 HIV Initiative for communities of color and World AIDS Day spotlight
 on international crisis.

              six and a half years ago I was very honored to stand
 with you on the stage of the Palace Theater in Los Angeles, where you
 outlined your commitment and genuine care and concern for those
 living with HIV and a really good vision of how -- (inaudible.)   In
 light of the efforts you made in securing unprecedented funding, for
 starting the Office of AIDS Research, Office of National AIDS Policy,
 convening the White House Conference on AIDS, establishing a goal of
 a vaccine -- which are all landmarks I think you can be very proud of
 -- I am just as honored to be with you here today.

              THE PRESIDENT:    Thank you.

              DR. HITT:  In addition, I want to thank you for the
 humbling honor of serving this council of incredibly dedicated and
 committed individuals as its chair, and to tell you on behalf of all
 of us how honored we are to serve your administration.

              Continuing with our task of offering advice to you, we
 recently adopted our priorities, which reflect the community
 realities, especially the urgent need for action in the racial and
 ethnic communities, and in the youth of our country.  This epidemic
 has been full of changes and challenges and we're really at a
 crossroads in this ep·idemic. The media all the time tells us about
 how people are living longer and this is a chronic, manageable
 disease and less people are dying overall of AIDS.

               What they often fail to mention is that curb-prevention
 efforts .are not reaching the American pUblic.  Three hundred thousand
 Americans don't even know they're HIV positive. And contrary to your
 own stated goals, we are not decreasing the numbers of new people
 infected. And, in fact, in many communities the numbers are
 increasing.

              In addition, thousands of HIV individuals cannot get the
 early treatment the public health service guidelines tell them that
 they should get, but, rather, they have to wait until they become
 disabled from the disease before becoming eligible for treatment.



              Out of all our recommendations to date, there are a few
 items we would like to discuss with you today that need your specific
 presidential intervention now if we are going to achieve these goals.
 Before we give you these few suggestions I want to emphasize to you
 that none of what we're recommending to you today would be possible
 without the tireless efforts of several people who serve you, this
 Council and the people living with HIV and AIDS -- especially in the
 White House and across administration.  It's because of them that
 you've had so many successes -- namely your own NAP Director, Sandy
 Thurman -- (applause) -- who made real your 'vision of a White House
 office that leads the national response to this epidemic, along with
 the Deputy Director Todd Summers and the Council's Executive
 Director, Dan Montoya. And we appreciate the efforts very much.

              The Rabbi has a few words.

              RABBI EDELHEIT: Mr. President, we're honored to be with
 you today, especially so soon after your recent trip to the Mideast,
 where you courageously engaged in the making of peace, where you
 brought the gift of hope to the land of the Bible.

              During this week of Hanukkah, on the eve of Ramadan and
 one week before Christmas, we are all reminded that all these
 religious holidays promise us light in the darkest time of the year.
 As your Advisory Council, we want to help you fulfill your vision to
 bring the light of hope to those living with HIV/AIDS.

              HIV/AIDS still darkens the path to that bridge that
 crosses into the 21st century to which you have prophetically led us.
 We want to help you illumine the darkness that still covers the path
 to that bridge. We must warn you that there are some Americans who
 are in danger of being unable to cross when you lead our nation to
 that bridge into the 21st century.

              How can we be sure that the African American who has no
 access to clean needles, nor the newest combination of drug therapies
 will get to the other side? What do we need to do to make sure that
 the Latino youth who is not eligible for Medicaid will have access to
 primary care and still be able to work that he, too, can cross the
 bridge with other Americans?

              Here is a gift, Mr. President, from my four children.
 It is a dreidel -- that's right.  I'm impressed.   (Laughter.) It is
 the traditional spinning top we play -- and the four letters on it,
 Mr. President, stand for "a great miracle happened there." But, Mr.
 President, we know that there will be no one great miracle that ends
 HIV-AIDS.· So we are here to help revive your vision of zero rate of
 transmission and an equitable access of care to all persons battling
 HIV disease.

              We are here with you today, Mr. President, when a
 terrible political darkness has fallen over this land, because we
 want you to know that we will do whatever it takes to cross that
 bridge with you into the 21st century.

              DR. HITT: As I said, we fought through a lot of
 recommendations and tried to come up with some specific new
 initiatives that we wanted to bring to your attention. And to start
 that off, I'm going to have Mr. Tom Henderson lead with one of the


 new initiatives.

 0,

              MR. HENDERSON: Mr. President, when I stood, with many
 others during the stirring speeches of Bob Latoy (phonetic) and
 Elizabeth Glaser at the 1992 Democratic National Convention, I truly
 believed it would be my last national convention. But because of the
 remarkable progress we've made under your leadership in fighting this
 disease, I'm still here today, alive and well.

              That's primarily because I'm fortunate enough to be
 employed and adequately insured and, therefore, able to enjoy the
 benefits of the new combination drug therapies. For those who must
 rely on Medicaid, however, for their health care, the story is often
 much different.
              On one hand, we have new public health service
 standard-of-care guidelines that call for early treatment of HIV
 prior to disability.  But on the other hand, in many cases, accessing
 Medicaid requires individuals to be already disabled.  Instead of
 being able to enjoy the benefits of living longer and better lives,
 many are still forced to wait until they're sick and unable to work
 before they can even begin treatment.

              Not only is that inhumane, Mr. President, it's costly as
 well. Access to quality medical care for those living with HIV who
 are incarcerated is also a major problem.  In most cases, there is no
 preparation for connecting those individuals to medical care, once
 they are released back into the community.

              In April of 1997, the Vice President asked HCFA to
 evaluate the possibility of expanding ~ccess to Medicaid for poor
 HIV-positive individuals, prior to becoming disabled. HCFA/HHS has
 concluded that can't be done in a budget-neutral manner.  Now, some
 would suggest that the only near-term solution is to rely on the
 demonstration programs called for in the Jeffords/Kennedy
 legislation. Mr. President, we reject those conclusions. We believe
 there are two things that can be done now, without legislation, to
 solve this problem.  First, OMB currently requires finding offset
 cost savings within Medicaid only to determine budget neutrality.
 Any savings generated within other federal programs can't be
 considered to determine budget neutrality.

              Also, current poli,cy only allows looking at a five-year
 budget window. We believe those hurdles can be overcome, but only if
 you make the decision to include a broader look at cost savings, and
 a longer budget window, and then direct the Secretary of HHS, and the
 Director of the OMB, to modify current policy to account for any
 resulting savings.

              Second is the issue of drug cost. Mr. President, the
 time to deal with crucial drug cost issues is while we're also
 dealing with expanding access to those drugs. The vastly increased
 market for HIV drugs that would result from early access makes
 simultaneously negotiating drug cost reductions both reasonable and
 possible. We believe that asking the Vice President to include such
 drug cost issues in his ongoing discussions with the pharmaceutical
 industry could offer substantial potential for progress. Breaking
 the current gridlock, Mr. President, surrounding these issues will
 require your personal intervention. With that intervention, however,


 providing Medicaid access to early intervention therapies can be
 accomplished.

              THE PRESIDENT: Well, I'll see what I can do about that.
 You know, generally, this whole medical coverage problem is getting
 worse in America.  It reminds me of that joke that the Republicans
 used to tell on us -- they told me if I voted for Barry Goldwater
 we'd get involved in Vietnam too much, And I did, and sure enough,
 it happened. (Laughter.)  And they said when they attacked Hillary
 and me for our health care plan, they said that if people supported
 it, things would get worse. And sure enough, they did.   (Laughter.)
 0,


              We've had -- these coverage problems have gotten quite
 profound, and as a consequence, with fewer and fewer people getting
 medical coverage at work, what you've got is more and more people
 trying to find a way to get into Medicaid.

              One of the things, for example, that I want to look at
 as a result of this is something we're doing with disabled people who
 get back into the workplace.  I just started an initiative not very
 long ago to try and have people who have disabilities, including some
 people with HIV and AIDS when they get better -- if you have
 disabilities and you go back to work, it used to be automatically you
 lose your Medicaid. And now more and more people are working in
 small businesses where they don't have employer-based health
 insurance or they have small pools and they can't afford to take
 somebody with a preexisting conditions.

              So we're trying to modify the rules so that when people
 are on disability, then they get off of it and they go back into the
 work force, they can keep their Medicaid for some period of time.
 And I want to go back and see exactly how we did that and what else
 we can do here.                        .

              Tom, I want to make sure what you said. You believe
 that there are savings in non-Medicaid areas that would come from
 keeping people off -- giving people the drugs before they get sick in
 the first place.

              MR. HENDERSON:    As you know, the process right now is
 for states to seek waivers. We've been working closely with a number
 of states who have been working on those waivers for submission at
 the present time. They believe there are significant savings in SSI
 and SSDI, in other areas, that would result

              THE PRESIDENT:        all would be counted.

              Q       Yes, sir.   And current rules don't allow that.

              THE PRESIDENT:   I've got to go back and look at that.
 Part of it is the way the law disaggregates money into mandatory and
 non-mandatory spending.   I'll look at it and see if we can do
 something about that.   I know it's very important.

              I presume you still -- hello, Bob.

              HATTOY:     Hello, Mr. President.   (Laughter.)   Sorry I'm
 late.



               THE PRESIDENT:   I'm glad you're here.   (Laughter. )

               MR. HATTOY:   I'm glad you're here.   (Laughter and
 applause. )

              THE PRESIDENT:      notwithstanding what you said, you
 still think we ought to pass the Kennedy-Jeffords bill. It's a good
 bill.

               MR. HENDERSON: Absolutely.   We just think that there
  are some things that can be done in the near-term, though, within the
  administration that do not require legislation, that they would move
  this problem forward.

               THE PRESIDENT:   I'll do some work on it -- what you
  said.

               MR. ROBINSON: Mr. President, as you said in your
  opening statement, prevention of new infections is an area where,
  although we've made some progress, we still have a great deal to do.
  In fact, this Council, the community at large, and your
  administration, has struggled with the challenge of preventing new
  infections.

               Today we want to raise two issues related to prevention
  with you.  First, as you know, this council supported making federal
  funding available for needle-exchange programs.  Today, we again want
  to ask you for your support in this area. We've made a request of
  Secretary Shalala and HHS to provide us -- the Council, the Office of
  National AIDS Policy, and other federal agencies -- with a summary of
  the scientific information that supports needle-exchange programs to
  prevent new infections. We believe that this would be an important
  first step in fulfilling the administration's commitment to assisting
  communities that chose to use these life-saving programs.

               Second, we want to recommend to you that the White House
  Office of National AIDS Policy be directed to undertake a bold,
  national media campaign to promote voluntary HIV testing. Without a
  cure, preventing new infections is our best strategy. This is
  especially true for African-Americans and other people of color,
  where the severe and ongoing health crisis has created a public
  health emergency.

               One reason why.stemming the tide of new infections has
  been so elusive is the fact that so many people don't know that
  they're infected. As a person who has thrived for the past 17 years,
  despite the fact that I'm living with HIV, I understand the
  importance of knowing one's -- status.  It has offered me an
  opportunity to seek treatment for my HIV, and made me more aware of
  the need of protecting myself and others from infection.

               Some members of Congress and others in the community
  have called for misguided measures, such as mandatory HIV testing,
  mandatory contact tracing, and mandatory partner notification --
  measures that we believe will not be effective. However, like us,
  they are concerned that too many people living with HIV don't know it
  and, therefore, risk infecting others.

               We believe that this campaign would demonstrate your


 administration's sound public health approach to this challenge.
 Modeled on ONDCP's national youth anti-drug media campaign, this
 voluntary HIV testing campaign would raise awareness about the
 continuing threat of HIV while lessening the stigma of HIV testing.
 Working with the CDC, national advertisors and other media concerns,
 ONAP would develop this campaign as a public/private partnership,
 which we believe would build on your legacy of an activist government
 and enhance your efforts to end racial and ethnic health disparities.

              Mr. president, we hope you seriously consider
 undertaking this campaign of voluntary HIV testing, because we
 believe it is essential to our efforts of preventing infection.

               THE PRESIDENT:  It sounds like a good idea.  I think
  Sandy is going to come up with a proposal of what we should do, but I
  think it's a good idea.

              MS. THURMAN:     We'll work with you and get one done.

               THE PRESIDENT: And it offers the promise of sort of
  getting by the divisive arguments of the past and actually doing
  something.  I like it.

              Q       Proactive.

              MS. MIRAMONTES:   Mr. President, I came here today as a
 mother with a son living with AIDS, to talk to you about vaccines.
 But before I speak to you about the vaccine issue, I want you to know
 that combination therapies, although valuable for many, are also
 failing some people -- some in this room -- as well as my son. So,
 therefore, I really want to stress the need for continuing research,
 both in vaccines and in therapeutics, is as important today as it
 ever was.
              First, I want to thank you for what you have
 accomplished in moving the agenda on the AIDS vaccine issue and
 establishing the 10-year goal.   But there are several critical issues
 that only you can address if your goal is to be reached.   And I have
 two examples I want to give you.

              The first one, it has been 19 months to the day since
 your announcement of the vaccine goal, and a director of the vaccine
 center at NIH has not yet been appointed.  We know that even though
 the center is only about 10 or 15 percent of the funding, this
 appointment really is important to be made and should be made as soon
 as possible.

              Secondly, a preliminary vaccine meeting was held more
 than six months ago and, to date, there has been no follow-up
 meeting. When President Kennedy announced that we were going to put
 a man on the moon, he appointed a person within the White House to
 oversee this endeavor. After hearing almost 100 hours <;>f. testimony,
 we recommended a coordinator be placed within your Office of National
 AIDS Policy, with adequate resources -- and I need to really stress
 that -- with adequate resources to coordinate the vaccine effort.
 This is not that we want to tell anyone agency what they are to do,
 but rather to coordinate vaccine activities across all relevant
 federal agencies. And I think the next piece is especially
 important: developing true partnerships with the international
 community and the private industry.


               We also recommended that a comprehensive plan be
  developed and implemented, and this hasn't happened, either.  I think
  we all need to remember that the person most at risk, worldwide, is a
  young person of color, and that the most effective strategy for
  stopping this pandemic is an effective vaccine.

               So what I'm asking you, Mr. President, if you're willing
  to use your position to really address these critical issues.

               THE PRESIDENT: Well, let me make a couple comments.
  First of all, I think the vaccine director is about to be appointed
     (inaudible. )

               Secondly, I do think that -- the new Director of the
  Office of AIDS Research has been doing quite a good job. We got
  about a 33 percent increase in funds for vaccine research in the last
  budget, so that's good. And we're going to try to -- I just had a
  brief meeting, before I came in here, with our folks, talking about
  how we can expand Sandy's -- this kind of work and kind of ride herd
  on this thing -- (Applause.)   I think that's important.  It does make
  a difference just to have a sort of sustained White House involvement
  on any kind of project to keep cutting through the resistance.
               MR. ROBINSON:   Thank you very much.

               MS. ARAGAN: Mr. President, the next issue we would like
  to discuss is the need for your FY 2000 budget to include meaningful
  and substantial increases in HIV funding,  The Council is very
  grateful to you for your strong and public support for the record
  increases in funding in FY 1999. At the local level, these increases
  will really make a difference in the real lives of the people who are
  struggling to live with this disease, and those who are at risk for
  infection.

                In particular, we want to thank you for the active role
  that you and your staff played in successful efforts to secure $156
  million for the congressional Black Caucus Initiative. As you know,
  that initiative is designed to address the severe and ongoing health
  crisis affecting African Americans, Latinos and other communities of
  color in the United States.

               But as you know, Mr. President, the emergency conditions
  that led to the need for the CBC Initiatiye require a sustained and
  expanded federal response.  As you finalize your FY 2000 budget, we
  ask that you use this opportunity to build upon the momentum of
  FY'99.  Specifically, we are asking that full funding for the CBC
  initiative be included in your base budget. As you know, some of it
  was one-time funded -- and that this funding be expanded in FY 2000.
  It is also critical that the distribution of these new funds be
  expedited, to reflect the fact that this is a response to a crisis
  situation.

               As my colleagues have discussed, we are also requesting
  that you propose a bold funding for a bold national testing awareness
  media campaign, and that access to HIV treatments be expanded both
  through the Ryan White CARE Act and through Medicaid.

              Finally, Mr. president, we ask that your budget reflect
 the leadership role the U.S. must play in efforts to address the
 global pandemic, and my colleague, Mike Isbell, will say a little bit
 more about that in a minute. This Council certainly understands the


  political dynamics of the budget process, in which you must consider
  what the Congress itself will fund in setting your own numbers.  But
  the reality is that your budget really sets the stage for all future
  deliberations in FY 2000. We really need your initial budget request
  to include these AIDS funding increases so that congressional action
  can build upon the strongest base possible.  In short, we need you to
  raise the bar.

              Thank you.

               MR. ISBELL: Mr. President, six million people become
  infected with HIV each year around the world, half of them under the
  age of 25. More than 90 percent of the infections in the world
  happen in the developing world where there is little or no access to
  the drugs that have made such a big difference to people in this
  country.

               We were extremely impressed and heartened by your use of
  World AIDS Day to highlight the need for American leadership ·in the
  global fight against HIV.  We strongly support the $10 million
  program that you announced to address the needs of women and orphans
  of AIDS. And we would strongly support you making this one-time
  funding a permanent part of USAID.

               Despite this initiative, Mr. President, U.S. funding for
  global AIDS activities has declined in real dollar·terms since 1993.
  Just last year the administration proposed a 10 percent cut in
  federal support for funding for infectious disease programs
  throughout the world.  We believe that we cannot turn the tide
  against HIV throughout the world without the aggressive, bold,
  energetic leadership of the United States. And we would strongly
  encourage in your next budget, Mr. President, that you're about to
  send to the Hill, that you include substantial increases for
  international AIDS programs at USAID and the CDC.

                Just also to close, we'd also strongly support an
  improved coordination of the many federal programs that happen all
  across the government that have a role to play in the international
  AIDS efforts.   Secretary Albright has announced, as you know, a plan
  to draft a U.S. international AIDS strategy, and we would hope that
  you would look to this as a first step toward making sure that all
  the federal agencies are reading off the same page and that they're
  part of the same team -- because it's an urgent problem and it
  requires an urgency of the entire U.S. government.

               THE PRESIDENT: Well, in general, let me say I think the
  budget should reflect better attention both to prevention at home and
  to the communities of color. And I've been trying to get more money
  for the USAID mission and we'll put some more money in there.  I
  think I'd like to make two points.

               One is that this budget year will be more difficult than
  the last one because we got such big increases in everything last
  time and because of the global economy kind of slowing down, we don't
  expect the same amount of revenues to come in this time. And we have
  to fund all the big increases we got last time again.  But we'll do
  the best we can.

               The second thing I would like to say is I think that it
  would be very helpful to have all of you using your, whatever


 influence you have, with members of Congress in both parties to
 support more global efforts, because eventually all this is going to
 a menace to the United States. So it's not only a moral imperative,
 it's also very practical over the long run.

              One of the things that has kind of bothered me is that
 in the aftermath of the Cold War we were able for several years to
 reduce our defense budget, and that was a good thing and everyone
 --and even the Pentagon wanted to do it.  There reduced like by about
 300,000 the number of civilian employees.  And they plan for further
 reductions there.

              But during that time, we actually needed to make a
 larger commitment on the diplomatic front or in the non-defense
 security areas, if you will. And with the exception of the special
 efforts we made in the former Soviet union to dismantle and destroy
 nuclear weapons, basically there's been a wholesale effort to cut
 back on our diplomatic budget, even though, contrary to popular
 wisdom, the United States spends a smaller percentage of our income
 on international affairs than any other major country.

              And one of the things that I have seen    almost no one
 knows this, but it's true -- one of the things that I have -- now, to
 be fair, we also spend more on defense and a lot of our defense goes
 to protect other countries, as you see in the last couple of days.
 But, still, for the numbers -- are so much more modest, not only for
 -- if you just look at the USAID program, th~ health programs, the
 empowerment of women and children, especially young girls,
 initiative, the small scale microeconomic development -- all that
 stuff that doesn't cost much money and it has a huge impact. And
 especially a lot of the things we can do in public heath.

              And, interestingly enough, a lot of the preventive
 activities that we would engage in with regard to AIDS, for example,
 would go quite well with other things we need to be doing out there
 with these large populations anyway in a lot of countries that have
 severe public health problems.

              So we've been sitting here meeting in our -- I've been
 having each of the last three or four days rather long, detailed
 budget sessions, trying to figure out how to get more blood out of
 that turnip. And one of the things that I'm trying to do is to
 figure out how to make the case to the Congress in an effective way
 that the united States has enormous interest, as well as obligations,
 in making these kinds of investments beyond our borders.

              And I think anything you can do to help that, I would
 appreciate it.  I mean, there is this sort of general awareness in
 Congress that the world is becoming more interdependent. There's a
 much more sophisticated understanding of the economics, for example.
 But it's not just economics.  It's the environment, it's the public
 health, it's all these other things where we are becoming more and
 more caught up with each other.

              Our major military mission in the last six months,
 before the operation in Iran, has been to send several thousand of
 our uniformed personnel to Central America to help them rebuild after
 Hurricane Mitch.  It's not only the right thing to do from a
 humanitarian point of view, it is in our national interest. Because
 if those countries don't rebuild they will become highly vulnerable


     to all the drug traffickers. And if they don't rebuild then all
     their people will have to come here. And if they can't get here
     legally will try to come illegally.  So there's all these things that
     we need to begin to see our relationships beyond our borders, as more
     of an extension of our relationships with one another, rather than as
     something totally different and apart from our relations with one
     another.

                  And, anyway, I don't mean to give you a speech on that;
     I know you believe that.  But the point I want to make is', most
     people who run for Congress never have to think about these things
     unless they have a large immigrant population within their district
     from a particular place.  So it doesn't -- this kind of discussion
     we're having, because you understand the HIV/AIDS issue -- I'm
     preaching to the choir here. But anything you can do to sort of just
     sit down and walk through this with congressional delegations, or
     their chiefs of staff, or whoever the appropriate people are from
     around the country, I would really appreciate.

                  Because I think there is a lot of support.  For example,
     you can always get good support in Congress, bipartisan, for a big
     increase in the Ryan White Act.  And now, we've finally got pretty
     good support in Congress, this whopping increase we had to help
     people purchase the drugs, the medicines.  But it drops off markedly
     when you try to talk about the connection between what we're doing
     here at home and beyond our borders. And I really think you could
     help, because this is one example of a more general challenge the
     country will have to face -- more every year for the next 20 years.
     Maybe forever, but certainly for the next 20 years.

                  DR. HITT: Mr. President, we really have made --
     probably hundreds of recommendations in the past few years, I mean --
     (Laughter.)  We've tried our best to narrow down

                    THE PRESIDENT:   This is the most energetic
     (Laughter. )

                  DR. HITT:    But we have narrowed down a few specific
     initiatives we brought to your attention today and the reason is
     clear, that we've talked to many administration officials and this is
     where we feel that there's a logjam that you can really help and get
     involved in, and take it to heart.

                    THE PRESIDENT:   I will.

                    DR. HITT:   And thank you, again, for meeting with us.

                   THE PRESIDENT: Thank you for the dreidel, the book, the
     letters.   Thank you very much. (Applause.)

                     END                         6:40 P.M. EST


