          RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

          CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

          CREATION DATE/TIME:21-JAN-1999 13:34:45.00

          SUBJECT:    ag

          TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TEXT:
                              Tobacco Industry Criticizes Lawsuit

                              By Estes Thompson
                              Associated Press Writer
                              Thursday, January 21, 1999; 11:43 a.m. EST

                              DURHAM, N.C.   (AP)   -- Tobacco company executives and
          officials in
                            states dependent on the crop had nothing but scorn for
          President Clinton's
                            threatened lawsuit against cigarette makers and an
          increased tobacco tax.

                              "This industry is under siege, "      Kentucky Gov. Paul
          Patton said
                              Wednesday. "There's a limit to what this product can
          bear, and we're
                              coming close to that limit."

                              Patton was among representatives from 11 tobacco states
          and four
                              companies who discussed Clinton's speech as they met in
          Durham to
                            work out plans for a $5.15 billion trust fund to assist
          farmers hurt by the
                            settlement of state lawsuits.

                              In his State of the Union speech Tuesday night, Clinton
          said the federal
                            government would follow the lead of states and sue
          tobacco companies to
                            recover health care costs of treating sick smokers.

                            States won $246 billion, mostly through lawsuit
          settlements, plus new
                            restrictions on tobacco ads and other industry
          practices. Federal attorneys
                            have studied the states' strategy.

                              Administration officials insisted that the decision was
          made after they
                              determined the government has legal grounds to make its
          case.

                              " I have made the decision, after looking at all the


information available,
                   after going through the legal issues that are involved,
that we can file a
                   lawsuit, " Attorney General Janet Reno said today in
Washington.

                             Reno said the suit would be filed "with all deliberate
speed"           but noted
                  that the timing and exact legal claims would be worked
out by a task force
                  of civil division lawyers that is still being formed.

                             "There have been vast amounts of monies paid out as a
result of this
                  issue. And I think we've got to do everything we can
within the law to try
                  to recover that money"  for taxpayers, Reno said at her w
eekly news
                  conference.

                             Tommy Payne, senior vice president of R.J. Reynolds,
said Clinton
                             apparently wants "more money from the industry and some
political gain
                             from the industry."

                             "The federal government already makes more money per
pack on
                             cigarettes than the companies make, "   he said.   "The
federal government
                             makes 24 cents per pack, and R.J. Reynolds makes 9 or 10
cents.   I   I




                  Phil Carlton, a tobacco industry lawyer, said the
companies would fight
                  any federal suit "to the last day. ' ,

                  "If there's any federal lawsuit, if new taxes are added
by Congress, it will
                  have a terrible impact on the industry," he said.
Cigarette makers called
                  the potential federal suit "political."

                  Administration officials say the lawsuit is independent
from Clinton's push
                  to pass tobacco legislation in Congress, but they
acknowledge a pending
                  suit could put increased pressure on the industry to cut
a deal.

                             The government released few details about the upcoming
lawsuit, which is
                             meant to recover tax dollars spent treating sick smokers
in Medicare, the
                             Defense Department, Veterans Affairs, federal employee
health benefits
                             and other federal programs.

                             It's expected to be months before a suit is filed.


                  A task force within the Justice Department, yet to be
appointed, will soon
                  begin work to develop the precise legal strategy.
Officials would not say
                  where the suit might be filed or how much money it might
seek.

                  Separately, the administration will try again to
persuade Congress to give
                  the Food and Drug Administration the power to regulate
tobacco and
                  adopt other policies meant to cut youth smoking.

                  The president also has proposed an additional
55-cents-per-pack tax on
                  cigarettes.

                  It's unclear how the administration and its allies will
fare on their second
                  try in Congress.

                    Last year, there was considerably more momentum for
tobacco
                  legislation, in part because state lawsuits had not yet
been settled. But the
                  deal died.

                    Administration officials argue they have a better chance
this time because
                  the legislation is less ambitious and doesn't directly
tie tobacco penalties to
                  domestic spending.

                  Still, Republicans fiercely oppose hiking the cigarette
tax, and the industry
                  is sure to renew its fight against new regulations.

                  Carlton said the settlement with the states doesn't set
any legal precedent
                  and that "unfortunately, the polls apparently show that
suing tobacco is
                  popular. ' ,


