RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JAN-1999 11:30:17.00

SUBJECT:   Rats

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce R. Lindsey ( CN=Bruce R. Lindsey/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
DOJ Lawsuit: The Coming Federal Settlement. Search For Closure
                         Continues.



Gary Black (212) 756-4197
Jon Rooney (212) 756-4504
January 21, 1999



  "You feed one rat, and six more rats come out of the sewer." A tobacco
company
                      CEO to this analyst

HIGHLIGHTS

   1.0nce the appeals are exhausted and reality sets in, we believe the
     industry will agree to a $150 billion-$200 billion settlement with the
     federal government for smoking-related claims, where the industry
     would get credits for claims paid out on personal injuries. This plan,
     pitched for months by Dick Scruggs, would give the industry the
     closure envisioned by framers of the June 20 accord.

   2·.Unlike many of our peers, we have always believed that the Medical
      Recovery Act of 1962 (MCRA) gives the federal government the
      statutory authority to sue the industry for direct recovery of
      smoking-related injuries. Absent a settlement, however, we believe
      the Justice Department's efforts to recover funds from the tobacco
      industry will fail at trial:

             Federal government's lawsuit would have to be brought in
             federal rather than state court, which have tended to favor the
             industry.
             Unlike the states, the federal government can't claim ignorance
             about the dangers of tobacco, given federally-mandated
             warning labels since 1966, Surgeon General's reports since
             1964, and the government's own research into the dangers of
             smoking since the 1950s.
             Unlike the states, where the trade pays the excise tax, the
             industry has paid the federal government trillions in excise
             taxes since the 1880s.



   3.0ur Washington sources say that DOJ is 6 -12 months away from
     bringing its claim. DOJ's first action will be to ask Congress to pass
     legislation that clarifies the current statutory authority that
permits
     claims for third party recovery of Medicare claims without triggering
     the dollar-for-dollar offset provision found in Section 10 of the new
     AG settlement. Republicans are unlikely to object.

      4.Moreover, Republicans are likely to support DOJ's efforts to bring a
        federal recovery claim, since it eliminates the need to pass the
        $.55/pack excise tax increase proposed by Clinton, and lends
        support to new legislation being introduced by Rep. Bilirakis (R-FL)
        and Senator Hutchison (R-TX) to block the federal government from.
        taking its average 60% share of the state settlement proceeds.
        Yesterday, House Budget Committee Chair Kasich warned Clinton
        that any proposal to raise cigarette taxes was "dead on arrival."

      5.The biggest obstacle to a new settlement with the federal government
        that gives the industry credits for personal injury claims is again
the
        renegade issue. The AG settlement gave the renegades a $.45/pack
        cost advantage vs. the majors. A $150-$200 billion settlement with
        the federal government would give the renegades an additional
        $.35-$.40/pack cost advantage. Brooke Group's LeBow has been
        cooperating with DOJ on its criminal investigation for two years, and
        is likely to be excluded from a civil action.

      6.We believe RJR management would cite the threat of a federal
        recovery action as a reason to hold off on the Nabisco spinoff. We
        believe an Icahn-led slate would push for the spinoff despite the
        likely legal challenges. We find no evidence in the history of
        corporate America of any company that is both solvent and without
        judgments being blocked from spinning off assets. Last week, The
        Treasury announced it is considering doing away with some of the
        tax-free aspects of corporate spinoffs in its F2000 budget.

INVESTMENT CONCLUSIONS

We rate Philip Morris, RJR, and UST outperform. We expect tobacco
stocks to remain weak near-term, although we expect a bounce following
yesterday's overreaction. Our continued near-term caution is based on the
uncertainty associated with four separate trials underway during February
(Henley in California; Engle Phase I in Florida; Newcombe/Karney in
Memphis; Ohio Iron Workers in Ohio). We see a possible silver lining in
the DOJ announcement, since it may alter the conventional wisdom by
many in the industry who thought the AG settlement would, by itself, lead
to
multiple expansion, and hence, higher valuations. Our view remains that in
the absence of spinoffs and other restructuring actions, settling simply
invites
more lawsuits -- which seems to be happening.

ADDITIONAL DETAILS

      1.Federal government's authority to bring a claim does not
        guarantee success .. Unlike many of our peers, we believe that the
        Medical Cost Recovery Act of 1962 (42 USC 5 2651), or MCRA,
        provides the federal government with the right to pursue either a
        direct or a subrogated action against the tobacco industry for medical


     expenses incurred by the federal government for smoking related
     illnesses. As with the stateD,s Medicaid suits, if the state has a
direct
     or independent cause of action, the industry could not use the
     defenses of contributory negligence or assumption of risk by
     individual smokers. The industry, could however, argue that the
     federal government itself was contributorily negligent based on the
     government's own awareness of the dangers of tobacco.

      The relevant part of the MCRA statute reads:

          (a) ... In any case in which the United States is
          authorized or required by law to furnish hospital,
          medical, surgical, or dental care and treatment to a
          person who is injured or suffers a disease, ... under
          circumstances creating a tort liability upon some third
          person, ... the United States shall have a right to recover
          from said third person the reasonable value of the care
          and treatment ... and shall, as to this right, be subrogated
          to any right or claim that the injured or diseased person
          ... has against such third person to the extent of the
          reasonable value of the care and treatment ...

           (b) The United States may, to enforce such right, (1)
           intervene or join in any action ... brought by the injured
           or diseased person ... against the third person who is
           liable for the injury or disease; or (2) if such action ... is
           not commenced within six months after the first day in
           which care and treatment is furnished by the United
           States in connection with the injury or disease involved,
           institute and prosecute legal proceedings against the
           third person who is liable for the injury or disease, in a
           State or Federal court, either alone ... or in conjunction
           with the injured or diseased person ... .

      This statute provides three ways for the government to recover the
      costs of medical and hospital care: (1) by subrogation; (2) by
      intervening or joining in any action brought by the injured person;
and
      (3) by instituting such action itself or in conjunction with the
injured or
     diseased person.1 Title 42 USC 6 2651 creates an independent
     federal cause of action, and certain defenses are therefore not
     available.2 If the federal government pursues an independent right of
     action under 6 2651, then federal law applies. The United States can
     pursue an independent cause of action even if the injured person has
     already filed his own action.3

     Our conclusion that the federal government has the authority to bring
     an independent action against the industry does not suggest that we
     believe the industry would lose such a claim at trial. Instead, we
     believe that the federal judge who gets the case is unlikely to
dismiss
     the government's claim outright, and would not rule for the industry
     on motion for summary judgment. Unlike the state suits, the federal
     government cannot claim that was not aware of the dangers of
     smoking, or was "duped" by the industry in paying for injuries caused
     by smoking. Unlike the states, there is a voluminous· paper trail that
     the federal government has long been aware of the dangers of
     smoking (federal government put warning labels on packs in 1966,
,.,
        U.S. Surgeon Generals reports warning of dangers of smoking since
        1964; government's own research into the dangers of smoking dates
        back to the 1950s) .

    2.The search for closure. Dick Scruggs' invisible hand. As we
       have written about before, last Fall, plaintiff counsel Dick Scruggs
       tried to convince players on both sides to consider using a lawsuit by
       the federal government as a settlement vehicle that would give the
       industry resolution of the AG claims, and resolution of the personal
       injury claims as well. Scruggs' plan was to have the federal
       government bring a direct action for recovery of federal moneys paid
       under Medicare, Veterans, CHAMPUS, and other federal
       programs. DOJ and the industry would then enter into a consent
       decree whereby the industry would agree to drop its challenge to
       FDA jurisdiction, and agree to pay to the federal government some
       $368 billion over 25 years, including some $200 billion to resolve the
       state AG claims. The federal government would have taken the
       remaining $170 billion, but gave the industry offsets for personal
       injury judgments and settlements, and any other litigation judgments
        (international claims, labor union claims, etc.) paid out by the
       industry. In essence, the government would be acting as insurer for
       the industry's litigation exposure. The industry would agree to a
 fixed
       payment stream to the government, and the government would incur
       the risk that claims paid out did not exceed the fixed premiums (if
       payouts exceeded the fixed premiums in any given year, the excess
       would be carried over to the following year). The main virtue of this
       settlement was that no action by Congress was needed, given DOJ's
       clear authority to enter into a consent decree with any industry. with
       both federal and state courts ruling that class actions are
       inappropriate in tobacco cases, and with the industry's largely
 perfect
       record in individual cases, expected offsets to the governments
       payment stream would likely have been minimal. Moving forward to
       the present, a new settlement with the federal government, where the
       industry receives offsets for personal injury judgments and some
       portion of settlements, would, combined with the just-completed AG
       settlement, get the industry very close to the litigation certainty
       provided by the failed June 20 accord.

        Mary Aronson, of Aronson Washington Research, contributed to
        this report.



        1. Palmer v. Sterling Drugs, Inc., 343 F.Supp. 692 (E.D. Pa. '1972).
        2. United States v. Housing Authority of Bremerton, 415 F.2d 239 (9th
 Cir.
      1969); United States v. Greene, 266 F. Supp. 96 (N.D. Ill. 1967);
 Government
      Employees Ins. Co. v. Bates, 414 F.Supp. 658 (E.D. Ark. 1975).
      3. United States v. York, 398 F.2d 582 (6th Cir. 1968).


