      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JAN-1999 18:35:34.00

      SUBJECT:   another item for the weekly

      TO: Elena Kagan     C~=Elena   Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      Below is a revised version of the Ed-Flex item I did earlier today.  My
      e-mail isn't working properly, so I could send this only by attaching i t '
      to an earlier message:


      Education -- Ed-Flex: Chairmen Jeffords and Goodling, with strong support
      from the Speaker, the Senate Majority Leader and NGA, are planning to mark
      up Ed-Flex legislation (which would extend the authority to waive many
      federal education requirements to all 50 states, in exchange for a system
      of standards, school report cards, and state intervention in low
      performing schools). as early as next week, with the intention of moving
      it on a fast track, separate from the ESEA reauthorization.   In the
      Senate, Democrats may opposing any legislative activity next week.   If
      this bill is marked up next week, Sen. Kennedy and other Democrats are
      planning to offer our class size reduction proposal and other Democratic
      initiatives as amendments, though they will ultimately support Ed-Flex in c
      ommittee if an acceptable version is offered.   In the House, Goodling
      has indicated a desire to work with us to fashion a bipartisan bill.
      However, Mr. Clay and most other Democrats show litte enthusiasm for any
      version of Ed-Flex, and we think the odds of bipartisan action are slim.
      While we would prefer to take up any Ed-Flex proposal in the context of
      ESEA, we believe our support for this proposal last year will make it
      difficult for us to oppose speedy action on it now.   As we consult with
      Kennedy, Clay and other key members, our overall strategy will be to    (1)
      emphasize our support for the principles of more accountability and more
      flexibility (2) stress our preference to take Ed-Flex up as part of ESEA
      reauthorization, though we will not oppose an acceptable Ed-Flex bill that
      moves independent of ESEA (3) insist that any Ed-Flex provision that moves
      in advance of ESEA be revisited during the reauthorization process, and be
      drafted so as to not permit states to waive the new accountability
      provisions announced in your State of the Union address.




      ---------------------- Forwarded by Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP on 01/22/99
      06:33 PM ---------------------------




      Michael Cohen
      01/22/99 02:11:12 PM
      Record Type:    Record
'.   "



         To:      Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP
         cc:
         Subject:         another item for the weekly

         as Elena requested:

         Education -- Reaction to your accountability proposals.  Overall initial
         reaction to your education proposals has generally been positive within
         the education community and in the press.  The education community is
         supportive of your proposals, understands clearly the need to meet the
         challenges of raising standards, turning around failing schools, ending
         social promotions and the use of unqualified teachers.  At the same time,
         many are worried about their capacity to meet these challenges, and will
         be looking to the AdministrationD,s budget and ESEA reauthorization
         proposals for financial, programmatic and technical support to carry out
         the needed reforms.  Your proposals have also generated considerable press
         attention, with several stories this week in the New York Times,
         Washington Post, and USA Today. These stories have focused on the content
         of your proposals -- particularly on the proD,s and conD,s of ending
         social promotion -- and on the threat that states and school systems could
         lose funding if they fail to implement them. There have been a number of
         favorable editorials, including one by Diane Ravitch in the wall Street
         Journal, NYU education professor John Zimmerman in the New York Times, and
         Timothy Noah in Slate magazine.   Criticisms of your proposal have come
         from David Broder, who charges that your proposals merely replicate and
         add a layer of federal bureaucracy to what the states are already doing,
         and Lamar Alexander, Checker Finn are quoted in a number of stories
         criticizing your proposal as a federal takeover of state and local
         education systems.


