RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU;OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-JAN-1999 12:07:11.00

SUBJECT:   comments on education section of Edley's book

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN;Cathy R. Mays/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I reviewed the education chapter and introduction again over the weekend,
and have a number of comments. Please note, I did not have a chance to do
any fact checking -- I presume the number Chris uses are right and have
been double checked by him and others.

1. The fundamental concern with this chapter has been addressed already,
in our memo to POTUS. The Compact for Equal Opportunity in Education is
clearly at odds with the President's State of the Union proposals and the
direction that ESEA reauthorization is taking, so I can't imagine that
piece staying in here as is.  If it is removed or substantially changed to
reflect what POTUS has already proposed, the structure (but not
necessarily the content) of much of the rest of the workplan would also
need to be altered, since some of the issues in the workplan--quality
teachers, social promotion, accountability for all--are addressed in the
SOTU proposals. However, I'm not clear what the process is for resolving
this conflict, so rather than relitigating now, I'll offer other comments
designed to strengthen the rest of the chapter.

2. A couple of editorial comments:
p.1 of the education section:  I don't remember if in 1957 there was such
a thing as "breaking news" television coverage. Someone should check
before POTUS declares he remembers it.
p.6:  sentence describing our class size reduction effort should end with
the point that reducing class size will " ... have positve effects on
student achievement particularly for minority youngsters."
p. 8: The sentence "On the other hand, I have seen that Federal education
programs are often too confining, with their red tape and narrow
categorical programs." is a problem (beyond the fact that it is contained
in the disputed section on the "Compact". First, in the beginning of the
Administration, we made a major and successful effort to reduce
regulations and red tape in el/sec programs (e.g., we cut regs in ESEA
programs by 2/3).  This sentance doesn't reflect our own success.    Second,
since then, we have added several of our own programs with "narrow
categorical purposes" including Class Size reduction and the America Reads
initiative, which are as categorical as anything we found when we came
into office.  I would simply drop this point.


3.  In the section highlighting aspects of the nation's workplan - the
education issues that must be addressed -- Chris pays inconsistent
attention to the extent to which our own initiatives help the nation
address the challenges in question. While I know this section is not


intended to be a compendium of federal education programs, it does seem
important to highlight Presidential initiatives that support the nation's
work. To that end, I offer the following suggestions (a number of these
highlight NEC initiatives, so I assume they will respond similarly) :
Support familiies and promote early learning opportunities.   the
discussion here should mention that our America Reads initiative includes
a significant effort -- through outreach, work with community based
organizations, development of materials, etc. as well as budget proposals
-- to encourge parents to read to their kids and to become literate
themselves.
Teaching -- This section should at least mention the initiatives POTUS
highlighted last week -- scholarships to recruit people to teaching in
high poverty communities, Troops to teachers and the Native american
teacher recruitment initiative.
Buildings -- Should underscore our battle over the past 2 years to enact
federal legislation to support school modernization.
Technology -- In addition to the e-rate, there should be some mention of
our nearly $2 billion technology Literacy Challenge Fund, to help get
computers and trained teachers in the classroom.
English Language Acquisition.I think there should be some indication that
POTUS believes that if local communities should strive to help kids become
proficient in English in 3 years.
Safety -- There should be some mention of our school safety initiatives,
with a particular emphasis on zero - tolerance for guns in schools,   other
efforts to keep guns away from kids, and after-school programs designed to
keep kids safe.

Overall, I think this section is otherwise quite good.

4.   I think this section could hit harder on state and local
responsibility to provide kids with an equal education opportunity.
Chris walks up to this on p.5, when he briefly discusses the impact of
financing schools from the local property tax base.  While I would not
favor an extended Presidential assualt on current school finance
mechanisms and local governance arrangements, I think a more forceful
discussion from the former Governor of Arkansas would be appropriate, on
how states must step up to their constitutional responsiblitiies to
provide equal education opportunity -- even though it can be tough
politically and may require some states to take a new look at how
education is financed.  POTUS could argue that as states step up to the
plate here, they should couple their efforts with strong accountability
for results.


