     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

     CREATION DATE/TIME:25-JAN-1999 09:59:07.00

     SUBJECT:   NC9206: Head of S.F. school board is lesbian

     TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     FYI
     ---------------------- Forwarded by Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP on 01/25/99
     09:58 AM - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


     Richard Socarides     01/25/99 09:51:07 AM

     Record Type:      Record

     To:      Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP
     cc:
     Subject:         NC9206: Head of S.F. school board is lesbian


     ---------------------- Forwarded by Richard Socarides/WHO/EOP on 01/25/99
     09:52 AM ---------------------------



             rwockner @ netcom.com
             01/25/99 04:01:00 AM
     Record Type: Record

     TO: Stuart D. Rosenstein, Richard Socarides
     cc:
     Subject: NC9206: Head of S.F. school board is lesbian
     AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA


     This item is copyrighted. Do not print it without permission from the
     originating media operation. Do not post this item in a public online
     forum. Items on this mailing list that are not copyrighted will not
     contain this message. This free mailing list is open only to my friends.
     It has 210 recipients.
     AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA




     SAN FRANCISCO EXAMINER, January 24, 1999
     (http://www.examiner.com )

     Owens is 1st openly lesbian school board chief in state
     Julian Guthrie, OF THE EXAMINER STAFF

     Juanita Owens once fled The City's schools in despair over harassment;
     now, she's back to change things
         There is one painful reason that Juanita Owens, San Francisco's new
     school board president, never finished high school.


    Openly gay at 17, she was so harassed and intimidated by classmates
that dropping out of Galileo High was more appealing than staying in
school.
    Thirty-five years later, Owens has become the first openly lesbian
school board president in California, elected this month to head the San
Francisco Board of Education. At 52, she holds two master's degrees and a
doctorate. Now, finally, she feels she is in a position to make a
difference for gay youth.
          "I didn't get the support I needed in the K-12 system," Owens said
over lunch. "That's why I'm happy to be a role model for young gays and
lesbians."
    Describing herself as an educator who wants to improve schools for all
children, "whatever their race and sexual orientation," Owens feels an
urgency to make sure teachers and students treat gay youth with respect.
     "There are not enough gay role models in leadership positions," Owens
said. "One thing we must do is talk in school about all of the significant
contributions gays and lesbians have made throughout history."
    Owens wants the district's required reading lists, for example, to
identify authors by ethnicity -- and sexual orientation.
     "We have a reading list for our students," Owens said. "I want the
authors who are gay and lesbian to be identified as gay and lesbian. Next
to James Baldwin's name should be the words "black' and "gay. '."
    When the San Francisco school board found itself at the vortex of a
national controversy last March over a proposal to make the "too white"
high school English curriculum more multicultural, Owens entered the fray
by calling for more books by gay authors.
     "If we're going to establish a list and talk about diversity, we need
to have it reflective of all students," Owens said. "And if you leave out
gay and lesbian students, you leave out a significant portion of our
student population."
    The first openly gay elected school board president in San Francisco
was Tom Ammiano, in 1990. Angie Fa served as The City's first openly
lesbian school board member, in 1992.
     'A great counterpoint'
    '''1 think having an openly lesbian school board president is very
important because it's a great counterpoint to the right-wing attacks on
homosexuality in our schools," said Ammiano, who now serves as president
of the Board of Supervisors. "Fighting for inclusion is an uphill battle.
Juanita is carrying that torch."
    Owens, whose mother was second-generation Portuguese and father was
Irish and American Indian and from Tennessee, describes herself proudly as
a "lesbian of color."
     Born in Sacramento, Owens lived there until her parents divorced when
she was 4. She then lived on and off with her mother in San Francisco and
grandmother in Sacramento. She has no memories of her father.
    While in San Francisco, Owens attended Jean Parker Elementary,
Francisco Middle School and Galileo High.
     "School was difficult'
     "For me, school was difficult because I was a lesbian," she said
haltingly, fidgeting in her seat. "We're talking about the 1960s. I was
threatened. It was hostile. I had to take different routes home. It was
very hard to be gay."
    Her mother discovered she was gay in an age-old tradition that
transcends sexual orientation: She walked in on her with her girlfriend.
     "My mother didn't accept it at first, but she did later on," Owens
said. "I was 15 when I actually knew. It's something that kind of evolved.
It wasn't like there was one moment, where I said, "Aha! I'm a lesbian.'."
   After leaving high school in her senior year, she attended City College
before transferring to S.F. State. She then enrolled at the University of
San Francisco, earning her bachelor's degree in sociology, her master's


and doctorate in education, and another master's in counseling and
psychology.
    She has worked as a student counselor at City College and various
community colleges since the early 1980s. She was recently named dean of
counseling at City College.
    With dark circles under her eyes attesting to long hours at work,
Owens has a spirited smile that lights up her face.
    She has reason to smile. Besides the steady gains in her professional
life, she is happy with her private life. She has been in a 4-year
relationship with Rosalinda del Moral, 51, an elected member of the
Democratic Central Committee who once taught kindergarten at John Muir.
    Looking ahead
    Owens is looking ahead; her political ambitions clearly extend beyond
the school board presidency.
    Asked whether she hopes to run for a seat on the Board of Supervisors,
Owens demurred, saying, "At this point, my interest is on being president
of the Board of Education."
    When pressed, she allowed, "It is something I'm interested in
exploring in the future."
    One of the first things Owens plans to do as school board president is
work to increase public participation in board meetings and district
decisions.
    The Board of Education has been criticized for making critical
decisions without sufficient community input. It has also been accused of
being a rubber stamp to the powerful schools Superintendent Bil.l Rojas.
Owens replaces as president Carlota del Portillo, who was a Rojas defender
and lost her bid for re-election in November.
    The seven members of the Board of Education have wide-ranging power,
determining everything from graduation requirements to how much funding
goes to arts education. Board members oversee the state's fifth largest
public school district, with 65,000 students and a $540 million annual
budget'.
    Despite all this, board meetings, held every other Tuesday evening at
Everett Middle School, draw few parents.
    To increase participation, Owens wants to hold a monthly open house
modeled after Mayor Brown's popular Saturday morning gabfests. The public
would be invited to speak with board members about school issues, Owens
said.
    School board road show
    Owens also plans on moving school board meetings around The City,
hosting four meetings in four different neighborhoods, beginning in March
or April.
    All of this is welcome news to members of Coleman Advocates for
Children and Youth, who have long called for more open dialogue between
the school district and the community.
     "people don't really understand the importance of the Board of
Education, that it is the body that makes the policy decisions for the
school district," said Marybeth Wallace, a parent liaison with Coleman.
     "I have to say," Wallace added, "I have a more positive attitude now
that Juanita is president. She has made herself accessible. Right there is
a change."
    Owens, for her part, says she's always done the nontraditional and, to
a certain extent, the unexpected.
     "In spite of all the obstacles I faced, of being a person of color,
being a lesbian, coming from a working class family," she said, "I've
managed to earn four degrees and -- I hope -- become a role model."




;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
RFC-822-headers:
Received: from conversion.pmdf.eop.gov by PMDF.EOP.GOV (PMDF V5.1-9 #29131)
 id <01J6XZYZTRXS006IUW@PMDF.EOP.GOV>; Mon, 25 Jan 1999 04:02:33 EST
Received: from storm.eop.gov by PMDF.EOP.GOV (PMDF V5.1-9 #29131)
 with ESMTP id <01J6XZYWJ368005ESB@PMDF.EOP.GOV>; Mon,
 25 Jan 1999 04:02:29 -0500 (EST)
Received: from netcom15.netcom.com ([192.100.81.128])
 by EOP.GOV (PMDF V5.2-29 #34437) with ESMTP id <01J6XZY84SBUOOOFMR@EOP.GOV>;
 Man, 25 Jan 1999 04:01:56 -0500 (EST)
Received: (from rwockner@localhost)
 by netcom15.netcom.com (8.8.5-r-beta/8.8.5/(NETCOM V1.02)) id BAA01839; Man,
 25 Jan 1999 01:01:22 -0800 (PST)
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; END ATTACHMENT     1 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;


