RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-JAN-1999 16:06:44.00

SUBJECT:   slight revision

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
In the last section, the heading should be to keep message on
accountability and opportunity.


ESEA Reauthorization Strategy

1.      Complete work on bill in time for March 15 transmittal
  continue to complete major policy decisions -- particularly with respect
to teacher quality/program consolidation
 implement joint OMB/DPC/ED expedited review/approval of proposal
legilsative language

2.      Continue Consultations with Hill Democrats
 Riley/ED has taken lead on overall consultations with Committee
Democrats, especially Kennedy and Clay.  This should continue, with more
WH participation on priority policy issues, as we move forward.   Staff
level discussions should now occur weekly.
 Riley will testify next week before Senate committee.
 Help DemO,s see how our approach to accountability and other program
proposals strengthen our hand in coming battles over block grants and
choice.  This is essential to keeping DemO,s on board with our approach.
 WH/ED need to reach out beyond committee Dems, to build stronger support
in Caucus for SOTU accountability proposals in particular

3.      Intensify Work with education, civil rights and business groups
 Now that initial rounds of consultation on overall approach to
reauthorization have concluded, begin working with education, business and
civil rights groups on design of key accountability and programmatic
proposals. We need reasonable level of support from education and civil
rights groups to keep DemO,s on our side. Business groups and local school
board critical to making it difficult for Republicans to gain ground by
attacking our proposal as a federal power grab.
 As consultations proceed, we need to line up endorsements from key groups
and from individual eduation, business and civil rights leaders.

4.      Keep Message focused on Accountability/Responsibility and
Opportunity
 We need events for POTUS to put accountability proposals in proper light
-- as helping rather than punishing disadvantaged students, and as leading
and supporting state and local accountability efforts, rather than
usurping them.
 POTUS needs to balance events with an accountability message with events
that play up opportunity -- class size reduction, school modernization,
teacher excellence, in order to keep education groups and hill DemO,s in.
our camp.


