RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-JAN-1999 16:51:08.00

SUBJECT:   From this week's Legal Times

TO: Cynthia A. Rice   ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
                  President Bill Clinton's announcement that the
                  Justice Department was going to file suit against
                  the big tobacco companies may have taken the
                  public -- and the industry -- by surprise. But it was
                  not news at Justice, where officials have been
                  quietly plotting strategy for a fresh federal assault
                  on tobacco for months.

                  The DOJ task force that will determine how and
                  when to proceed is not fully formed, and few details
                  about the mission have leaked.

                  But department officials have been quietly outlining
                  the government's legal strategy against the
                  industry -- and the plans won't make the job of
                  tobacco industry lawyers any easier.

                  Two Justice officials confirm that the department is
                  weighing whether to pursue punitive damages
                  against the industry alongside compensatory
                  claims -- a move that would be designed to punish
                  the tobacco industry with steep additional
                  monetary payouts. The companies have already
                  agreed to pay a total of $246 billion as part of
                  major settlement agreements with all 50 states;
                  federal claims could exceed that.

                  Moreover, according to the two Justice officials,
                  who ask not to be named, the department is
                  considering a plan to sign on to suits filed by
                  individuals in several different jurisdictions
                  simultaneously, thus enabling Justice to wage war
                  against tobacco with distinct claims and in front of
                  a number of different federal judges.

                  This move would immunize the department from
                  being shut out by the unfavorable rulings of a single
                  judge or jury. The DOJ is also weighing the
                  possibility of filing one massive suit against the
                  tobacco companies, which would leave the
                  department vulnerable to that problem.

                  Officials have not ruled out reaching some form of
                  settlement with the industry, or asking Congress
                  for new legislation aimed at tobacco. Still, litigation


                appears the likely course.

                "There is an unprecedented liability that we believe
                is owed to the u.s. Treasury," claims DOJ
                spokeswoman Chris Watney. "We've reviewed the
                facts and the law, and we're determined that there
                are appropriate grounds to recover from the
                tobacco industry."

                Department officials are saying publicly that they
                will not demand that the government be reimbursed
                for Medicaid expenditures for smoking-related
                illnesses -- the claim that alISO states settled on
                with the industry.

                Rather, these officials say the tobacco industry's
                conduct may have fallen afoul of several different
                statutes pertaining to government-provided health
                care.

                Specifically, they tout two federal statutes as the
                most likely basis for claims -- the Medical Care
                Recovery Act, which allows recovery from those
                who commit a wrongful act that causes the federal
                government to pay health care benefits, and the
                Medicare Secondary Payer Act, which in some
                circumstances allows the United States to recover
                for injury done to Medicare recipients.

                And, as Attorney General Janet Reno suggested
                last week during her weekly press briefing, the
                department might utilize statutes that provide relief
                for military personnel and Native Americans.

                But while the statutory mechanisms the
                government may use to pursue Big Tobacco have
                been discussed, additional details are now coming
                to light:

                    The task force, which officials say will have
                    about 20 lawyers, is being pulled together
                    by Frank Hunger, assistant attorney general
                    for the Civil Division, and three of his
                    deputies -- Philip Bartz, Donald Remy, and
                    William Schultz, who are in charge of the
                    division's federal programs branch, torts
                    branch, and appellate staff, respectively. It
                    is not yet clear who will run the task force.

                    The group will be composed mainly, but not
                    exclusively, of lawyers from the DOJ's Civil,
                    Criminal, and Antitrust divisions. Attorneys
                    from the Department of Health and Human
                    Services and the Food and Drug
                    Administration may also be part of the
                    group, these sources say.

                    While Justice officials are reluctant to
                    speculate about their timetable, one says
                    the task force could finish its work within


                     three to nine months.

                Justice officials say they have been debating for
                four years about whether to sue tobacco
                companies. Their decision to move forward was
                made easier when Congress last year killed
                comprehensive legislation that would have ·forced
                tobacco companies to settle with the feds.

                "There's always been a healthy debate as to how,
                when, where, or whether we should proceed," says
                one Justice official, who adds that internal
                deliberations picked up considerable speed in the
                last several months.

                In December, Reno made the decision, and last
                week, in his State of the Union address, President
                Clinton announced the plan, bolstering the hopes
                of anti-tobacco activists -- and walloping an already
                defensive tobacco industry.

                "Clearly, politics is driving this apparent federal
                lawsuit," says tobacco industry spokesman Steve
                Duchesne, a director at the public relations firm
                BSMG Worldwide. "What you're seeing is another
                frivolous attempt to extract money from these
                companies."

                Matthew Myers, general counsel to the D.C.-based
                Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, says industry
                claims of politicization are flat wrong. "I don't think
                there's any question that the Justice Department
                made a legal decision and not a political one," he
                says. "What's at stake here is the industry playing
                Russian roulette with their finances."

                Bartz referred a call to Watney. Remy, Schultz,
                and Hunger, who is leaving the department at the
                end of the month, decline comment.

                MUSICAL CHAIRS
                The churning continues in the office of Deputy
                Attorney General Eric Holder Jr.

                Holder announced Jan. 22 that Gary Grindler, who
                has been counselor to the attorney general, will
                take over as Holder's new principal associate
                deputy -- a vacancy created by the announcement
                last week that Robert Litt will be stepping down.
                Litt leaves at the end of January; Grindler takes
                over Feb. 1.

                The post is a crucial one; the principal associate
                deputy is often a key adviser to both the deputy
                and the attorney general. And the person in that
                job plays a critical role in helping to manage the
                department -- which has not been Holder's strong
                suit, according to some department critics.

                Grindler is a former assistant U.S. attorney who


                served in both the Southern District of New York
                and the Northern District of Georgia. He also did a
                three-year stint in Main Justice's civil Division, and
                worked at Atlanta's Powell, Goldstein, Frazer &
                Murphy.

                Meanwhile, Associate Deputy Attorney General
                DeMaurice Smith recently left Holder's office to
                return to the office of the u.S. attorney for the
                District of Columbia, according to a source familiar
                with the department. Smith, who handled oversight
                of the u.S. Parole Commission and the Bureau of
                Prisons, among other agencies, while in Holder's
                shop, is a special counsel, helping to steer the
                u.S. attorney's community prosecution unit.

                Eileen Mayer, another associate deputy AG, will
                be leaving Holder's office soon, these sources say.
                Mayer, who worked with Holder when he was u.S.
                attorney for the District of Columbia, will be joining
                the Treasury Department's Financial Crime
                Enforcement Network.

                Finally, Jonathan Schwartz, an associate deputy
                who has been handling drug policy work, among
                other duties, will be leaving his post temporarily to
                teach at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy
                School of Government.

                Officials in Holder's office stress that the moves do
                not represent a mass exodus; taken individually,
                each of the changes is easily explainable, they
                say, and on the whole the office is functioning
                smoothly.

                One DOJ official, however, welcomes the
                opportunity for a realignment of Holder's
                management team.

                A few of the changes, says the official, are
                designed "to build on the strengths of the office"
                and at the same time to "shore up what are
                perceived to be some management difficulties
                there."

                MORE HANDS ON BOARD
                Overwhelmed with merger reviews, the Justice
                Department's Antitrust Division plans to ask
                Congress for a 10 percent to 20 percent increase
                in staff, including 70 or 80 more lawyers.

                "We are clearly stretched," says division chief Joel
                Klein. "We do need a significant increase in our
                staff."

                Word at the department is that officials were
                thwarted in their efforts last year to boost antitrust
                staffing beyond the president's recommendation by
                Republican Sen. Slade Gorton, according to two
                sources. Gorton happens to represent


                Washington, home state of the Microsoft Corp. --
                which is in the midst of a high-profile, hard-fought
                battle with Klein and the Antitrust Division here in
                u.s. District Court.
                But Gorton's office denied playing any role in
                cutting the division's budget last year. "We weren't
                quite sure where that rumor came from," a
                spokeswoman said.

                In seeking additional funding, the division does
                have some compelling evidence to marshal.

                The number of mergers requiring antitrust review
                under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act has tripled since
                1991. The Antitrust Division and the Federal Trade
                Commission handled a record 4,728 merger filings
                in the year ending Sept. 30, 1998, a 28 percent
                increase over the year before.

                Klein says he will seek to add 100 to 150 new
                positions to the 850 now allotted the division. The
                division currently has about 350 lawyers.

                "In the meantime, we are focusing all our energies
                on the important mergers, and we certainly will not
                neglect important matters," Klein says.

                One of the most important matters is Microsoft.
                Klein frequently attends the trial, and has a sizable
                contingent of lawyers tied up on the case. Nearly
                half of the lawyers in the division's Western
                regional office in San Francisco -- nine out of 20
                attorneys -- are in Washington working full time on
                the case.

                The division also is looking at America Online
                Inc. 's planned purchase of the Netscape
                Communications Corp., and it recently asked
                those companies for more information about their
                respective businesses. Microsoft is pointing to the
                AOL-Netscape deal as proof that there is
                competition in the browser market and thus no
                basis for the government's antitrust allegations
                against it.

                The FTC, meanwhile, is reviewing the $80 billion
                merger of the Exxon Corp. and the Mobil Corp.
                FTC Chairman Robert Pitofsky says he has
                enough staff for now, but would have to seek an
                increase if the merger pace continues to rise at the
                current rate.

                Claudia MacLachlan contributed to this article. She
                is a free-lance writer covering the Microsoft trial for
                American Lawyer Media Inc.

---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 01/25/99
04:41 PM ---------------------------
.'




     Cynthia A. Rice
     01/22/99 06:19:26 PM
     Record Type:    Record

     To:      BRUCE N. (Pager) #REED, Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
     cc:      4697 @ WHCA
     Subject:         .Chafee staffer is Amy Dunathan. CR


