 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Ron Klain ( CN=Ron Klain/O;OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:26-JAN-1999 13:22:35.00

 SUBJECT:   Welfare Debate, Redux

 TO: Elena Kagan
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 In the immortal words of one of our previous Democratic Presidential
 nominess, "This isn't just my
 fight, it's your fight, too:"




 Bradley warming up for big game
 By RON FOURNIER;
 AP political Writer;
     CONCORD, N.H. (AP)   Democrat Bill Bradley offered a glimpse of
 his battle plan against Vice President Al Gore by charging today
 that the 1996 welfare reform signed by President Clinton "cut the
 bond between the mother and the child.·' ,
     " I think we clearly have a difference on welfare, " Bradley
 said when pressed during a morning radio interview to distinguish
 himself from Gore, the presumed front-runner for the Democratic
 presidential nomination in 2000.
     The law that Clinton signed in 1996 over objections from
 liberals transformed welfare from a federal entitlement to a block
 grant that enabled states to craft their own plans to help the
 needy.
     " I thought there was a federal obligation to individual
 children who are poor, " Bradley said, "not simply an obligation
 to take a pot of money and send it from one group of politicians to
 another group of politicians in a state.' ,
     Gore is not responding to Bradley's remarks, but spokesman Chris
 Lehane said: "Yesterday, President Clinton announced that
 America's welfare rolls were at their lowest in 30 years. Under the
 leadership of the Clinton-Gore administration, millions of
 Americans, including many in New Hampshire, have moved from welfare
 to work. Vice President Gore believes that this is the best help we
 can give to children, mothers and families.' ,
     Making his first campaign swing through New Hampshire, site of
 the nation's first presidential primary, the former New Jersey
 senator and Hall of Fame basketball player is trying to answer the
 most critical question of his Democratic presidential campaign: Why
 should primary voters side with him, not the vice president?
     "Because they think I would be a better president and would
 have a better chance of winning, " Bradley said at a Monday news
 conference in Manchester, N.H., to open the three-day. trip.
     But Gore has the power of the White House behind him; he jets
 across the country aboard Air Force Two and enjoys the support of a
 popular president. In New Hampshire, he stuffed mail boxes full of
 Christmas cards and White House invitations, and raised thousands


of dollars for Democrats who now owe him big.
    So why does Bradley think he would have a better chance than
Gore of winning the presidency?
    --I think in part because I'd be better able to attract
independents and Republicans in a general election,"   he said.
Bradley says he proved during 18 years in the Senate that he can
draw votes from both parties.
    Gore might argue that he also can court GOP and independent
voters, having served a president who forged the party's centrist
--third way."
    No matter; Bradley has other rationale for his candidacy.
    --I have not been a part of the partisanship that has shaped the
debate the last couple of years, " Bradley said. Without saying so,
Bradley was clearly trying to cast himself as the anti-Washington
Democrat in a race against the son of a Tennessee senator who has
never wandered too long from Washington.
    He and Gore have --different personal histories, " the former
senator said.
    Bradley was raised in a small Missouri town, earned a Rhodes
Scholarship, played in the National Basketball Association for 10
years, served a diverse state in the Senate and left to lecture and
teach.
    --I've been on the road 30 years in America as senator, a
basketball player and writer, a lecturer and a businessman. I had a
life before I got into politics and a life after I left the
Senate, " he said.
    It all seemed designed to make Gore pale in comparison, but
Bradley denied any such motive.
    --I'm not really running against Al Gore, I'm running because of
what I want to do ... for the country,"  he said.
    Bradley says he wants to restore integrity to public office,
--bring out the best in people, " help troubled children and ease
economic woes of working families in what he calls this --age of
insecuri ty. ' ,
    He has to win first. And most Democratic operatives say his is a
long-shot bid.
    --This is something Bradley should have done six years ago, ' ,
said consultant Harold Hodes of New Jersey, a longtime Bradley
backer now in Gore's camp.
    Still, the vice president has not locked anything up. Bradley
senses an undercurrent of insecurity among voters and a general
disgust with anything or anybody related to Washington.
    --A lot of people see (Bradley) as a good way to change, to
clean the slate, " said Jim Gilmour, a Democratic voter interviewed
over a bagel in nearby Keene, N.H.
    Another Democratic voter, Frank Shlauter of Keene, said
Bradley's chances --will depend on how much heat Gore takes."
    Bradley plans to turn up the heat, especially if no other
Democrat enters the race.
    During a brief shoot-around with New Hampshire youths Monday,
the old pro bent his knees and flicked his Hall of Fame wrist to
send a basketball arcing toward the hoop. He missed his first few
shots, watching the ball spin off the rim, before finding his
range.
    The ball ripped through the net with a whisper.
    Swish!
    Swish! Swish!
    --It takes a while to warm up, " Bradley said afterward, a
warning to competitors in basketball and politics alike.
    ,

"
