RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-JAN-1999 13:39:18.00

SUBJECT:   first cut at mayors draft

TO: Thurgood Marshall Jr ( CN=Thurgood Marshall Jr/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paul E. Begala ( CN=Paul E. Begala/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Deich ( CN=Michael Deich/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Mickey Ibarra ( CN=Mickey Ibarra/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sarah Rosen ( CN=Sarah Rosen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Minyon Moore ( CN=Minyon Moore/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Linda Ricci ( CN=Linda Ricci/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Doug Sosnik thinks the President will want to look at this in his car
after the event -- so an early version will be faxed to him in about 20
minutes.  Please get me changes asap.  MW

Draft 1/28/99 1pm
Waldman

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS TO THE U.S. CONFERENCE OF MAYORS
THE EAST ROOM
January 29, 1999

        Acknowledgments: Mayor Corradini -- Thank you for your leadership on the
Census. While the Supreme Court struck down the use of O+samplingO, for
congressional apportionment, it reaffirmed our use of these scientific


methods for other purposes. And we are committed to making the Year 2000
census the most accurate ever.

        Seven years ago, when I first sought the Presidency, nothing shook
me more deeply than the wasted potential of our nationO,s cities and
communities. Our great urban centers -- the gateway of opportunity for
millions, the hubs of commerce and creativity -- were too often islands of
decay and despair. Crack and crime and welfare seemed like an inexorable
tide that submerged neighborhoods and drowned dreams.

        I believed   that America could renew itself -- that, as I said
almost exactly six   years ago when I became President, there is nothing
wrong with America   that cannot be cured by what is right with America.
And I knew that --   together -- we could renew AmericaO,s cities.

        We set forth in 1993 with a new strategy to create a new economy.
Fiscal discipline. Investing in our people. Seeking new markets for our
goods abroad.   We balanced the budget for the first time in 30 years --
and we increased investment in education and training by 40%.

         This strategy has helped steer our nation through new and
turbulent economic currents. Today, our economy leads the world. This
morning, we received more good news about AmericaO,s economy.   I can now
report that in the fourth quarter of 1998, the economy grew at a rate of
 [4 « percent) -- and at a rate of [3+%) in 1998.

        AmericaO,s growth in the 1990s is built not on the vapors of
deficit spending but on the solid foundation of private sector
investment. And this expansion is both wide and deep. Four of our ten
largest cities have cut their unemployment rate in half since 1993. We
have the highest real wage growth in over two decades -- growing at twice
the rate of inflation; the lowest African American and Hispanic
unemployment rate recorded since we began keeping such statistics in
1972. And average family income is by $3,500.   At long last, this rising
tide is lifting all boats.

        My friends, this economic good fortune poses a profound question
for all of us: What will we do with these good times? If we simply relax
and bask in our prosperity, we will look back at this moment of
opportunity as a time of missed opportunity.   I believe we have a duty to
make certain that prosperity spreads throughout our nation -- that hope
replaces despair in every corner of every community -- that every American
be given the tools to reap the rewards of the new economy. We have a duty
to rise to the challenges of the 21st Century.
        We are committed to press forward with the new strategy that has
helped to renew our cities.

        We rejected the idea that the solutions to the problems of the
cities were miles of concrete and acres of regulations, that the answer to
your problems was a fiat from Washington. And we have decisively rejected
the misguided idea that cities should be left to sink or swim on their
own. Our approach -- our O&third wayOS -- has been to offer empowerment,
to help provide the tools to succeed, and to insist on results.

        We have worked to be an effective partner.   Over the past six
years, we have transformed the Department of Housing and Urban Development
from a bureaucratic backwater to a streamlined innovator. David Osborne
the intellectual godfather of reinventing government -- says HUD is O&a
model for reinvention in the 1990s.0S


         So the balanced budget I will submit to Congress will increase
HUDD,s overall budget by $3 billion -- the biggest increase in its
history.   It will support HUDD,s Community Empowerment fund ... 100,000
new vouchers to move people into homes of their own ... and dozens of
other innovative steps.   I ask you to support this commitment -- and to
make your voices heard in the halls of Congress.

        With new resources for HUD and a strong focus throughout the
government, we can and must press forward with our new urban strategy.
Our communities face stiff challenges -- stubborn pockets of poverty,
shrinking populations, the flight of the middle class.   We can and must
act together to meet these challenges.  HereD,s how.

        First, strong cities in the 21st Century will depend above all on
economic opportunity. We said from the beginning, the best poverty
program, the best crime program, the best urban program is a private
sector job.

        So we created 30 Empowerment Zones, to bring the spark of private
enterprise into inner cities and isolated rural areas. Vice President
Gore announced the 20 newest zones earlier this month. And I will ask
Congress to fully fund this round of Empowerment Zones so we can help
create 90,000 jobs.

        We created a network of Community Development Financial
Institutions.

        We strengthened and streamlined the Community Reinvestment Act,
encouraging banks to lend more than $1 trillion -- nearly 95% of all
commitments since CRA has been on the books -- even as bank balance sheets
have grown stronger.

        In all these ways, we have sought to extend the horizons of
opportunity into the hardest pressed urban areas.

        But even today, the flows of capital too often bypass under served
areas. The largest pool of untapped investment opportunities.and new
customers are not beyond our shores, they're in our backyard. They are in
Harlem or Watts or Appalachia -- the kinds of communities that, according
to a recent Harvard Business School study, control more than $85 billion a
year in purchasing power, more than the entire retail market in Mexico.

         So I am proposing a bold initiative to bring jobs and opportunity
into the D+New MarketsD, here in America: We should write into law a D&New
Markets Tax CreditD8 -- $1 billion of tax credits over five years worth
25% of the amount of equity placed in investment funds, community
development banks and investment vehicles targeted for these untapped
markets.

        We help businesses invest abroad through the Overseas Private
Investment Corporation. We should help them invest here at home through
new American Private Investment Companies -- that can spur $1.5 billion in
equity for investment in under served America.

        We will support a New Market Venture Capital initiative to bring
capital and technical assistance to small businesses in distressed areas.
Thousands of entrepreneurs who only need a little capital and expert
guidance to expand their businesses and create new jobs -- these funds
will give it to them.


        All told, this New Markets initiative will bring $15 billion in
new private sector investment -- our most significant opportunity in years
to break the cycle of poverty and joblessness. But it will only happen if
together, we persuade Congress to make it happen. I ask your support.

       We shouldnD,t stop there.

        Today, welfare is at its lowest level in 3 decades, and the
welfare rolls have been cut nearly in half.  But we should use this
prosperity to move the hardest cases off of welfare.  We should
reauthorize the Welfare to Work initiative and help 200,000 people move to
the dignity and pride of work.

        And we must do mor to clean up and redevelop abandoned industrial
sites. My balanced budget will propose a new Abandoned Buildings
initiative so that brownfields can stop being eyesores and start being
places of opportunity.

        Everyone of these initiatives will require Democrats and
Republicans to work together. Everyone of them requires Congress to
act.  I ask your help.

        HereD,s the second step we must take together:    Strong cities in
the 21st Century simply must be safe cities.

        Crime is down for six years in a row.  Violent crime is at its
lowest level in three decades. This year we will achieve our goal of
100,000 new community police, under budget and ahead of schedule.   In all
this, we worked with you on the frontlines to develop and deploy new
strategies to fight crime. Now we must focus our efforts on neighborhoods
where violent criminals still hold sway.
        So I will propose a 21st Century crime bill that helps communities
hire and redeploy at least 30,000 new officers for high crime
neighborhoods ... that enlists probation and parole officers, school
officials and faith-based organizations to take our streets back from
crime ... and that gives police high-tech tools to fight crime, from
digital mugshots to crime-mapping computers in squad cars.  For years,
drug dealers have used pagers, scam artists have used the Internet, and
gangs have had high-tech weapons.  ItO,s time for police to have the
benefit of 21st Century technology, too.

        You know, as well, that crime is down because guns are being taken
out of the hands of criminals. So I ask your support as we seek to
restore the five-day waiting period for buying a handgun -- to extend the
Brady Bill to prevent juveniles who commit violent crimes from buying a
gun -- and to pass legislation to require child trigger locks.

        Third, strong cities depend on strong schools.     with 53 million children
in school, one in five of them from immigrant families,   in the 21st
Century that will be more true than ever.

        Across our nation, test scores are up. But too many schools are
still failing too many children.   In my State of the Union Address I set
out a new agenda for AmericaD,s schools. We should finish the job of
hiring 100,000 new teachers to reduce ~lass size in the early grade. We
should act this year to build or modernize 5000 schools.

        And I will soon propose an Education Accountability Act -- a
dramatic change in the way the federal government invests in elementary
and secondary education.   We will invest only in what works, only in the

,,,
things that cities like Chicago and Boston have proven works. No social
promotion. Quick action to turn around failing schools. Qualified
teachers.  Report cards on schools. Discipline codes.

        Our goal is not to put our children down, but to lift them up.  So
my balanced budget will triple the support for after school programs where
children can learn after the regular school bell has rung -- the hours
when juvenile crime soars.

        You know and I know that the issue is not whether the national
government will be involved in education -- it already is. Our answer
must be: we should invest in what works.

        Fourth, as I said in the State of the Union Address, our
communities face a preservation challenge, with 70,000 acres of farmland
and green space lost every day.  So I have proposed a $l-billion
Livability Agenda to help communities save open space, ease traffic
congestion, and grow in ways that enhance every citizen's quality of life
... and a $l-billion Lands Legacy Initiative to preserve places of natural
beauty all across America -- from the most remote wilderness. to the
nearest city park.

        In all these ways -- expanding economic empowerment, pressing our
fight against crime, renewing our schools, keeping our growing communities
livable -- we can meet our duty to make our cities and towns strong and
vibrant for the 21st Century.

        That new millennium is less than a year away.  As the First Lady
will tell you later today, it is an opportunity to honor the past and
imagine the future.  We have established the White House Millennium
Council, which that seeks to use the millennium as an inspiration to leave
gifts to future generations. And she will announce the Millennium
Communities program will invite you to apply on behalf of your community
to receive national designation as a Millennium Community.  I hope every
one of you takes advantage of this.

        The turn of a century often marks a true turning point in how
people see themselves and their world.    We think back to the last turn of
the century, and we see now that it was a time when AmericaD,s cities
literally created themselves.    From the WorldD,s Colombian Exposition in
Chicago, to the unification of the five boroughs of New York, to the
rebuilding of San Francisco after the earthquake, in the early years of
the 20th Century, AmericaD,s cities were melting pots not only of people
but of ideas - -, the most remarkable in human history.  Changes in
technology and commerce and patterns of living donD,t make our cities
obsolete. They give us a chance to come' together as only great and
growing communities can, to make our cities more dynamic, more exciting,
more livable for more people than ever before. I look forward to that
challenge.
