       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN:Bruce N. Reed/OU:OPD/O:EOP [ OPD 1 )

       CREATION DATE/TIME:28-JAN-1999 11:05:00.00

       SUBJECT:   latest from g.black

       TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN:Cynthia A. Rice/OU:OPD/O:EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
       READ:UNKNOWN

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN:Elena Kagan/OU:OPD/O:EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       1.As we indicated in our piece on the coming DOJ lawsuit last week,
             DOJ's likely next step will be to persuade one or more Congressmen
             (Durbin, Conrad most likely) to introduce legislation that clarifies
       the
             federal government's statutory authority to seek recovery of
             Medicare and other federal expenditures under MCRA. We would
             expect little resistance to such legislation.

            2.As long as the legislation is written as clarification of the MCRA
              statute --- rather than as new legislation -- we believe the
              government could bring claims against the industry back to at least
              1996, when MCRA was amended to give the government the right
              to sue "independent of the rights of the injured or diseased person."
              Anything beyond clarifying language could be held by the courts as
              substantive changes to the law, which might preclude retroactive
              recovery -- as the Florida Supreme Court ruled.

          3.Legislation clarifying the federal government's statutory right to
       bring
             claims for recovery of Medicare and other expenditures for
             smoking-related diseases would iikely pave the way for a single,
             massive federal claim, comprised of: a) Direct post-1996
             expenditures of $30 - $60 billion; b) punitive damages, and c)
             recovery of future anticipated expenditures for past tortious acts
             committed by the industry. Unlike the states, which can sue under
             "common law" theories for each state, the federal government needs
             explicit statutes under which to bring a suit. Absent clarifying
             language, the feds would have to bring 51 separate claims.

           4.We see little resistance among Republicans to supporting a bill that
             clarifies the federal government's rights to bring a recovery claim
             under the 1962 Medical Cost Recovery Act (MCRA). A federal suit
             -- brought by the Clinton Administration -- would be viewed as the
             lesser of three evils to allow the federal government to get its
        share of
             the failed June 20 accord (about $170 billion).

                  Raise federal excise taxes -- Clinton will propose a $.55/pack
                  increase on cigarettes in his budget to be submitted 2/1);
                  Republicans from both the House and Senate have told
                  Clinton that a tobacco tax hike is "dead on arrival"
                  Claim federal share of states' Medicaid settlement: Under the
                  Health Care Financing Act (HCFA), the federal government
                  can simply take its share (average 60%, but ranges. from 50%
                  to 80%) of each states' Medicaid settlement proceeds, by
,\..   ·r-



                    deducting it from future payouts. Republicans have announced
                    legislation to block the federal government from taking its
                    share; and states have threatened to bring suit against the
                    federal government if they deduct the fed share from state
                    payouts.
                    Allow DOJ to bring independent cause of action: This option
                    takes the pressure off Republicans to back either of the first
                    two options, and allows Republicans to appear tough on
                    tobacco without getting their hands dirty (Administration's
                    lawsuit). Even conservatives indicated last week that there
                    would be little resistance to language that simply makes
                    explicit the government's ability to bring a claim. Senators
                    Conrad or Durbin will introduce clarifying legislation in the
                    next few weeks.

              5.We believe Congress would follow the New Jersey model of
                legislation, rather than Florida's, so as to not trigger claims that
        the
            legislation substantively changes the law, which might convince a
            court to preclude retroactive recovery. In 1996, the New Jersey
            legislature, backed by a Republican governor, passed clarifying
            language that gave the state explicit authority to bring common law
            claims for recovery. Florida, of course, had gone one step further,
            passing legislation that not only gave the state the right to seek
            recovery, but struck affirmative defenses, permitted use of
       statistics,
            etc .. The FL Supreme Court ruled that the law had been substantially
            changed, and precluded recovery for claims prior to June, 1994 --
            the law's date of passage. We expect Congress to follow the New.
            Jersey precedent of passing clarifying language to ensure that
            recovery for claims back to 1996 be permitted.

              6.We rate MO, RN, UST outperform. We continue to believe that the
                industry and government will agree to a $150 - $200 billion
                settlement if, and only if, the government agrees to reduce its
                settlement stream for all claims not covered in the AG settlement.
                With a federal settlement 6-12 months off, and with 4 trials ongoing,
                we expect tobacco stocks to remain dead money near-term.


