          RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

          CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

          CREATION DATE/TIME:31-JAN-1999 13:54:13.00

          SUBJECT:     summary of House education hearing last week

          TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ:UNKNOWN

          CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ:UNKNOWN

          CC: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TEXT:
          Below is a summary of last week's education hearing in the House, prepared
          by someone on Scott Fleming's staff. A couple of things hit me from the
          summary:

          1. The R's are clearly pushing Ed-Flex, and our best friends in the
          education community are giving them all the ammunition they need.  Nancy
          Grasmick (the state superintendent in Maryland -- a big supporter of the
          Administration) and Gary Chico from Chicago were both supportive of as
          much flexibility as possible; Lisa Keegan from Arizona is a conservative
          Republican--her comments suggesting the federal gov't provides little
          money and lots of strings were less surprising--though not far in tone
          from Chico's.

          2.  It doesn't appear that our class size proposal fared all that well in
          the hearing--with Keegan implying that it wouldn't have that much of an
          immediate impact, and Chico basically saying we should just give the
          districts the $ and let them figure out what to do with it.

          All of this, together with the Senate debate on Ed-Flex and the strength
          of our accountability proposals suggests that we will need to come up with
          a serious flexibility proposal in ESEA. I'm going to try and get some
          ideas down in the next day or so.




          TO:                Scott Fleming and Tom Kelley

          FROM:      Heidi Bonner

          DATE:      January 28, 1999

          RE:                TodayO,s Education and the Workforce Committee Hearing


          This morning, Rep. Goodling held a hearing on implementing educational


reform at the state and local level.   Witnesses were Lisa Graham Keegan,
ArizonaD,s state superintendent, Nancy Grasnick, MarylandD,s state
superintendent, Gary Chico, president of the Chicago school Reform Board,
David Eisner, vice president for corporate relations for America Online,
and Pat Forgione.

Members attending the hearing were Goodling, Kildee, Boehner, Hoekstra,
Roemer, Scott, Barrett, Miller, Ballenger, Salmon, Wu, Castle, Hinojosa,
Kucinich, Tancredo, Holt, Hilleary, Fletcher, Holt and Ehlers.

Testimony

In her statement, Keegan said that 7 percent of the funds she receives
(the Federal ones) require 46 percent of the monitoring by her staff. She
favors less regulation, which she believes would result in more money to
kids and less for her office.  She favors funds following individual
children, whether theyD,re in regular schools or charter schools.  SheD,s
concerned about the huge disparity between children who are achieving and
those who are not. She said that she worries because no one who supports
Federal funding for school construction is dealing with the inequities
that cause there to be crumbling schools in the first place 0) she sees
fixing the schools as a superficial fix to a greater problem. She
commented that they are interested in ed flex, but cannot participate
because they donD,t qualify.

In her statement, Grasnick mostly talked in a superficial way about what
MD has done as part of its sustained school reform effort. The bases of
this effort are standards, accountability, assessment, achievement and
public access to information about the schools.  The reform movement
emphasizes reconstitution of failing schools and rewards for schools that
are succeeding. She sees her efforts as being quite successful.    She said
that MD is an ed flex state, and that they are very pleased with the
flexibility it has allowed them. She commented that she supports a
continued role for SEAs, and that the SEA works well with the LEAs in MD
in a coordinated effort to enact reforms. She cautioned that Federal funds
should not supplant state funds.

Mr. Chico talked about the reforms undertaken in the Chicago public
schools over the past few years.  They are holding teachers and principals
accountable, ending social promotion, and eliminating waste, fraud and
corruption. He emphasized that reform solutions must be tailored to each
individual community, and that local school districts should be able to
decide how to spend funds.  He did say that they should be held
accountable for results. He asked for support for their proposal to
establish a national teaching academy, where aspiring teachers would be
taught by master teachers. He also expressed support for increased funding
for early childhood education. He cautioned that funds should not be cut
off for failing schools. He spoke in favor of the AdministrationD,s
after-school initiative. After-school and summer programs have been an
integral part of the reforms in Chicago. He supported expanding Title I,
but with the most flexibility possible. He asked for less red tape and
more money to the classroom
   He asked that the Feds simplify existing regulations and eliminate the
state role entirely within the biggest school districts.  He closed by
saying the Federal government should have as much of a role in how its
funds are used locally for education as a mortgage banker has over the way
its loans are used.

Pat gave a rundown of recent NAEP and TIMSS statistics, as well as stats
on dropouts and student aspirations.  I have copies of the testimony if


youO,re interested, and itO,s also on the NCES website.

David Eisner said that AOL is interested in three things in education:
ensuring that graduates have met tough standards, teachers are fully
prepared to teach technology, and that no child is left behind. He cited
the high need for technology employees 0) he said only 38 percent of those
who apply have the technology skills needed. Their concern is that
schools produce O&lifelong adaptive learners08, critical, creative
thinkers who can adapt to the changing field.  TheyO,re concerned that
there is a large gap in computer ownership between high and low-income
people. Children from poor families donO,t have as much access to
technology, and their teachers arenO,t trained as well as teachers in
wealthier communities.

Questions

GoodlingO,s questions centered on school choice, ed flex and teachersO,
roles in school reform. He asked Keegan about her stateD,s school choice
program, Grasnick about how ed flex works in MD and Chico about how they
got teachers on board for the school reforms.

Kildee asked the panel if ed flex is expanded, how should it be structured
so as to ensure accountability? Chico talked about the importance of
ensuring accountability by measuring attendance and graduation rates as
well as student performance. He also took a shot at the class size
initiative, talking about how we shouldnO,t reduce class size for the sake
of reducing class size. schools should decide what they need to do to
improve achievement themselves. Grasnick said every school should adopt a
prescriptive plan, but that it should be tailored to their own needs.
Keegan talked about the importance of strengthening curricula.  Kildee
also asked how we ensure that poor kids get what they need under ed flex,
and Chico basically said most of their kids are poor and they get what
they need.

Tancredo talked about the importance of school choice, then asked a
question about what should be included in a school report card and whether
there is a Federal role there.  Panelists said Federal role should be
research-focused.

Roemer asked Chico why they support charter schools.  Chico said theyO,re
not concerned about the competition 0) said their mission was the best
interest of the child, and if a child can get what he needs at a charter
school better than at their schools, thatO,s fine. He said. that they can
learn from the charter schools. Roemer also asked if we should punish
failure. Chico said no; rather, we should figure out whatO,s going wrong
and redistribute resources to address the problem. Roemer expressed
support for the national teaching academy concept.

Hoekstra asked Grasnick how AZ would benefit if they did qualify for ed
flex. She said much greater flexibility, calibrated to the needs of the
individual systems, less staff committed to the minutia of tracking regs,
more energy going into serving kids. He also asked Chico why Chicago
supports Federal involvement in school construction. Reply was that local
economy cannot support the necessary investment 0) neither can state. He
believes thatO,s true everywhere.  Mr. Goodling used this opportunity to
point out that if the Fed govt funding special ed at 40 percent, Chicago
would have an additional $76 million to spend on construction.

Scott asked Eisner whether itO,s more technology education thatO,s needed,
or better coverage of basic skills. Eisner said the core need is for kids
"   .
        to have analytical skills.  Scott asked what Federal funds should be
        focused on to ensur~ that itO,s covered. Keegan said thereo,s nothing that
        wouldno,t get done if Fed didno,t fund it.  She made a comment about Title
        I not getting results.  Grasnick said theyo,re grateful for Fed funds, but
        mentioned that they need more special ed funding.

        Hilleary asked which program would benefit most if you had a waiver to
        eliminate Federal overlap (he didno,t explain what he meant by Fed
        overlap, or justify that it exists). Chico said he wants money to go
        directly to LEA 0) bypass states. Grasnick disagreed, but Keegan said
        money should go directly from Feds to kids.

        Miller said weo,ve fupded a lot of failure in the past because we didno,t
        ask for accountability. He brought up the GAO report on ed flex that says
        that some states that have no goals for performance at all are getting
        waiver authority.  He asked what the bargain for accountability should be.
        The panelists suggested independent review of state standards and
        assessments, and praised NAEP as an assessment tool.

        Ehlers was concerned about our studentso, low math/science skills.   He
        asked what we could do to bring up scores.  Primary problems are bad
        textbooks and poor curricula. Grasnick also mentioned support for
        alternative certification programs. Pat said his results indicate problems
        are in content and out of field teaching.

        Wu was also concerned about math. He cited something in Pato,s testimony
        about the importance of math courses to predicting achievement.  The
        panelists agreed there is a problem that schools are not requiring enough
        challenging math courses.

        Castle wanted more specifics on why AZ isno,t eligible for ed flex. Keegan
        said she wasno,t sure 0) basically implied that it was some stupid ED
        rule. Castle said itO,s clear that ed flex is needed allover.   He got
        Grasnick to say she couldno,t think of anyone in her state who opposes ed
        flex, but she also said that states must have a well-defined
        accountability system.

        Hinojosa talked for awhile, but I couldno,t for the life of me figure what
        his point was, if he had one. Something about using stadiums for things
        other than sporting events.

        Salmon asked Keegan if they know how their schools will be affected by
        class size money. Keegan said every third school will get one teacher.
        She said money is not always the reason why thereo,s a teacher shortage 0)
        geography is also a problem, for example.  She said locals should decide
        what they need. He also asked Pat a question about how data on dropouts
        is gathered and reported.

        Holt asked whether Eisenhower funds should be able to be used for purposes
        other than professional development. Everyone said program is fine the way
        it is.

        Fletcher talked about accountability a bit. He asked how we can ensure
        best practices are shared. Chico said ED does great job at this.

,.
