RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul D. Glastris ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-FEB-1999 19:25:29.00

SUBJECT:    Re: Great Debate, Take III

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
           Thanks for the grafs.

        Here are a few modest changes.   I wasn't sure if you and Bruce had
wanted to cut out the graf from the earlier draft that talks about the
$118 billion invested in Title One (see below)--Bruce was very high on
using that stat before.   Please let me know. Below that graf, I've taken
the liberty of decoupling the two GOP arguments and putting them in
seperate paragraphs.   I think that makes it easier to follow the
argument.   It also works better in terms of the flow of the speech, with
the don't-invest-more point setting up the section about how we HAVE
invested more over the last six years.

           Please send your thoughts back ASAP so I can get this in.   Thanks
again.



        We must make sure all schools are on that right track. These
reform ideas are spreading. But they are spreading too slowly--especially
in our inner cities, isolated rural areas, and on Indian reservations.
That is where the need for improvement is greatest. That is where our
largest federal investment in public schools, Title One, is targeted. We
have made $118 billion in Title One investments over the last 30 years.
We have not gotten anywhere near $118 billion worth of educational
improvements.  I believe we can and must do better, by insisting that this
money be invested only in ways that you, at the state and local level,
have shown works to boost student achievement.          .

         This year we will have a great debate in Congress about the next
steps to improve education in America. There are some in Congress who
argue that even though we spend $15 billion a year on public education,
the national government has no business holding the system accountable for
results.   I think that is wrong.  I believe that as a nation, we should
say once and for all that no child in America should be taught by an
unprepared teacher. No child in America should be passed from grade to
grade without having mastered the material. No child in America should be
trapped in a failing school. The education of our children must be a
national priority, and holding our schools accountable for results must be
a national commitment.

        From now on, we must say to states and school districts:   Identify
your worst-performing, least improving schools, and turn them around, or
shut them down. Today I am pleased to announce that the balanced budget I
submitted yesterday contains a new $200 million pool of flexible Title I
funds that states and schools districts can use to turn failing schools
around. We must make sure all schools are on the right track.    If we fail
to do this, and do it quickly, we are going to lose another generation of
/   "'.   '}


           children to low expectations, low educational achievement, and low
           prospects of moving ahead in life.

                   Now some of the same people who are against making sure we invest
           only in what works also believe the national government has no business
           investing more in public education.  I strongly disagree. We should
           finish the job of hiring 100,000 teachers to reduce class size, and pass
           our tax credit to build or modernize 5,000 schools. The education of Our
           children must be a national priority. And we have changed the priorities
           of the national government. We have balanced the budget--moving from a
           deficit of $290 billion when I took office to a surplus of $70 billion
           last year. But as we shrank government and balanced the budget, we nearly
           doubled our investment in education and training.




                                                                                                        \




                                                                                                    \

                                                                                                    \
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 044 - FOLDER -001


[02/02/1999]


