    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-FEB-1999 10:20:00.00

    SUBJECT:   FYI.

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Tobacco-state congressmen fire off letter
                         to Clinton over lawsuit


                           Copyright   1999 Nando Media
                           Copyright   1999 Associated Press

                          RALEIGH (January 29, 1999 8:46 p.m. EST
    http://www.nandotimes.com) - Angry
                          with President Clinton's decision to sue the tobacco
    industry even after
                          its huge settlement with the states, 10 congressmen
    from
                          tobacco-growing states have called on him not to harm
    farmers'
                          interests further with a new round of litigation.

                           The bipartisan letter, signed this week by U.S. House
    members from
                           North Carolina, Virginia and Kentucky, also questions
    the president's
                           ability to bypass Congress and sue cigarette makers
    to recoup Medicaid
                           dollars for smoking-related illnesses.

                         Clinton announced his administration's decision to
    file a federal lawsuit
                         during his State of the Union message Jan. 19. He
    also said tobacco
                         growers should be protected.

                           "By all accounts, and despite your stated desire to
    achieve both, those
                           two objectives - assaulting the tobacco industry and
    protecting tobacco
                         farmers - appear to be mutually exclusive policies,"
    said the letter, dated
                         Tuesday.

                           North Carolina Democrat Bob Etheridge, who is a
    tobacco grower, said
                           another lawsuit, on top of a proposed


55-cents-per-pack tax on
                     cigarettes, will only increase ill-will among North
Carolina growers.
                     Farmers believed the recent settlements with the
states and a new trust
                     fund had laid the issue to rest.

                        The congressmen also fear that forcing tobacco
companies to pay even
                        more money, coupled with the higher cigarette taxes,
will prompt the
                        companies to buy leaf overseas.

                     "It's Tidiculous," Etheridge said Friday. "The
farmers are tired of being
                     picked on. They pay their bills. They helped build a
lot of schools in their
                     communities . . . . We're talking about a major economic
interest in our
                     state and a lot of others."

                        Details of the lawsuit are incomplete. It supposedly
would seek to
                        recover tax dollars spent treating sick smokers in
federal employee and
                        health programs. A U.S. Justice Department task force
is being formed
                        to shape a legal strategy.

                        An administration spokeswoman said Friday U.S.
Attorney General
                        Janet Reno advised the president the lawsuit is
necessary to recoup
                        federal dollars even though the states have already
recouped health
                        spending at their level.

                        "The Justice Department made the determination after
months of study,"
                        said Julie Goldberg, who hadn't seen the letter. "It
determined that the
                        liability the tobacco companies have in this matter
is massive.   II




                        Rep. Mike McIntyre, D-N.C., said in a news statement
Friday the
                        proposed lawsuit contradicts earlier administration
statements indicating
                        Medicaid statutes provide no explicit authority for
such an action.

                        "Everyone in tobacco country has grown tired of
hearing the president
                        talk of protecting tobacco farmers in the same breath
he outlines
                        proposals to destroy the industry they rely on for
survival," he said.

                        Last year, the tobacco industry reached settlements
with alISO states


                       totaling $246 billion. The money will go to the
  states to pay for health and
                       anti-smoking programs. Last week, the four largest
  companies agreed
                       to put $5.15 billion into a trust fund over the next
  12 years. The money
                       will help tobacco growers and communities harmed by
  the settlements.

                        "That sounds like a lot of money, but spread out over
  10 or 12 years, you
                        do the math and ultimately it's not that much," said
  Etheridge. "Now
                        they're talking about putting them out of business."

                        Demand for tobacco is expected to fall as the tobacco
  settlement drives
                        up cigarette prices and launches anti-smoking
  initiatives.

                        Other congressmen who signed the letter are Howard
  Coble, Richard
                        Burr, Walter Jones Jr., Charles Taylor, Cass
  Ballenger and Robin
                       Hayes, all of North Carolina; Virgil Goode of
  Virginia; and Harold Rogers
                       of Kentucky.


