RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Amy Weiss ( CN=Amy WeissjOU=WHOjO=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-FEB-1999 16:35:53.00

SUBJECT:   States reach tentative agreement on dividing $5.15 billion


TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Barry J. Toiv ( CN=Barry J. Toiv/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
States reach tentative agreement on dividing
                               $5.15 billion


           RALEIGH, N.C. (AP) - Tobacco states reached a tentative agreement
           Thursday on dividing a $5.15 billion trust fund for farmers that
would be
           financed by the major cigarette makers.

          The distribution plan will use the 1998 basic quota system set
by the U.S.
          Department of Agriculture, said North Carolina Attorney General
Mike
          Easley and other officials.

          --It's the most equitable way and what our farm groups want
here. All states
          come out pretty much even with that, ' , Easley said.

           Kentucky Gov. Paul Patton said Phil Carlton, the lawyer for four
largest
           U.S. tobacco companies, would prepare a final draft of the
proposed
          agreement, and the states' representatives would meet again to
discuss it.

          About 70 people met behind closed doors at a Raleigh hotel to
work out the
          distribution plan.

          North Carolina, the largest flue-cured tobacc'o state, and
Kentucky, the
          biggest burley tobacco producer, would receive the biggest
shares under the
          proposal - 38.34 percent and 29.97 percent, respectively,
sources who spoke
          on condition of anonymity said.

          The sources said Tennessee would get 7.65 percent; South
Carolina, 7.01
          percent; Virginia, 6.65 percent; and Georgia, 5.91 percent.



             The other tobacco quota states will receive less than 5 percent,
based on
           their 1998 basic quotas. Maryland and Pennsylvania tobacco
farmers a17e
           not part of the quota system, and their shares of the settlement
still must be
           worked out, the sources said.

             The private trust fund was created last month by tobacco-growing
states
          and cigarette makers following last fall's $206 billion
settlement between the
          tobacco industry and 46 states. The fund was created to aid
tobacco
          farmers expected to be squeezed by the higher cigarette prices
and curbs on
          tobacco promotion that are part of the deal.

             The trust fund will be financed by contributions over 12 years
by Philip
             Morris Cos., R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., Lorillard Tobacco Co.
and Brown
             & Williamson Tobacco Corp. The payments could begin as early as
April.

             Burley's share of the basic quota was 44 percent in 1998;
flue-cured
             tobacco farmers got the other 56 percent, according to the u.s.
Farm
          service Agency. Using that formula to divide the trust fund
money, burley
          states would get $2.256 billion and flue-cured states, $2.892
billion.

             Burley-tobacco states and states that grow flue-cured tobacco
entered
             Thursday's meeting at odds over how to divide up the trust fund
money.
             Each backed formulas that favored their crop.

             Danny McKinney, chief executive officer of Burley Tobacco Growers
             Cooperative in Lexington, Ky., said each state must work out how
to
             distribute the' money to the farmers and how much goes to quota
owners,
             tenants who work tobacco acreage and lessees.

          --When it leaves here and goes back to the state level, that's
when the civil
          war starts," he said. --It's going to get pretty hateful pretty
darn quick:' ,

             Major tobacco states involved in setting up the trust fund were
Virginia,
             North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Tennessee and Kentucky.
Other
             involved were Maryland, West Virginia, Indiana, Florida, Alabama
and
             Ohio.



          Copyright 1999 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This
material may not
          be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.


