     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-FEB-1999 09:41:21.00

      SUBJECT:   AP story

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Lee Ann Brackett ( CN=Lee Ann Brackett/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: edahl ( edahl @ os.dhhs.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Here's the full transcipt from Cuomo's speech.

      It does appear the quotes were somewhat out of context. As the excerpt
     below shows, he talked about successes in welfare reform, challenges
     remaining, and then about how it had become a political issue when it went
     to Congress, with demonizing the victim. But, as the bold sentences show,
     it's possible to see how the reporter could write what she did.

       Welfare reform is, welfare reform is the topic of the conference a
       stepping off point and I think it serves that very well.   If you take
       welfare reform as the specific a lot of success has been achieved through
       welfare reform.  The e·conomy has been going great guns since then.   But a
       lot of success has been achieved.   If you look at the numbers on welfare
     . reform, welfare rolls down 44 percent.   Single women down 20 percent.
       Earned income for family is up. All the numbers speak of good story of
       success. At the same time you can see real challenges within welfare
       reform. The same time you have the great numbers of success, you also
       have more cities saying the demand for emergency services is going up.
       And the numbers tend to show that while there has been a reduction in the
       welfare rolls, those who have left were the most mobile anyway, and those
       that are being left on the rolls are the hardest to reach.   Well the
       existing welfare rolls, the remaining welfare rolls are becoming more and
       more minority.  Hispanics are now the growing, largest growing percent
       within the welfare population, more urban. So a great story of success on
       the numbers but real challenges lie ahead.
               And I think the reason why welfare is an appropriate stepping,
       stepping off point is because it's the truth about welfare reform, and the
       reason it's a good metaphor for what's going on now, is welfare reform was
       never about a policy debate.   I was on the Welfare Reform Task Force for
       President Clinton, believe me it had nothing to do with any form policy
       debate once the issue got to the United States Congress, it was a
       political debate. No one would say, how do we really help people on welfar
       e. Let's design an intelligent program to move people from welfare to


work, that wasn't the discussion.   It was a political discussion and we
were demonizing the people on welfare. They were the enemy and this was a
retaliation against the enemy. That was what welfare reform was all
about, that was the engine driving it.   I would like to say that this was
our nation at its best, saying we want to help the people on welfare, we
want to invest in the people on welfare, that was not the discussion.    It
was a Congress pandering to some of the worst sentiment in the American
people.
        And the welfare recipient was really the icon for the enemy.
Welfare recipient was a metaphor for the stereotypes. You know who gets
welfare those lazy welfare mothers. We're suppose to give them money so
they can sit home on a couch and make babies. All the ugly mean
stereotypes, that's what welfare was really about.   And welfare reform
then meant punish that person who has gotten away with it for too long.     I
would also like to say that was a unique circumstance, the debate over
welfare, but it wasn't, it wasn't.   That anger, that mean spiritedness is
to all common. welfare became the hot button for it.    It became the vent
for it, but it is there day-to-day.   I would also like to be able to say
well it was a problem of the Congress, elect a new Congress and we'll
solve the problem, but frankly it's not that simple either, because
Congress was only a mirror reflecting back what the people were showing to
the Congress.   We should have more leadership from a Congress, we should
have more strength from the Congress. But it was a mirror, that's what
the representatives gave us back, the anger that they saw coming from the
American people.   ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
WPC9
2
BJZCourier#lxHx6X@'7X@HP LaserJet 4SiHPLAS4SI.PRSxD
@\'"<LX@#lx2DZ< XHP LaserJet 4SiHPLAS4SI.PRSxD
@\'"<LX@(CourierCourier Bold<?xxx,x6X@-7X@?xxx,x -7Xk5f) t4ft!n@)UP-tbPP%+Ft+SD
I#VP67Yl_ A Y[XHrZ*u"+EED
B*b=t#273'3'Standard3'3'StandardHPLAS4SI.PRSxD
(DO

@DO!




D?D"DNATIONAL SUMMIT ON CHURCHES AND WELFARE REFORM
D?
DJ"SECRETARY CUOMO'S SPEECHD


%Taken on the date:

"TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 1999




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC AFFAIRS
451 7TH STREET, NORTHWEST, ROOM 10132
WASHINGTON, D.C.   20410
(202) 7080980$'H&H&@@D"NATIONAL SUMMIT ON CHURCHES AND WELFARE REFORM


J"SECRETARY CUOMO'S SPEECH
 "TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 1999
D?FD(DSTART OF AUDIOTAPED)
 (MUSIC)
MALE SPEAKER:DD&Good afternoon. As always there is
an announcement. Many of y
ou have asked about the audio
tapes of these terrific sessions we've been havin
g and
you'll be happy to know that everything has been taped.
So audio tape is
  on video tape, is on sale.   I am told
in the recreation area, didn't know we h
ad a recreation
area, maybe registration area. And there are order
forms you c
an mail for tapes.   B. J. after we spoke this
morning we so impressed by the pr
ogram he said maybe we
can get some money from Brookings to transcribe these
th
ings and make resources out of them, I said that's a
good idea.
I'm very happy to welcome Andrew Cuomo to be with
us today.   We have been, we j
ust met, sharing back
behind the stage a little bit about who we are and what
w
e are doing.   I use the English metaphor, legs, these
people are legs in the ne
ighborhoods across this$'H&H&@@country.   Nonprofit organizations have good legs
  in the
neighborhoods and the religious community often has some
of the stronge
st legs. But mere people who know we are
not just service providers, our vocat
ion as religious
folk has a prophetic vocation as well. And so we want
to spea
k to the issues of justice and we're glad that
Secretary of HUD is one who has
a sensitivity to those
issues of justice. We are anxious to form more
effectiv
e working partnership with our friends in the
public sector on every level, loc
al, state and federal.
And so we are glad for this chance to meet together
tod
ay and listen to Andrew Cuomo.
Long before Andrew Cuomo became Secretary of the
Department of Housing and Urba
n Development in 1997 he
was building affordable housing and leading urban
deve
lopment movements.   In fact, he was the first
Secretary in HUD's history to hav
e built an operative
housing development before taking office. So he knew
some


thing about the job before they gave him a job.   In
1986 Secretary Cuomo founde
d Housing Enterprise for the
Less Privilege or HELP, HELP. HELP provided more
than shelter from the elements, but a range of services$'H&H&@@that moved homel
ess people from the streets to selfsufficiency. The organization went onto bec
orne the
nations largest private provider of transitional housing
for homeless p
eople. Many people in this room spend
their lives and time working with homele
ss people. t"t"I
Since 1993 the Secretary has led the way to
creating a host of innovated progra
ms dealing with
community and economic development, job creation,
affordable ho
using, and homelessness.  But most
important to us, most important to me is the
 strong
commitment to encourage new partnerships with faith
communities.   Under
 Secretary Cuomo's leadership HUD
more than any other agency within the Federal
 Government
has reached to us in the faith community.
Father Joe Hakula (phonetic sp.) who is an old
friend of mine and many of us an
d sort of our subversive
agent inside the Federal Government Joe, radical Jesui
t
character down here, Father. Who· we've known for many
years with many move me
nts and struggles been shoulder
and shoulder.   Joe is involved with the Secreta
ry and
Center for Community and Interfaith Partnerships.  There
is now a concer
ted effort to recognize what we've known$'H&H&@@all along, the faith based comm
unity organizations have
for years been the heart of the cry for social justice

So I think we are kindred spirits with you today, Mr.
Secretary, and we welc
orne to you, this is a wonderful
election of faith based organizers, these are
o
rganizers, these are activists who do the work on the
ground and on the street,
  and they want to partner with
you as much as we can find to do that.  So we we
lcome
you and are very happy that you are with us today.
Thank you.
SECRETARY CUOMO:dd+Thank you very much.  Good
afternoon to all of you.
PARTICIPANTS:OO&Good afternoon.
SECRETARY CUOMO:dd+Oh, it's a better afternoon
than that.   It's a great afterno
on, isn't it.


 PARTICIPANTS:OO&Yes.
 SECRETARY CUOMO:dd+First, Mr. Jim Wallace, God
 bless you, Jim, for everything y
 ou do and for this
 convening with more for your inspiration. You couldn't
 have
  a better individual or better call then the call
 for renewal and Jim Wallace's
  leadership at this time in
 our history. And Jim, I just want to thank you ver
 y$'H&H&@@much. Carol Finley, I've worked with her for more years
 then I choose
  to remember, God bless you for organizing
 this convention and for all you do,
 Carol, thank you,
 it's a pleasure to be here. And Jim introduced our
 radical J
 esuit resident at HUD, Father Joseph'Hakula,
 why don't you standup you radical
 you.   Father Hakula
 is the only priest who is a political appointee of the
 Clin
 ton Administration so he very much is the radical.
 And we couldn't have him at
  a better place than HUD.
 I have two basic messages for you today.   First
 message is that if we're going
 to make the kind of
 projects we're going to make the Government has to
 listen a
 nd hear the message, listen and hear. There is
 a difference between listening
 and hearing when you say
 something to someone, that is listening, hearing is in

 taking the words and absorbing them and acting on them.
 Government must liste
 n and hear. And the second message
 is, that ultimately it's going to be up to
 you to make
 the difference and up to you to catalyze and facilitate
 public opin
 ion and public action in your community,
 those are the two messages.
 Two stories about the two messages.   First on the$'H&H&@@differences between Ii
 stening and hearing.   For those
 who hear the (indiscernible) in the confessiona
 Is.   You
 know the fellow goes into the confessionals, forgive me
 Father I have
 sinned it has been six months since my
 last confession, here are my sins. Fath
 er, I stole
 lumber.   Father says, you stole lumber? Yes, I've stole
 lumber, Fa
 ther.   Father says, okay, two Hail Mary's, to
 Our Father's that's your penance.
   The fellow leaves the
 confessional, does the penance.   Next week the same
 fel


low comes back to the confessionals, forgive me
Father for I have sinned, yes.
 Father I stole lumber,
stole lumber. Okay.   Five Hail Mary's and five Our
Fat
her's, that's your penance. Young man leaves the
confessional, next week the y
oung man comes back,
forgive me Father for I have sinned, Father I've stolen
lu
mber.  Father said, well, wait, we have a
communication problem here now.  Let
me put it this way
because I have given you penance and it hasn't made a
differ
ence, do you know how to make a Novina. He says,
no Father I don't know how to
 make a Novina but if you
can get the building plans I can get the lumber. The

difference between listening and hearing. Government$'H&H&@@has to listen but
 Government also has to hear a change.
The second message is ultimately it's up to you.
The story of the farmer and t
he flood.  Farmer down
south is on his farm and it starts to rains. And it's
r
aining, and it's raining, and the rain is nearing
biblical proportions and the
authorities now are afraid
of floods. They come out with a large truck and the
y go
out to the farm and they say to farmer, come on get in
the truck, it's rai
ning and the word is coming from the
county they are talking about flooding and
 we want to
bring you to safety. The farmer says, no, I'm a God
fearing man, I
 go to church every Sunday, the Lord will
take care of it. The authorities are
  frustrated but
they leave. And the rain keeps coming, the rain keeps
coming a
nd now it's about six feet deep, the water, and
the authorities come back in a
boat and they say to the
farmer, we told you, now get in the boat, the rain is
coming, the floods are coming, we'll take you to safety.
The farmer says, no,
I'm a God fearing man, I go to
church every Sunday, the Lord will take care of
me.
They say, we know that, that's nice, but get into the
boat and we'll take
you to safety. And he says, no, 'the$'H&H&@@Lord will provide.
Well the rain keeps coming, the rain keeps coming
and now the farmer is standin
g on the roof of the farm
house and the water is up to the farmers neck and the



farmer has his hands above the water and everything,
there is water, just his
head is above the water. And
he's looking up and out of the clouds appears a
h
elicopter and the helicopter throws down a rope and
they say to the farmer, gra
b the rope we can still save
you, it's not too' late, grab the rope.  And the fa
rmer
looks up, he says, no, I'm a God fearing man, I go to
church every Sunday,
 the Lord will take care of me.
They said, grab the rope for crying out loud,
he says,
no.
Next scene the farmer is at the pearly gates of
heaven. And he meets our Lord
and the farmer says,
Lord, I'm a little confused, I was a God fearing man, I
we
nt to church every Sunday, I thought you would take
care of me, what happened?
 Our Lord look back and said,
you're confused, I'm confused.   I sent a truck, I
 sent a
boat, I sent a helicopter. Ultimately it's up to you.
Those two stori
es in mind, let me make a couple of$     'H&H&@@points and see if there is any poss
ible relevance to
them.
Welfare reform is, welfare reform is the topic of
the conference a stepping off
 point and I think it
serves that very well.   If you take welfare reform as
the
 specific a lot of success has been achieved through
welfare reform.   The econo
my has been going great guns
since then. But a lot of success has been achieve
d.   If
you look at the numbers on welfare reform, welfare rolls
down 44 percent
    Single women down 20 percent. Earned
income for family is up. All the numb
ers speak of good
story of success. At the same time you can see real
challeng
es within welfare reform.   The same time you
have the great numbers of success,
 you also have more
cities saying the demand for emergency services is going
up
    And the numbers tend to show that while there has
been a reduction in the we
lfare rolls, those who have
left were the most mobile anyway, and those that ar
e
being left on the rolls are the hardest to reach.   Well


the existing welfare
rolls, the remaining welfare rolls
are becoming more and more minority.   Hispan
ics are now
the growing, largest growing percent within the welfare$
'H&H&@@population, more urban.   So a great story of success on
the numbers but
real challenges lie ahead.
And I think the reason why welfare is an
appropriate stepping, stepping off poi
nt is because it's
the truth about welfare reform, and the reason it's a
good m
etaphor for what's going on now, is welfare reform
was never about a policy deb
ate.  I was on the Welfare
Reform Task Force for President Clinton, believe me
it
had nothing to do with any form policy debate once the
issue got to the Unit
ed States Congress, it was a
political debate. No one would say, how do we rea
lly
help people on welfare.   Let's design an intelligent
program to move people
 from welfare to work, that wasn't
the discussion.  It was a political discussi
on and we
were demonizing the people on welfare. They were the
enemy and this
was a retaliation against the enemy.
That was what welfare reform was all abou
t, that was the
engine driving it.   I would like to say that this was
our natio
n at its best, saying we want to help the
people on welfare, we want to invest
in the people on
welfare, that was not the discussion.   It was a Congress
pande
ring to some of the worst sentiment in the American$'H&H&@@people.
And the welfare recipient was really the icon for
the enemy. Welfare recipient
 was a metaphor for the
stereotypes. You know who gets welfare those lazy
welf
are mothers. We're suppose to give them money so
they can sit home on a couch
and make babies. All the
ugly mean stereotypes, that's what welfare was really

about. And welfare reform then meant punish that person
who has gotten away w
ith it for too long.   I would also
like to say that was a unique circumstance,
the debate
over welfare, but it wasn't, it wasn't. That anger,
that mean spiri
tedness is to all common. Welfare became
the hot button for it.   It became the


  vent for it, but
it is there day today.   I would also like to be able to
say we
11 it was a problem of the Congress, elect a new
Congress and we'll solve the p
roblem, but frankly it's
not that simple either, because Congress was only a
mi
rror reflecting back what the people were showing to
the Congress. We should h
ave more leadership from a
Congress, we should have more strength from the
Cong
ress.    But it was a mirror, that's what the
representatives gave us back, the a
nger that they saw$O'H&H&@@coming from the American people.
Now why the anger? Why the anger? We are
essentially a nation that believes i
n the judaic
Christian tradition. We go to church on Sunday, we go
to temple 0
n Saturday and we preach one set of values,
we preach community and we preach c
ompassion and we
preach civility, but then why do we live such a
different set
of values, because that's all this thing
called Government winds up being, it's
   just the common.
It is a vehicle for the common will.    Why the anger,
when it
   is so opposite of all the virtues we espouse.
I think it's important to understand what's driving
the anger, because unless w
e find what is causing it we
will not be able to stop it. And unless we stop i
t we
won't be able to get the progressive government to the
scale that we're go
ing to need it. Because there is no
doubt that we are doing the right things i
n communities
all across the nations.    There is also no doubt that
we're not do
ing enough of it and that we have to bring
those efforts up to scale, and to br
ing those efforts up
to scale we're going to have to bring the American
people
with us. So your charge is twofold, not just to$
 'H&H&@@do the good work that
you're doing within your own
sphere, but to increase your sphere to bring more
people
to bring that political will so that Congress which is a
mirror is will
then reflect that.
Why the anger? Why the anger? Complex set of
briefs, we've been working on it
  for months at HUD. One


reason I think is a sense that Government has failed.

Government tried and Government failed.   And the anger
is a resentment towards
 Government for that failure and
I'm not going to have Government try again bec
ause it
failed once before. And the truth is there is some
truth to that.   Gov
ernment did fail in some cases. Not
across the board, it's not a total failure
, but in some
cases it failed.   Good intent gone awry. And we were
too late as
 a Government in recognizing that failure.
Where at HOD we do public housing.   Talk about an
icon of Government failure.
People take public housing
and would use it as an illustration of this anger.
You
want more money for the HUD budget, why, so you can
build more public housi
ng. You know what public housing
did, we had a nice ne'ighborhood, everything w
as fine,
then they came in with public housing, they built these$'H&H&@@big hig
h rises, or if you are out west or down south,
these long complexes that went 0
n block after block.
And you took a good neighborhood and you destroyed it,
an
d then you crammed people into the public housing, and
you made their lives wor
se, not better, and the taxpayer
paid the bill.   Some truth to it.
Welfare system 20 years later we said, oops, we
made a mistake. We wind up the
n blaming the victim.
The Government failures were not the problem of the
reci
pient but the Government that designed the programs
in the first place. What t
he programs really did was
disincentivized and penalized all the values and
vir
tues that we espouse as American citizens. Look what
the programs did, disince
ntivized ownership.   Public
housing, put people in the housing unit and said, i
t
doesn't matter how you treat the unit, doesn't matter
how you maintain the un
it, rent doesn't go up, rent
doesn't go do, you can never buy it, you can never
 sell
it. That is an unnatural experience for us as
Americans. Disincentivize
d ownership, disincentivized
marriage it's what the welfare system did.   Disinc
entivized marriage, disincentivized, disempowered$'H&H&@@the male, her wage ear


 nero And then we wound up
 penalizing and blaming the people who participated i
 n
 the program. But the aftermath, the leftovers, American
 public now says publ
 ic failed and I'm not so quick to
 reinvest.
 Why else the anger? Sorry to say, but I believe
 racism plays a part. You look
   a poor people in thls
 nation.   It's very too often, it's too often synonymous
 with minority people in this nation. And it's therefore
 someone else's problem
     It's their problem, it's
 someone different, and racism which is very much al
 ive
 and well in America then plays a role in this problem.
 It's about an econo
 mic selfishness. All those years we
 heard about a deficit, this great deficit
 and we
 couldn't afford to reach out and help anyone else. Now
 there is a sense
  that the economy is going well and
 people are doing well, and it's okay for me
 , it must be
 okay for everyone. And on a higher level I believe this
 is someth
 ing I refer to as an aspiration deficit.    Which
 is somehow we got to a place as
  a people where we no
 longer to aspire for better. We somehow say, maybe this
 is all it can be. Maybe this is as good as gets and we$'H&H&@@shouldn't even t
 ry to be any better as a people. An
 aspiration deficit.   We don't even dream a
  bolder vision
 or a brighter future.   It is a complacency, it is an
 anger which
  is pervasive and which is the real obstacle
 towards long term Government and p
 olitical action.
 We've got to knock down that obstacle.
 How do we do it? Well the truth is, we do have the
 answers but we're going to
 have to make the case. The
 truth is Government did make mistakes in the past,
 but
 we've learned from those mistakes and we now know the
 right way to do it.
 We have Government programs that
 work because Government realizes that Governme
 nt can't
 do it, you can do it. And the Government program that
 works best is t
 he Government program that puts out its
 hand and says, let's do this in partner
 ship. You
 community based organization, you faith based
 organization, we're no
 t, this is not about an


institution that is going to be able to do this, it"s
g
oing to be persontoperson community, the community.
Community based organizati
ons are the vehicle for
change.  Faith based organizations are the vehicle for
change. When you are going to help a person, or help a$'H&H&@@neighbor, help a
 community you talk about holistic
change. Unless you can not only help the bo
dy, but also
the sole and the spirit you won't really solve the
problem.
And we know the kind of programs that we have to
have that will make a differen
ceo We know that work
works. We know the best thing we can do is get a person

into a job, give them that pride and dignity and sense
of self that comes from
 their earning and they have a
future ahead of them.   We know, by the way, that
 that's
all the person wanted on welfare to begin with.   Welfare
reform is the
person wanted the welfare check and you
have to pull it out of their hands.   I'
ve been all
across this nation, I never once have had a person come
up to me an
d say, Mr. Cuomo, do me a favor, help me get
a welfare check. Help me get a jo
b, help me get dreams,
help me get transportation, but that's what people
reall
y wanted. Get those jobs programs, get the
training, get private businesses 10
cated back into
community. Understand that you're going to have to
incentivize
 the private businesses to get them back
there, otherwise they will not go. Th
at's where$'H&H&@@Government can playa role. That's what empowerment
zones ar
e all about.
President Clinton APIC, APIC, American Private
Investment Corporation in the St
ate of the Union and
investment bank for poorer communities.   We can
subsidize
development overseas. Why don't we subsidize
the Government right here at home
  (indiscernible). We
know that homeownership works, homeownership works.
Givi
ng a person a stake in the community. Getting
people out of rental housing and
 into ownership where
they have equity, they have control. We know that that
w
orks.   And we know that partnership with faith based


and community based organi
zations where Government
provides resources, but the community based
organizati
ons provide the programs an the initiative and
the incentive, that's how it wor
ks.  That has to be the
formula for the future.
It's not going to happen otherwise, this is not
about Federal, State, and local
 government anymore.
It's communitybycommunity, making the organizations
that
are there grow and blossom. That's what we are
trying to do at HUD. That's wh
at Father Joe Hakula is$'H&H&@@all about at HUD. That's what the incentive for

community and faith based organizations are all about.
Think about it, HUD to
day has no relationship with
community based organizations. We've talked eithe
r to
governments, city governments, state governments or what
they call public
pousing authorities. But there was no
venue, there is no seat at the table for
  community based
organizations, notforprofits. That was yesterday,
that is not
  tomorrow.
You are the vehicle of tomorrow and that's what the
Center fo"r Community Based
Partnerships is all about.
Now we have 28 billion dollars per year in funding,
  28
billion, that's billion with a "B", that is a lot of
money.    This year the
President proposed the largest
increase in the HUD budget in the past 15 years.
   We can
make a real difference with these funds, but only if you
are at the ta
ble, only if you are part of the program,
part of the initiative. We have prog
rams that can build
housing, programs that can create jobs, programs that
can d
o transportation, programs that can do welfare to
work.   But it's up to you, th
e farmer and the flood,
we're there, Joe Hakula is there, we have our hand out,
$'H&H&@@but let's form those partnerships and let's go forward
together.
And as we are building the programs let's also
remember the second goal and the
  longer term goal, which
is we're also going to have to change that public
opin
ion.   We're going to have to end the anger. We're
going to have to end the apa


thy. We're going to end the
complacency and let people know that we can actual
ly
solve these problems that have defined resolution for so
long.   We're going
to have to let people know that we
can do better as a nation and as a people th
en we are
now doing. This nation is not a success where it stands
today and pe
ople know it. All this talk about the
economy is going great, 18 million new j
obs, lowest
interest, poverty down, unemployment down, all of which
is true, al
1 of which is success on one level.    It does
not mean we as a nation are succes
sful. And something
within people tells them that.    They don't feel that we
ar
e a success. They see real problems all around them.
They just have to know t
hat it can be better than this.
They have to know there is still a possibility
  that we
can aspire to a higher place. We don't judge each$'H&H&@@other.   We n
ever said that we are a success by the size
of our bank account.    We said we ar
  a success as
individuals by the way we treat one another, by what we
believe,
by our values.
Well then it's also true we judge a nation as a
whole.    The DOW Jones hitting r
ecord heights doesn't
mean we're a success. The stock market hitting a new
hig
h doesn't mean we're a success.    Tell me how you
treat one another, tell me how
  you live and I'll tell
you whether or not you're a success. My job to visit
p
laces that it's not even close. And to the Colonius
 (phonetic sp.) on the Texa
s, Mexico borders, people live
in hell holes. The (indiscernible) Greens, publ
ic
housing in Chicago.    People wouldn't let their poodle
live in apartments tha
t we have children living in.
You go to the inner city (indiscernible) you to go
to the inner cities in Bedfo
rd Heights (phonetic sp.)
and you see the same type of poverty, the same type 0
f
hopelessness that we saw 20 years ago. And you say,
well, you know the econo
my is doing great in America, I
don't know if you noticed 18 million new jobs.
 They


didn't notice and it doesn't mean anything.   You could$'H&H&@@be talking
about a different planet. When you have
those pocket of poverty, where you hav
e that kind of
need and you have that kind of despair then you are not
a succes
s.
We pride ourselves as a nation of laws, as a nation
of justice. Central to our
 concept we are a nation of
justice. Look what they are doing in this town tod
ay in
the name of justice. The United States Congress
consumed with justice.
They want justice, they are
going to have a trial.   They are going to call
witn
esses, they are going to take depositions to find
out if we are just as a socie
ty, because they want
justice with this President. That's not justice, that
is
 not justice, that is an in justice because it is a
distraction. To call that
justice, that is not the
justice that the bible talks about, that is not the
ju
stice the great thinkers talked about, that's not the
justice that the great Ie
aders talked about.
They talked about a higher form of justice. How
about economic justice, that's
 justice. We have the
greatest economy in history on the planet but you still
have one out of five children tonight sleeping in$'H&H&@@poverty.   Is that your
 definition of justice. How about
social justice. Where we've gotten to a pIa
ce as a
people where we can have our homeless brothers and
sisters sleeping on
the street, 600,000 of them, and it
doesn't even phase us anymore. We've gotte
n to a place
where it is okay, where we can now walk down the street
and just w
alk by them and not even see them anymore.
Where we've gotten to a place as a
people, as a
community where we'll pickup trash, we'll pickup an
aluminum can t
o recycle before we bend down to help our
brother and sister. That is not just
ice.
There are higher forms of justice. There is
educational justice, educational j
ustice.  We said there
should be justice in our education system, which is we
h
ave two educational systems right now.   We have a
private education system and


we have a public education
system. And you go to that private education system

because you can pay the tuition and not question the
future is yours.  But who
a beyond to you who goes to the
public education system because your future may
be closed
by the time you enter the first grade.  Because you're
not going to h
ave the skills, you're not going to$'H&H&@@(indiscernible).
Private education system's child goes in, first
grade they put you, sit you dow
n at the computer, you're
on the Internet.  Public school they can't even figur
e
out to get you a basketball net.  Private education
system, they sit you down
, they give you a Pentium
Processor. Public education system the most
sophisti
cated piece of electronic equipment is a metal
detector that you walk through 0
n the way to class.
That is not, that is not justice.
There is environmental justice. There is racial
justice, which is in many form
s, one of the truest
senses and forms of justice. And boy we have a long way
t
o go on that.  Just look what happened, looked what
happens today, look what ha
ppened in 1998 in America.
The sins that we committed.  The racial in justices
 in
Jasper, Texas. An African American man was chained to
the back of a pickup
 truck and dragged to his death like
an animal, for no reason except for the co
lor of his
skin. A gay man in Denver taken, beaten, and hunt on a
fence.  In N
ew Jersey second night Rashashana and a
swastika is on the tombstones in a Jewi
sh cemetery. You$'H&H&@@want to talk about justice, Lord, we have them already

to go.  That is also your job and your message.  Run
your programs, serve your
 community, and also get the
word out. Remind people that there is a higher fo
rm of
justice and that there is a higher aspiration. That
this is not success
as a people and that we can be
better as a people.
We can strive to do more, we can strive to be
closer. That words like communit
y and civility and
compassion are not a dream, they are something that can
be r


eal and we can make it real. We can be better than
we are. We have to dare to
 aspire. We have to dare to
dream. And you have to be the prophets and the ch
ange
changers for that inspiration. Because if we don't
change the American pe
ople we will never change the
political will and we'll never change this nation
, it
can't be done, people want it to be done, people want it
to be done.  You
can see the void, you can hear the
vacuum, just give them the hope, the sense 0
f
possibility that it can be real.  With that sense of
justice that is politica
1 TNT. You put those together
and there will be a real explosion in this natio
n for$'H&H&@@the better. Make it happen.   Thank you very much.
(MUSIC)
D?D(DEND OF AUDIOTAPED)
\
\
*!DD&*dd+O*511:*?     D*




    $'H&H&@@DDDDD@@
                       CERTIFICATE OF AGENCY

      I, Carol J. Schwartz, President of Carol J. Thomas
Stenotype Reporting Services, Inc., do hereby certify we
were authorized to transcribe the submitted audio
cassette tape, and that there
after these proceedings
were transcribed under our supervision, and I further
c
ertify that the forgoing transcription contains a full,
true and correct transc
ription of the audio cassette
furnished, to the best of our ability.



                              CAROL J. SCHWARTZ
·

                                   PRESIDENT




     $'H&H&@@================== END ATTACHMENT   1 ==================


