RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-FEB-1999 10:26:02.00

SUBJECT:   Go team

TO: J. Eric Gould ( CN=J. Eric Gould/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
American Cancer Society Statement on Clinton Budget
U. S. Newswire
3 Feb 15:09

American Cancer Society Statement on Clinton Budget Proposal
To: National Desk, Health Writer
Contact: Steve Rosa of the American Cancer Society, 202-661-5710

WASHINGTON, Feb. 3 /U.S. Newswire/ -- Following is a statement by
Francis L. Coolidge, American Cancer Society board chair, regarding
President Clinton's proposed FY 2000 budget:

"The president's FY2000 Budget provides important funding targeted
at supporting tobacco prevention and reducing health disparities for
medically underserved, but misses the mark on other critical cancer
control programs.

"We are extremely pleased to see the ever increasing commitment of
the White House to reducing tobacco use. With tobacco at the root of
30 percent of all cancers, there should be greater resources
available to prevent our youth from ever beginning to use tobacco
products. The administration has earmarked funds for increased
tobacco control efforts, especially for the u.S. Food and Drug
Administration and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's
Office on Smoking and Health. This shows that the president is
seriously committed to stopping tobacco-use among our youth.
Additionally, we applaud the president's support of the federal suit
against the tobacco industry to recover Medicare costs for
tobacco-related disease.

"The president's budget provides for innovative approaches to
reach the medically underserved. In order to cut down on cancer
incidence, we must reach those traditionally unable to afford or
participate in preventive and quality health care. The Society itself
has an on-going commitment to addressing this important issue.

"The American Cancer Society commends the president for including
the Medicare Clinical Trials Demonstration Project in the budget.
This cancer treatment initiative is an important project to advance


knowledge of new ways to fight many cancers. The Society would like
to see this benefit expanded to all Americans.

"Although there are many parts of the budget with which we agree,
chronic disease and cancer research programs funding falls far short
of the Nation's needs. These programs, administered mostly by the
National Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, are vitally important to the health and well-being of the
Nation. As the baby boom generation ages, funding for chronic disease
prevention and control must increase or we will be fighting a losing
battle in containing health care costs and protecting the health of
all Americans.

"On behalf of our 2 million volunteers and more than 19 million
donors, the American Cancer Society will work with the president and
the Congress to help finalize a budget which provides the necessary
resources for preventing, detecting, treating and curing cancer."

(For more information on the specific proposals addressed in this
statement, contact Susan Polan at 202-661-5716.)


ACS ANALYSIS OF
President's 2000 Budget Blueprint

Tobacco Initiatives:
-- Increases the federal tobacco tax by 55 cents-per-pack in an
effort to reduce the rate of tobacco use by teens. Because all the
revenues generated by this increased tax will be used to pay for the
costs of tobacco-related diseases in federally funded programs like
Veterans and federal employees benefits, it will not trigger the
dollar for dollar offset that was part of the state settlement.
-- Reaffirms the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA's) full
authority to keep tobacco out of the hands of children and provides
for an additional $34 million for the FDA's tobacco enforcement
budget (bringing the total funding level to $68 million) .
-- Increase funding for the Centers for Disease Control's toba'cco
control efforts by one-third, from $74 to $101 million ($27 million
increase). The two anti-tobacco initiatives for States- ASSIST and
IMPACT- will be combined into the National Tobacco Control Program.
The grants to States will increase by 29 percent, from $51 million in
FY99 to $66 million in FY2000.
-- The president's budget assumes that the Federal Government can
recoup its share of the State settlement based on their contention
that U.S. taxpayers paid a substantial portion of the Medicaid costs
that were the basis for much of the State settlement with the tobacco
companies, the FY2000 Budget does not suggest that any portion of
these funds should be spent during this fiscal year. In addition, the
Administration noted they will work with the States and the Congress
to enact tobacco legislation that, among other things, resolves these
Federal claims in exchange for a commitment by the States to use
tobacco money to support shared national and State priorities which
reduce youth smoking, promote public health and children's programs,
and assist affected rural communities.
-- Contains $20 million to pay for necessary legal costs for the
Department of Justice's federal lawsuit against the tobacco industry
to recover Medicare costs for tobacco-related disease. The
administration will propose that recoveries will be used to enhance
the security of Medicare for future generations.
-- Includes funding for smoking cessation for veterans (was part of


a overall veterans health package; no dollar amount indicated).

Minority and Medically Underserved Populations:
-- Provides for a new public health initiative using of
competitive grants. The program is designed to encourage local public
officials and others to work closely with providers (estimated cost
$1 billion over five years) :
1. to improve coordination of the delivery of services;
2. to establish accountability in the system for assuring adequate
patient care;
3. and to increase the number of services delivered, ultimately
improving the quality of care and expanding access for the uninsured.
-- Provides $135 million for health education, prevention, and
treatment services for minority populations (funding is dispersed
into various agencies including CDC, AHCPR).
-- Proposes a four-pronged funding strategy for the Indian Health
Service (IHS) , which includes: 1) increased resources to $170 million
 (8 percent increase) 2) a coordinated effort to ensure that HHS
health grants provide assistance to Native Americans; 3) review of
reimbursements from Medicaid and Medicare; and 4) increased vigilance
to ensure that Federal funds are used properly. The budget makes note
that the increased funding will help IHS to finance an additional
34,000 breast cancer screening mammographies for Native American
women between ages 50 and 69, reduce incidence of complications
related to chronic diseases such as diabetes and enable approximately
130 new community-based public health nurses to provide outreach
activities, including home visitations, well-child examinations,
immunizations, prenatal care, health fairs, follow-up visits, and
missed clinical appointments.

Research:
-- National Institutes of Health: $15.93 billion ($320 million or 2.1
percent increase):

o National Cancer Institute- $2.668 billion ($65 million or 2.4 percent
increase)
o Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine- Includes $50 million

-- Agency for Health Care Policy and Research- $206 million ($35
million, or 21-percent increase) The increase will go to enhance
knowledge about how best to measure and improve the outcomes and
quality of medical services and expand information on new priority
health issues (e.g., vulnerable populations, the impact of managed
care, pharmaceuticals research and other activities). Also includes
$10 million in research on eliminating health disparities for
minority populations.

Clinical Trials:
-- The budget establishes a Cancer Clinical Trials Demonstration
program for Medicare beneficiaries. The three year, $750 million
demonstration program will cover the patient care costs for
beneficiaries who participate in certain cancer clinical. trials.
Funding priority will be given to trials that would most assist the
Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) in making f~ture coverage
policy decisions for cancer-related treatments and to substantive
trials designed to address specific research questions. Although HCFA
would run the demonstration, it would not draw upon Medicare's trust
funds.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)


The CDC received $3.1 billion ($201 million or 7 percent
increase). The president's efforts to provide substantial investments
for the Bioterrorism Response Initiative and Infectious Diseases
Control Efforts resulted in cuts to several programs and level
funding in others.
-- Chronic Disease Control and Prevention (C&E): The C&E line,
which hosts a variety of critical cancer control programs including
prostate, skin & colorectal cancer awareness/ education programs, and
environmental health lab, was level funded at $80 million. While the
cancer registries program, the breast and cervical cancer early
detection program, and the Office on Smoking and Health are housed in
the Chronic and Environmental Disease Control and Prevention Program,
the president provided for separated lines for these programs (as
indicated below) :
1. The Office on Smoking and Health will receive an increase of
$27 million (bringing the total to $101 million)
2. Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program was level
funded at $159 million.
3. Cancer Registries was level funded at $24 million.
-- The Preventive Health Services Block Grant (all the small
cancer programs) was reduced by $30 million.
-- Race and Health Demonstration Programs (funding also
incorporated in the president's efforts to provide health education,
prevention, and treatment services for minority populations -- as
noted above under Minority and Medically Underserved) was increased
$25 million (total $35 million). CDC Prevention Health Research was
level funded at $15 million.

OTHER HEALTH CARE INITIATIVES IN BUDGET:

Investments in Long Term Care:
The budget includes: a $6 billion initiative that includes a tax
credit to compensate for the cost of long-term care services; a new
National Family Caregivers Program; a national campaign educating
Medicare beneficiaries about long-term care options; and a proposal
to provide the authority to allow the Federal Government to offer
private long-term care insurance to its employees at group rates. It
also includes a new investment to strengthen nursing home quality; a
housing initiative .to create and integrate assisted living facilities
and Medicaid home and community-based long-term care; and a new
Medicaid option that equalizes eligibility for people with long-term
care needs in community settings.

Improving Access to Health Coverage:
-- The president's budgets allows people between the ages of 62
and 65 to buy self-financing Medicare coverage.
-- The Budget offers the option of a Medicare "buy-in" to
workers between the ages of 55 and 62 who have lost company-sponsored
health care coverage because their hours were scaled back, or their
employer relocated or stopped operations.
-- Also, requires employers to guarantee access to health
insurance to retirees between the ages of 55 to 65, by providing
these retirees the option to "buy in" to the company sponsored plan
at a fair price.
-- Small Businesses with fewer than 25 employees will be provided
a tax credit to join voluntary health purchasing coalitions (cost $44
million) .
-- The budget proposes to help the working poor, whose income
makes them ineligible for the traditional Medicaid program, by
allowing them to retain temporary health insurance through Medicaid
·
    until they can secure private insurance.

    Improving Medicare Managed Care:
    The budget would help communities where the Medicare managed care
    plan companies have left by providing earlier notification, reducing
    administrative burden on health plans, and extending plan coverage
    proposal deadlines.


