RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey K. Nussbaum ( CN=Jeffrey K. Nussbaum/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-FEB-1999 09:13:17.00

SUBJECT:     (Now) VP's Anti drug remarks

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
These are revised with some VP language, please give me a call at 6-9005
with comments/changes.

Jeff

REMARKS BY VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE
ANTI-DRUG EVENT
Monday, February 8, 1999

I want to start by thanking Jessica Hulsey [HULL-see] for sharing her
story. Just finding the courage and strength to survive and even thrive
in a home where drugs -- not parents -- are in control is remarkable.
But your commitment to make sure that no other child has to live through
the fear and uncertainty you endured is an inspiration for us all.  You
are a truly exceptional young woman, and I thank you for being here today.

        Sadly, we know that JessicaD,s story is not unique -- and that she
speaks for the thousands of families who suffer through that same
nightmare of powerlessness and frustration.

        But one of the most important thi~gs that JessicaD,s story and the
ads from our media campaign teach us is that we do have the power to fight
drugs.  If each of us takes action, at every level of government, in every
community, in every house of faith, and in every home ... if we reach out
to our young people -- as parents, mentors, and peers -- before drug
dealers reach them ... if we join forces, united and relentless in our
determination to win this war, we can make our nation stronger than ever
in the 21st Century.

         For years, it seemed that crime was an insurmountable and ever-increasing
problem.   But we put in place a tough, smart anti-crime plan, with more
police, tougher punishment, and better prevention.    Six years later, we
know that our strategy is working -- beyond our expectations. Around the
country, in cities large and small, crime is down to its lowest rates in
25 years.

        We are beginning to win the war against crime, and we can win the
war against drugs -- by marshaling the forces and resources of our
nation.  Year after year, our administration has secured the largest
anti-drug budgets in history, with more money for drug enforcement agents,
for border and customs control, for education and outreach, for treatment
and prevention. under the leadership of General Barry McCaffrey at the
Office of National Drug Control Policy, our efforts have begun to pay
off. Overall drug use by adults has dropped to more than half of its
highest levels in 1979. Even drug use by our young people -- which seemed
to be getting worse every year -- has finally begun to decline.

           But when drug dealers still roam our streets and rob our children
·
    of their dreams, when drug-related crime still ravages our neighborhoods,
    we know we must do more.  with our economy the strongest in a generation
    and our confidence rising, we have a rare opportunity -- and an obligation
    -- to redouble our efforts in the war against drugs.

            We must start by recognizing that our nationD,s drug problem was
    not born in isolation and does not exist in a vacuum.  It is an
    interconnected problem -- so our solutions must also be interconnected.
    We must mount an all out effort to banish, crime, drugs, disorder, and
    hopelessness from our streets, once and for all.

            BROKEN WINDOWS THEORY ...

            To deal with the drug problem, we need to do more to expand opportunity
    and create jobs for young people, especially in communities that have too
    often been passed by in good times.  ThatD,s why I was so proud to
    recently announce our second round of Empowerment Zones, to bring the
    spark of enterprise back to our inner cities; and that is why I am working
    so hard to help people move from welfare rolls to permanent private sector
    jobs.

            To deal with the drug problem, we need to do more to improve our schools
    and help all of our students to reach high standards. We need more after
    school and summer school programs to keep young people learning in the
    classroom in the hours after the school bell rings, but before the work
    whistle blows -- the hours when young people are more likely to fall prey
    to drugs.

            And to deal with the drug problem, we need a comprehensive anti-drug
    effort that fights drugs on every front and uses every weapon we possess.

            That is why I am so pleased to release our AdrninistrationD,s 1999
    National Drug Control Strategy. This is not a short-term plan designed to
    produce short-lived results.  It is a comprehensive, long-term strategy,
    with more money for drug testing and treatment ... better drug-law
    enforcement in our communities and better drug control on our borders
    and better anti-drug education for young people, including our media
    campaign.

            And our plan is backed by the largest anti-drug budget ever
    presented to the Congress: Our AdrninistrationD,s balanced budget for 2000
    includes nearly $18 billion to keep drugs away from our borders, off of
    our streets, and out of our childrenD,s reach.

            I want to say a special word about our National Youth Anti-Drug Media
    Campaign. We launched this campaign last year because we knew that when
    it comes to fighting drugs, attitudes drive actions.  Young people who
    understand the damage drugs can do to their lives -- and the lives of the
    people they love -- are simply less likely to use them.

            Since we kicked off the campaign in July, we have reached
    literally millions of young people with a powerful message: drugs are
    illegal, drugs are wrong, and drugs can kill you. Although it is too
    early to fully measure our success, we are seeing evidence that our
    anti-drug message is getting through.

            I am particularly pleased that in addition to our general market
    advertising, we have launched the strongest multi-cultural communications
    effort ever mounted by government, focused on reaching young people of
    every ethnicity and national origin. Drugs speak only the language of


destruction, but with ads in 10 languages, we are speaking to all of our
youth and the adults who influence their lives.

        One big reason for this success is the remarkable response of the private
sector to our challenge to join our fight against drugs.  In six months,
our campaign has generated more than $165 million in matching
contributions for paid anti-drug ads. Virtually every major network has
produced high profile anti-drug public service announcements with their
best known celebrities -- you just saw a few of those -- and donated air
time to scores of non-profit organizations for their own anti-drug PSAs.

        I am so proud of all of our efforts -- especially at the ONDCP --
to fight drugs. But making our anti-drug strategy work is not a job fqr
just one agency, but for every agency, 365 days of the year.  That is why
President Clinton has called on every single Cabinet agency to redouble
their efforts in our fight against drugs.
        Next week, President Clinton will travel to Mexico, a critical
partner in the fight against drugs. A major portion of the drugs that
come into our country come through Mexico, across the 2,000 mile border we
share.   This illegal drug trade endangers Mexicans and Americans -- and
it is in our nationsO, mutual interest to work together to shut it down.

        The Alliance Against Drugs that President Zedillo and President
Clinton adopted in 1997 is making progress -- and we are committed to
building on that progress.  I am very pleased that last Thursday, the
Mexican government announced it will be spending $400 to $500 million over
three years to buy new planes, ships, radar and law enforcement equipment.
By sharing resources, information, and experience, we can secure a safer
future for both of our nations.

        Our battle against drugs is a fight to the finish -- and it is not
a job for government alone. It will take all of our efforts and energy,
all of our courage and compassion.  It will take everyone of us, looking
ahead to a day when the scourge of drugs no longer threaten our children,
our communities, or our collective future.   I believe that we will reach
that day, together, and I look forward to working with all of you to build
a stronger nation for the 21st Century.

       Thank you.


