      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-FEB-1999 12:55:39.00

      SUBJECT:   our suggested language on bilingual education

      TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      (from Jon and Tanya)

      Our added language is in bold -- in paragraphs 4 and 5. Based on further
      conversations, we think the language below will help address concerns from
      the groups and be consistent with Administration policy.

      SUPPORTING STUDENTS WITH LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY

              Students with limited English proficiency (LEP) are the fastest
      growing population served by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.
      According to State educational agency data, the number of LEP students
      grew 24 percent between 1992 and 1995.

              Many of the fastest growing LEP student populations are in States
      and communities that have little prior experience in serving these
      students.  For example, ten States (Alabama, Georgia, Idaho, Indiana,
      Nebraska, Nevada, North Carolina, Oregon, Tennessee, and Virginia)
      reported increases in the numbers of LEP students greater than 46 percent
      between 1992 and 1995.

              Our nation derives a great deal of strength from our diverse
      population, and we have to capitalize on the strengths and potential that
      every child brings to the classroom.

              Our clear goal is that LEP students should be able to speak and
      read English after three consecutive years in our schools. We are equally
      committed to ensuring that LEP students reach challenging academic
      standards in all content areas. And we are committed to developing
      legislation that preserves flexibility for states and school districts to
      provide the most appropriate, research-based instruction for each child.


              Our reauthorization proposal for the Title VII bilingual education
      provisions seeks to achieve these two very important goals by emphasizing
      the same two key strategies we are pursuing throughout the ESEA:
      improving teacher quality and strengthening accountability.

                  To increase teacher quality, for example, all institutions of
      higher education applying for Title VII grants, would be required to show
      that their teacher education programs include preparation for all teachers
      serving LEP students.


         To strengthen accountability and ensure that LEP students reach our
 three-year goal of learning English, both Title VII grantees and Title I
 schools would be required to annually assess LEP student progress in
 attaining English proficiency.

         LEP students who have been in a U.S. school for less than three
 years would continue to be included in the Title I assessment system, but
 after three years reading assessments would be conducted in English.
 Schools and districts will be held accountable, as part of the larger ESEA
 accountability provisions, for their progress in ensuring that LEP
 students reach the three-year English language proficiency goal.

         I also believe that AmericaO,s children need to become much more
 fluent in other languages. We are very far behind other nations when it
 comes to giving our students a mastery of other languages. There are
 teenagers in Europe who can easily speak three languages.  I am certain we
 can do a much better job at giving our students at least a fluency in
 English and one foreign language.  There are currently over 200 two-way
 bilingual education programs that teach English and a foreign language and
 allow all students to truly develop proficiency in two languages.


