RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Ann_O'Leary@ed.gov@INET@LNGTWY ( Ann_O'Leary@ed.gov@INET@LNGTWY [ UNKNOWN]

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-FEB-1999 10:08:20.00

SUBJECT:     Final Final ESEA Testimony

TO: Tanya E. Martin@eop ( Tanya E. Martin@eop [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan H. Schnur@eop ( Jonathan H. Schnur@eop [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan@eop ( Elena Kagan@eop        OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
        Please ignore my message from last night.

        This is the final version of the testimony that was delivered to the
        Hill.


                                  Forward Header

Subject: Final Final ESEA Testimony
Author: Bill Cordes at USDOED
Date:    2/9/99 12:47 AM


Please ignore the previous message (sent 8:01 PM Monday 2/8) and its
attachment
 (eseafin.doc) , which purported to be the final version of Secretary
Riley's ESEA
reauthorization testimony for Tuesday's Senate hearing. The real McCoy is
attached to this message as "finaltst.doc". Some parts of the earlier
message
were accurate:    this attachment also does not include either a cover sheet
or
the 5 charts referenced in the testimony.
==================== ATTACHMENT      1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:      0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D84]MAIL422971149.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
000000000002000000F50000000000000000100000F700000001000000FEFFFFFFOOOOOOOOF300
0000F4000000FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                 Hex.-Dump Conversion

Good morning Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee.

        I appreciate this opportunity to present the Administration's views on the upcoming
reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) of 1965. The
Administration is working on a detailed reauthorization proposal that we plan to submit for
your consideration next month. The Department will also soon submit to Congress several
reports evaluating the implementation and impact of Title I, other ESEA programs, and Goals
2000. Today I will provide an overview of our reauthorization efforts, as well as some of our
specific recommendations. Ifthere is one overriding principle that defines what we hope to
accomplish, it is to end the tyranny of low expectations and raise achievement levels for all of
our young people.

         Let me begin by urging the Committee to develop a single, comprehensive bill
reauthorizing the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. Some have suggested a title-by-
title approach that could lead to several separate bills. This concerns me, because we have
worked very hard with the Congress in recent years to develop a comprehensive approach to
Federal support for education reform. If our efforts are to be successful, it is very important
for all the pieces to fit together, complementing and reinforcing each other to help States,
school districts, and schools to make the changes needed to raise achievement for all students.
This is why the Administration is developing a single, integrated reauthorization proposal,
and I hope you will do the same.

         I also want to point out that with the nearly simultaneous reauthorization of the
Department's Office of Educational Research and Improvement, we have a unique
opportunity to develop a comprehensive agenda for independent research to support improved
practices and instruction in elementary and secondary education. We should make every
effort to develop research-based solutions to the many challenges we face in elementary and
secondary education, and to get the best information on what works into the hands of parents,
teachers, principals, and superintendents across the Nation.

                 BACKGROUND AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS

        This is, of course, this Administration's second opportunity to work with Congress on
improving the ESEA. The 1994 reauthorization-the Improving America's Schools Act-
took direct aim at transforming a Federal role that for too long had condoned low expectations
and low standards for poor children. Along with the Goals 2000: Educate America Act, the
1994 reauthorization reflected a bipartisan effort to raise expectations for all children by
helping States and school districts to set high standards and establish goals for improving
student achievement. The 1994 Act included provisions to improve teaching and learning,
increase flexibility and accountability for States and local school districts, strengthen parent
and community involvement, and target resources to the highest poverty schools and
communities.

       There is strong evidence that these changes, particularly the emphasis on high
standards, have helped States and school districts carry out the hard work of real education
reform. States that led the way in adopting standards-based reforms-like Kentucky,
Maryland, North Carolina, and Oregon-found new support from Federal programs that
helped them to raise reading and math achievement. In other States, the new ESEA and Goals
                                                         Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                2

2000 encouraged and supported improvements in teaching and learning tied to high standards.
For example, in a very positive report on Goals 2000 by the General Accounting Office
(GAO), we were most pleased that State officials described Goals 2000 as "a significant
factor in promoting their education reform efforts" and a "catalyst" for change.

                                      Signs of Progress

        Partly as a result of changes at the Federal level and our new partnerships with the
States, 48 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have developed state-level
standards and two States have pushed for standards at the local level. More importantly, there
are promising signs of real progress toward meeting these higher standards in the classroom.
The National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), for example, has shown
significant increases in math scores at the 4th, 8t\ and 12th grades (See Chart I). The National
Education Goals Panel reported that between 1990 and 1996,27 States significantly increased
the percentage of 8th graders scoring at either the proficient or the advanced level on the
NAEP math test (See Chart 2).

        Tomorrow the National Center for Education Statistics will release its national report
card on reading, and I understand we will see some improvement. Making sure that every
child can read well and independently by the end of the 3rd grade is a key benchmark of
whether or not American education is improving. This has been a very high priority for the
Administration and over the past few years a strong, bipartisan consensus has emerged on the
importance of helping all children master this key prerequisite for all further learning. Title I
provides substantial resources to improve reading instruction, and last year, Congress on a
bipartisan basis passed the Reading Excellence Act to strengthen State and local efforts to
improve reading in the early grades. We also now have some 20,000 College Work-Study
students serving as reading tutors.

                                  "Leading-Edge" States

        Turning from the national to the State level, individual States have made notable
progress in a very short period of time (See Chart 3). North Carolina, for example, more than
doubled the percentage of its 8th graders scoring at the proficient or advanced levels on the
NAEP math test, from 9 percent in 1990 to 20 percent in 1996. In Texas, the percentage of
4th grade students reaching the NAEP proficient or advanced levels rose from 15 percent in
1992 to 25 percent in 1996.

        The National Education Goals Panel issued a report authored by the RAND
Corporation that examined experience of these two States. This report found that the "most
plausible explanation" for the test-score gains was an "organizational environment and
incentive structure" based on standards-based 'reform, defined as "an aligned system of
standards, curriculum, and assessments; holding schools accountable for improvement by all
students; and critical support from business." The report also tells us that the willingness of
political leaders to stay the course and continue the reform agenda, despite "changes of
Governors and among legislators," is another key element that has defined the success of
these two leading States.
                                                3             til:?i.,Qllmp Conversion

        Many states are not yet implementing proven practices that are working in some of
this Nation's "leading-edge" States. According to recent special report on accountability in
Education Week, 36 states issue school report cards, 14 do not, and fewer than half of the
parents in States that do issue report cards are aware of their existence. The report also tells
us that only 19 States provide assistance to low performing schools, and only 16 States have
the authority to reconstitute or close down failing schools. Only about half the States require
students to demonstrate that they have met standards in order to graduate, and too many still
promote students who are unprepared from grade to grade. So we have work to do.

                         New Flexibility at the Federal Level

         The 1994 reauthorization also brought real change to the way we do business at the
Department of Education. We made a very determined effort to give States and school
districts greater flexibility to make innovations that help all students reach high standards.
Our regulatory reform effort, for example, systematically examined every Department
regulation and set very specific criteria for regulating only when absolutely necessary. The
Office of Management and Budget has supported this approach, and other Federal agencies
have since adopted it as a model. Under our new regulatory criteria, we found that we needed
to issue regulations for only five of the programs included in the 1994 ESEA reauthorization;
thus we eliminated a full two-thirds of the regulations previously covering the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act.

        Another major improvement was to give States the option of submitting a single,
consolidated State application, instead of separate applications, for the majority of ESEA
programs. Not surprisingly, every State but one has adopted this approach, which both
reduces paperwork and encourages a comprehensive approach to planning for the use of .
Federal funds. Moreover, States now submit their single plan just once during the life of the
authorization cycle, with brief yearly updates to ensure accountability. States reported in
fiscal year 1996 that the consolidated application slashed paperwork requirements by
85 percent.

        In addition, the Department has vigorously implemented the waiver provisions
included in the 1994 reauthorization, which permit States, school districts, and schools to
request waivers of statutory and regulatory requirements that present an obstacle to innovative
reform efforts ifthere are adequate accountability safeguards in place. Our efforts included a
Waiver Hot Line as well as comprehensive waiver guidance at our site on the World Wide
Web.

        Since the reauthorization of ESEA in 1994, the Department has received 648 requests
for waivers from States and local districts and granted a total of 357 waivers. Overall, the
Department has approved 55 percent and disapproved 8 percent of all waivers requested. Of
the remainder, 28 percent were withdrawn largely because districts learned that they had
sufficient latitude or flexibility under existing law to proceed without a waiver, demonstrating
that the ESEA is more flexible than many people thought even without the waiver authority.
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                                          ED-Flex

        Another approach to flexibility is the ED-Flex demonstration program, which allows
the Department to give States with strong accountability mechanisms the authority to approve
waivers of certain Federal statutory and regulatory requirements that stand in the way of
effective reform at the local level. Congress has authorized up to 12 States to participate in
ED-Flex.

       We are proposing to expand ED-Flex to allow all eligible States to participate. I
believe such an expansion should be considered in the context of reauthorization, our
emphasis on accountability for results, and other programmatic issues. ED-Flex can be an
important tool for accelerating the pace of real reform in our schools, but it must be done
thoughtfully. ED-Flex cannot be used to get around established civil rights protections.

                   Federal Education Dollars to the Local Level'

       One final issue I want to touch on is the Department's performance in getting Federal
education dollars to the local level, where they can do the most good. There have been a
number of "dollars to the classroom" proposals over the past two years based on the
assumption that the Department of Education retains a significant portion of Federal
elementary and secondary appropriations to pay for administrative costs.

       The truth is that over 95 percent of all the dollars appropriated by Congress for ESEA
programs already go to local school districts. Almost all of the rest goes to States to provide
technical assistance, to support the use of standards and assessments, and to provide
oversight. If the "95 percent" figure sounds familiar, it is because some of those proposals I
mentioned promise to send 95 percent of Federal dollars to the classroom.

         I recognize that some may argue about whether the "local level" is the same as "the
classroom." My view is that once the funds reach the local level, it is up to local elected
school boards to decide how best to spend them to achieve the purposes of the programs
enacted by the Congress. We in Washington should not attempt to bypass local school boards
and deny them their lawful responsibility to determine how to meet the educational needs of
their students.

         I believe that these accomplishments-widespread adoption of challenging standards,
promising achievement gains nationally and even more improvement in "leading-edge"
States, and new flexibility for States and school districts-show that we were on the right
track in 1994. The evidence demonstrates a clear connection between raising standards and
raising student achievement. The record also shows, however, that many States and districts
are still phasing in the 1994 reforms. Taken as a whole, this experience provides a
compelling argument for the Administration and Congress to keep working together to help
States and school districts get high standards into the classroom, and to push for improved
incentives and strengthened accountability mechanisms to ensure that these reforms take hold.
                                                5       J lcx-IJtJmp   Conversion

              THE NEXT STAGE: RAISING ACIDEVEMENT IN
                   OUR SCHOOLS AND CLASSROOMS

        Let me layout for you the broader context for our ESEA reauthorization proposals. ill
1994, we broke sharply with the past and made a significant policy shift in putting an end to
the practice of giving students a watered-down curriculum. I strongly believe that the tyranny
of low expectations-and it is tyranny-has been one of the great flaws of American
education. We vigorously oppose the idea of "dumbing down" American education. Instead
of "dumbing down," we want to "achieve up."

         To support this effort we have developed a comprehensive, three-part strategy of
(1) targeting investments to disadvantaged children, with particular attention to the early years
of schooling; (2) improving teacher quality, and (3) real accountability. All these pieces need
to fit together if we want to raise achievement levels.

         First, our investments in the Title I, the Class-Size Reduction program, the Reading
Excellence Act, education technology, and after-school programs-to name just a few-are
all part of our effort to get communities and their teachers and principals the resources they
need to raise achievement for all students. We have put a real emphasis on the early years of
schooling because research and common sense tells you that if a young person can "master
the basics" early, they get off to a much better start in their education.

        We want to improve academic achievement for all students, with a special emphasis
on closing the gap upward between poor and minority students and other students. This is
why, for example, we are such strong supporters of reducing class size in the early grades.
Research from the Tennessee STAR study demonstrated that reducing class sizes in the early
grades led to higher achievement for all students, with poor and minority students showing the
greatest gains.

         Second, we think it is absolutely essential to put a highly qualified, dedicated teacher
in every classroom in America. John Stanford, the inspiring former superintendent from
Seattle who recently passed away, had this marvelous slogan that summed up his philosophy:
"the victory is in the classroom." Ifwe are going to achieve many more victories in the·
classroom, we simply have to raise teacher quality and get many more certified teachers into
our Title I schools. This is why we asked the Congress to create a strong teacher quality
initiative in the Higher Education Act reauthorization last year. Our intent here is to make
high standards part of every teacher's daily lesson plans. I will discuss this part of our
proposal in greater detail later on in my testimony.

                              Strengthening Accountability

        Stronger accountability is the third part of our broad strategy of improvement. We
believe that effective accountability measures-what business leaders call quality control
measures-can make sure that our investments are used wisely and actually produce the
desired results.

       Much of our thinking about accountability has been informed by successful
accountability initiatives at the local and State levels. The most thoughtful education leaders
                                                6      Hex-Dwnp Conversion

at the State and local level are doing what we are proposing: they are ending social
promotion, requiring school report cards, identifying low-performing schools, improving
discipline in schools and classrooms, and putting in place measurable ways to make change
happen, such as basic skills exams at different grade levels. They are striking a careful
balance between giving schools the increased support and flexibility they need to raise
achievement levels and, at the same time, holding schools accountable when they do not
measure up to clearly established goals. We are trying to strike that same balance in our
reauthorization proposals.

        Our emphasis on accountability in ESEA, and in particular in Title I, seeks to build on,
support, and encourage these growing State and local efforts to pick up the pace of standards-
based reform. Here it is important to recognize that we are not talking about more
regulations. We want better results. There is both a moral and a fiscal dimension to being
more accountable. We cannot afford to lose the talents of one child, and we cannot waste the
substantial resources entrusted to us by American taxpayers.

        The "either/or" thinking that has dominated the public debate about our accountability
proposals-more Federal control versus less local control-really misses the point entirely
about what we seek to achieve. If a State is putting its own accountability measures into
place, we are not demanding that they replace their measures with our measures. But if a
State does not have such requirements in place, then it makes a good deal of sense for them to
adopt our proposals. We expect States to do this because it is good education policy and the
right thing to do for the children.

        Our approach to increased accountability is one of graduated response, a range of
options-some positive and others more prescriptive-that can help break the mold and get
low-performing schools moving in a more positive direction. On the positive side of the
continuum, we give school districts greater flexibility if we see that they are making progress.
But if a school or a school district simply isn't making things happen, we want to work with
State and local officials to find out why and shake things up. The local school district, for
example, may not be giving teachers the real professional development time they need.

        If a school district is refusing to change, we are prepared to be much more specific
about how it uses ESEA funding. We do not intend to be passive in the face offailure. We
will help, nudge, prod, and demand action. And, if we have to, we are prepared to restrict or
withhold ESEA funding.

        We recognize that a complete accountability system should be multi-dimensional and
include high expectations and accountability for everyone in the system. All of us are
responsible for ensuring that all students reach high standards. The accountability measures
in our reauthorization proposal will be designed to (I) help school districts and states provide
students with a high-quality education, (2) focus on continuous improvement, and (3) hold
students, teachers, principals, schools, and districts to high standards.

       It is important to note that our proposed accountability measures reinforce and build
on similar provisions enacted in 1994. For example, the underlying structure of the Title I
accountability provisions is sound, and a minority of States are hard at work emphasizing
continuous improvement and holding schools and principals accountable for results. Many
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                               7

States, however, have not fully implemented the Title I provisions and have moved only
tentatively to make other changes based on high standards and accountability.

        We seek to speed up and strengthen the process by requiring States to take immediate
action to turn around low-performing schools, to give parents annual report cards, to end
social promotion, to improve teacher quality, and to have well-thought-out discipline policies
in place that make a difference.

                                Meeting State Standards

       First, we would retain the current Title I requirement that States establish assessments
aligned with State content and performance standards by the 2000-2001 school year. States
must also define adequate yearly progress for Title I schools and local school districts in a
manner that would result in continuous progress toward meeting State standards within a
reasonable time frame.

                 Turning Around the Lowest Performing Schools

        Second, States should take immediate corrective action to turn around the lowest
performing schools. Currently, there are over 6,500 schools and 1,300 school districts
designated under Title I as needing improvement. These schools and districts were placed in
school-improvement status after making little or no improvement over a period of two years.
Many of these schools are still showing no improvement despite receiving additional support.
We are saying our children have spent enough time in low-performing schools-it is time to
take action now.

     . States should quickly identify the lowest performing schools that are failing to show
improvement and provide additional support and assistance. If any school continues to show
no improvement, States should take bold action such as reconstituting the school or closing
the school down entirely and reopening it as a fresh new school. The Department's 2000
budget request includes a $200 million set-aside in Title I to help jumpstart this process of
State and district intervention in the lowest performing schools.

                                  Annual Report Cards

       Third, annual report cards at the State, district, and school levels should be a
requirement for receiving ESEA funds. The report cards should provide invaluable
information on improvement over time or the lack thereof. They should include information
on student achievement, teacher quality, class size, school safety, attendance, and graduation
requirements. Where appropriate, the student achievement data should be disaggregated by
demographic subgroups to allow a greater focus on the gaps between disadvantaged students
and other students.

        For report cards to make sense they need to be easily understood by and widely
distributed to parents and the pUblic. As I indicated earlier, while 36 States already require
report cards, many parents and teachers from these States say that they have never seen them.
Our proposal is intended to give parents a tool they can use to join the debate over bringing
                                                             ,/,.'-   L-JJlIP Conversion
                                                8

high standards into the classroom, to advocate on behalf of their children and their children's
schools, and to work with teachers and principals to make improvements.

        I assure you, ifparents find out that their children are going to an unruly or unsafe
school, there will be standing-room only at the next school board meeting and that can be a
very good thing. Ifparents discover that test scores are down at their school but up at a
nearby school, they will start asking questions and spark reform. In short, a good, honest
report card gives parents a real accountability tool that allows them to make a difference in
the education of their children.                .

       Separately, we have proposed an additional test that can help parents determine if their
children are measuring up: the voluntary national tests in 4th grade reading and 8th grade
math. The independent, bipartisan National Assessment Governing Board (NAGB) is
developing a plan for this test, in accordance with language in the Fiscal Year 1999
Appropriations Act. I ask the Committee to join me in looking carefully at this plan when
NAGB announces it later in the spring.

                                Ending Social Promotion

         Fourth, all States receiving ESEA funds should end the practice of social promotion. I
want to be clear that in calling for an end to social promotion we are not encouraging school
districts to retain students in grade; instead, we are asking school districts to prepare children
to high standards. That is why we have pushed so hard for programs .like Class Size
Reduction, the Reading Excellence Act, and the 21 st Century Community Learning Centers
after-school initiative, which invest in the early years and help to minimize the number of
children at risk of retention in grade.

        Research indicates that from 10 to 15 percent of young adults who graduate from high
school and have not gone further-up to 340,000 students each year-cannot balance a
checkbook or write a letter to a credit card company to explain an error on a bill. In addition,
about 450,000 to 500,000 young people drop out of high school between the loth and 1ih
grades. These are the young people who are hurt by current practices. We need to make sure
these students are given the support they need to succeed.

        The President's call for an end to social promotion is designed to tell students that
"performance counts," and to encourage districts and schools to take aggressive action to help
all students meet promotion standards on time. States should target their efforts at key
transition points, such as 4th, 8th, and 10th grades, and should use multiple measures, such as
valid assessments and teacher evaluations, to determine if students have met the high
standards required for promotion to the next grade. States would develop their own specific
approaches to match their unique circumstances.

        Strategies to end social promotion include early identification and intervention for
students who need additional help-including appropriate accommodations and supports for
students with disabilities. After-school and summer-school programs, for example, can
provide extended learning time for students who need extra help to J<:eep them from having to
repeat an entire grade.
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
                                Ensuring Teacher Quality

         Fifth, States must do more to ensure teacher quality. States receiving ESEA funds
should adopt challenging competency tests for new teachers, phase out the use of uncertified
teachers, and reduce the number of teachers who are teaching "out of field." Less than two
weeks ago, we released our first biannual report on Teacher Quality. In developing this
report, we are making a statement that we are going to keep coming back to the issue of
teacher quality again and again. The report told us that less than half of America's teachers
feel very well-prepared to teach in the modem classroom. Teachers cited four areas of
concern: using technology, teaching children from diverse cultures, teaching children with
disabilities, and helping limited English proficient (LEP) students (See Chart 4). This study
really is a cry for help and we need to respond.

        I know the Members of this Committee share our concern about teacher quality, and
we want to work with you to address that concern. Research shows that qualified teachers are
the most important in-school factor in improving student achievement, yet more than
30 percent of newly hired teachers are entering the teaching profession without full
certification, and over 11 percent enter the field with no license at all.

         Our ability to raise academic standards also is hindered by teachers teaching "out of
field." Overall, nearly 28 percent of teachers have neither an undergraduate major nor minor
in their main assignment fields. Another significant concern is the practice of using teacher
aides as substitutes for full-time instructors. All of these individuals are trying to do their
best, but where they are being asked to take the place of a teacher we are shortchanging our
students.

        High-poverty urban schools are most likely to suffer from unqualified teachers. Even
when urban districts succeed in hiring qualified teachers, attrition rates during the first five
years often reach 50 percent. Partly as a result of difficulties in recruiting and retaining
teachers, Title I schools are hiring teacher aides at twice the rate of certified teachers, and an
increasing number of aides are providing direct instruction without a teacher's supervision.

         Our ESEA reauthorization proposal would begin to address these problems by
ensuring that States adopt challenging competency examinations for all new teachers that
would include assessments of subject-matter knowledge and teaching skills. We would also
work to phase out the use of teacher aides as instructors in Title I schools, but at the same
time encourage paraprofessionals to become certified teachers by supporting State and local
efforts to build career ladders leading to certification. Our proposal will ensure that States
make significant progress in reducing both the number of teachers with emergency certificates
and the number of teachers teaching subjects for which they lack adequate preparation.

        The issue of improving teacher quality is also of great importance to all of us who
want to improve the education of children with disabilities. The ESEA is meant to serve all
children and there are growing numbers of children with disabilities who have been
successfully mainstreamed into regular classrooms. The ESEA and the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act can work together to make a real difference for many more of these
children. The Teacher Quality report told us that the majority of our teachers do not feel as
well-prepared as they should to teach children with disabilities. We want to work very hard to
                                               10           !-!ex-Dwnp Conversion

make sure that all teachers have the skills and the tools they need to teach these children to
high standards.

         We made a good start in improving teacher quality last year when Congress passed-
with strong bipartisan support-the new teacher recruitment and training programs in Title II
of the reauthorized Higher Education Act. Our ESEA reauthorization plan would build on
this success by providing resources to help States strengthen teacher-certification standards.
It also will include-in the new Teacher Quality and High Standards in Every Classroom
initiative-increased investment in the high-quality professional development that teachers
tell us they need to help all students meet challenging new State standards.

                                           TITLE I
         I have described some of the key, crosscutting measures for getting high standards into
all classrooms. Now I would like to outline some program-specific issues and
recommendations, beginning with Title I, which is the largest Federal investment in
elementary and secondary education. This $7.7 billion program reaches more than 45,000
schools in over 13,000 school districts. With the expansion of schoolwide projects following
the last reauthorization, the program now serves over 11 million students. In the 1996-97
school year, 36 percent of the children served were white, 30 percent were Hispanic, and
28 percent were African-American. Seventeen percent of the children served were limited
English proficient.

        Historically, Title I has been the single largest source of Federal funding targeted to
raising the achievement levels of students in high-poverty schools and helping to close the
achievement gap between these children and their more advantaged peers. The 1994
reauthorization focused on helping children in high poverty schools reach the' same high
standards expected of all students. In particular, States were required to develop content and
performance standards in reading and math, with aligned assessments to measure student
progress toward meeting the standards.

        The 1994 Act also improved targeting of resources, expanded the schoolwide
approach, and strengthened parental involvement. With regard to targeting, the GAO recently
reported that Federal programs are much more targeted than State programs. On average, for
every $1 a State provided in education aid for each student in a district, the State provided an
additional $0.62 per poor student. In contrast, for every $1 of Federal funding districts
received for each student, they received an additional $4.73 in Federal funding per poor
student. We believe targeting works, and we recommend leaving in place the Title I
allocation formula adopted by the Congress in 1994.

         The 1994 Act expanded schoolwide programs by permitting schools with poor
children making up at least 50 percent of their enrollment to use Title I funds in combination
with other Federal, State, and local funds to upgrade the instructional program of the entire
school. Since 1995, the number of schools implementing schoolwide programs has more than
tripled, from about 5,000 to approximately 16,000. Our reauthorization proposal would
maintain the 50-percent threshold for schoolwide programs.
                                                11            Hex-Dump Conversion

        Parents of Title I children are now more fully involved in their children's education
through the use of parent compacts called for in the 1994 Act. I want to stress that getting
parents involved in the process of school reform is often the spark that makes the difference.
I have been a strong advocate of increased parental involvement in education for many years
and there is a good reason for it. Parents are children's first teachers and they set the
expectations that tell children how hard they should strive to achieve. Teachers tell us again
and again that parents are too often the missing part ofthe education success equation.

        If you look at the chart entitled "Making the Grade," you will see why we are placing
such a strong emphasis on developing compacts between parents and schools for our Title I
children (See Chart 5). Four years ago, we created the Partnership for Family Involvement in
Education with 40 organizations. This Partnership has since grown to 4,700 organizations
and it continues to grow quite rapidly. To give you one example of its activities, last month
the Partnership sent out a detailed guide of best practices on how teachers can work better
with parents.

                       Progress Since the 1994 Reauthorization

        Current information on Title I indicates progress on several fronts. Title I has
contributed to the rapid development of challenging State standards that apply to all students
in Title I schools. Teachers in Title I schools are increasingly reporting that standards are
helping to guide instruction. Moreover, preliminary data gathered for this reauthorization
from States that have implemented the Title I standards and assessment provisions generally
show increased achievement levels in high-poverty schools. For the 1997-98 school year,
7 of the 10 States with standards and aligned assessments in place for two years report
increasing percentages of students meeting proficient and advanced performance standards in
schools with poverty rates of at least 50 percent. These State-level data are particularly
encouraging since final assessments are not required to be in place until school year 2000-
2001. This and other information, including data indicating that Title I is driving higher
standards to poor districts and schools, will be discussed in greater detail in the
Congressionally mandated National Assessment of Title I scheduled for release in late
February.

         Despite these initial signs of progress, I would be the first to admit that we are not
anywhere near where we need to be in turning around the thousands oflow-performing high-
poverty schools that are served by Title I. This is why the President is so strong for
improving teacher quality and increasing accountability. We know that many States, districts,
and schools are not making as much progress as we had hoped. However, we did not expect
to tum around the long, sorry history of setting low expectations for our Nation's poorest
children in just four years. I believe we are now on the right course in aligning Title I with
the best efforts of State and local school systems. We simply need to stay the course in fitting
all the pieces together to raise achievement levels.

       Finally, in looking at the impact of Title I, we should keep in mind that despite its size
and prominence at the Federal level, it represents about three percent of national spending on
elementary and secondary education. Title I is effective only when it works in partnership
with much larger State and local resources. Nevertheless, Title I can and should do more to

                                               12               ,.   A   [.J~.I.ip   Conversion

assist State and local efforts to raise the educational achievement level of poor and minority
children, and this is what we are trying to achieve through our reauthorization proposals,

                              Proposed Changes to Title I

        Building on what we have learned since 1994, our reauthorization proposal would
continue to hold at-risk children in high-poverty schools to the same high standards expected
of all children and to link Title I to State and local reforms based on high standards. We also
would continue targeting resources to areas of greatest need, supporting flexibility at the local
level to determine instructional practices, and encouraging more effective implementation of
schoolwide programs,

        Title I schools would, of course, be subject to the accountability provisions that we
would apply to all ESEA programs. Specific improvements to Title I would include targeting
additional resources to help the lowest achieving schools and phasing out the use of teacher
aides as instructors in Title I schools. We also would strengthen the school wide authority by
borrowing some of the successful features of the Comprehensive School Reform
Demonstration program, such as basing reforms on solid research about what works. And in
response to a key recommendation of the reading study conducted by the National Academy
of Sciences (NAS), we are proposing the use of diagnostic assessments in the first grade to
ensure the early identification of children with reading difficulties. In addition to these
proposals, we are giving serious consideration to phasing in a set-aside within Title I for
professional development aligned to standards.

        Separately, we support the continuation of the Comprehensive School Reform
Demonstration program, which we believe is generating some good models for improving the
effectiveness of the broader Title I program and for strengthening both Title I and non-Title I
schools.

        The Department also is considering proposals to promote high quality professional
development for early childhood educators and others to help children develop better
language and literacy skills in the early years. The NAS's reading study presented strong
evidence that children who receive enrichment services focused on language and cognitive
development in early childhood show significantly higher reading achievement in the later
elementary and middle school years. We believe that professional development based on
recent research on child language and literacy development-including strategies that could
be shared with parents-could make a significant contribution toward the goal of ensuring
that every child can read well by the end of the 3rd grade. Our proposal would target those
children most at risk of experiencing difficulty in learning to read by working with early
childhood educators in Head Start and Title I pre-K programs.

               QUALITY TEACHERS AND HIGH STANDARDS
                        IN EVERY CLASSROOM

        While every State has developed high standards, States and districts now need
significant support to continue the hard work of turning these high expectations into
classroom realities, This is why we are proposing a new initiative called Quality Teachers
and High Standards in Every Classroom. This initiative would help States and school districts
                                               13
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
continue the work of aligning instruction with State standards and assessments, while
focusing most resources on improving teacher quality through high-quality professional
development. Our proposal would build on and succeed the current Goals 2000, Title II, and
Title VI programs.

         The National Commission on Teaching and America's Future found that the biggest
impediment to improving teaching was the lack of access to the kinds of knowledge and skills
teachers need to help students succeed. We know from the Commission's report that most
school districts do not direct their professional development funds in a coherent way toward
sustained, standards-based, practical, and useful learning opportunities for teachers. We need
to provide teachers with opportunities to change instructional practices in order to ensure that
all children are taught to high standards.

        Just as we have real concerns about improving teacher quality, we need to recognize
the growing shortage of qualified principals. I was struck by a recent article in The
Washington Post, which indicated that about 50 percent of all schools face a shortage of
qualified principal candidates. That is a very heavy statistic.

        Unfortunately, we have not done enough to support the professional growth of
teachers and principals. Currently, most school districts spend less than three percent of their
budgets on professional development, while our best private companies spend as much as
10 percent to ensure that their employees have quality training and keep current in their work.
Ifwe expect the best from our students, we need to ensure that we are giving our teachers the
best support possible. And, we know it works. In New York City'S District 2, former
Superintendent Tony Alvarado made major investments in professional development-
investments that paid off in marked improvement in student achievement.

        The 1994 reauthorization included a greater focus on research-based principles of
professional development in the Eisenhower Professional Development program. Despite this
emphasis, recent evaluations of the Eisenhower professional development program found that
most districts did not receive enough funding to support the kind of on-going, intensive
professional development that works best to improve teaching skills.

        As we move into the next phase of getting high standards into schools and classrooms,
we must give States and districts the flexibility they need to strengthen their local efforts to
implement standards and to improve teacher quality. States could use these funds to continue
the development of standards and assessments and provide leadership to districts working to
align instruction with these standards and assessments and to improve professional
development for teachers. School districts would use their funds to implement standards in
schools and to invest in professional development in core subject areas, with a priority on
science and mathematics.

        States and districts would also be able to use these funds to meet new ESEA teacher
quality requirements related to the implementation and improvement of competency-based
assessments for initial licensure, the reduction of the number of teachers on emergency
credentials, and the reduction of the number of teachers teaching out offield.
                                               14
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
        Funds would be used to advance teacher understanding and use of best instructional
practices in one or more of the core academic content areas, with a primary focus on math and
science. The initiative also is designed to complement the strong emphasis on professional
development throughout our ESEA reauthorization proposal, including Title I, the Reading
Excellence Act, and Title VII.

        We would support activities to assist new teachers during their first three years in
classroom, including additional time for course preparation and lesson planning, mentoring
and coaching by trained mentor teachers, observing and consulting with veteran teachers, and
team-teaching with veteran teachers.

       Veteran teachers would be encouraged to participate in collaborative professional
development based on the standards developed by the National Board for Professional
Teaching Standards. The initiative also would support district-wide professional development
plans designed to help students meet State academic standards, the integration of educational
technology into classroom practice, and efforts to develop the next generation of principals.

             SAFE, DISCIPLINED, AND DRUG-FREE SCHOOLS

       The Administration's plans for reauthorizing the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and
Communities Act have actually taken shape over the past few years in our annual budget
requests. These proposals have been designed to strengthen the program by improving
accountability and by targeting funds to local educational agencies with (1) significant drug
and violence prevention problems and (2) high-quality, research-based programs to address
those problems.

        Our reauthorization proposal would build on these earlier efforts by emphasizing a
schoolwide approach to drug and violence prevention. All school districts receiving funds
would be required to develop a comprehensive Safe and Drug-Free Schools plan to ensure
that they have a drug-free, safe, and disciplined learning environment. These plans would
include fair and effective discipline policies, safe passage to and from schools, effective
research-based drug and violence prevention policies, and links to after-school programs.
These plans would also have to reflect the "principles of effectiveness" that the Department
recently established, which include the adoption of research-based strategies, setting
measurable goals and objectives for drug and violence prevention, and regular evaluation of
progress toward these goals and objectives.

         Program funds would be distributed in larger, more effective grants, because our
proposal would require States to award competitive grants to a limited number of high-need
districts. Program evaluations have consistently found that the current practice of allocating
funds by formula to all districts spreads funds too thinly to have a significant impact in most
districts. For example, about three-fifths of districts currently receive grants ofless than
$10,000, with the average grant providing only about $5 per student.

        Our reauthorization plan also would continue the Safe SchoolslHealthy Students
program, an interagency initiative that provides competitive grants to help school districts and
communities to develop and implement comprehensive, community-wide strategies for
creating safe and drug-free schools and for promoting healthy childhood development.
                                               15         j ...   A-Llump Conversion

Similarly, the Safe and Drug-Free Schools Coordinator Initiative would be continued under
our proposaL

       We also will propose to authorize the Department to provide emergency services,
especially mental health and counseling services, to schools affected by the kind of violence
we saw last year in Arkansas, Kentucky, Mississippi, Oregon, and Pennsylvania. This is the
$12 million Project SERV (School Emergency Response to Violence) initiative included in
the President's 2000 budget request. Our reauthorization plan also would set aside a small
amount of funding at the State level to support similar emergency response activities.

                         EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY

        Since the creation of Title III in the last ESEA reauthorization, the Federal
government has helped States and school districts make significant progress in bringing
technology into the classroom and making sure that teachers are prepared to effectively
integrate technology throughout the curriculum.

       With the support of Congress, the Department has delivered over $1 billion to States
through the Technology Literacy Challenge Fund. This investment is helping to increase the
number of classrooms connected to the Internet-just 27 percent in 1997-and has helped
decrease the student-computer ratio from 38 students per multimedia computer to 13 students
per multimedia computer.

        By early March, $1.9 billion dollars in E-Rate discounts will be provided to the
Nation's schools and libraries. This means that over the summer, the number of poor schools
that are connected to the Internet will rise dramatically. These discounts will also provide
affordable access to advanced telecommunications and ensure that all of our schools are
active participants in the technological revolution.

       To reduce the "digital divide" that could widen the achievement gap between
disadvantaged students and their wealthier peers, we propose to strengthen the targeting
provisions of the Technology Literacy Challenge Fund. Just 63 percent of high-poverty
schools had connections to the Internet in 1998, compared to 88 percent oflow-poverty
schools. The disparity is even greater at the classroom level, with only 14 percent of
classrooms connected to the Internet in high-poverty schools, compared to 34 percent of
classrooms in low-poverty schools.

       Federal dollars are helping to narrow this digital divide. High-poverty schools
received over two-and-one-halftimes more new computers than their low-poverty
counterparts in recent years. We will make a special effort to address the needs of rural
America, where technologies like distance learning can make a real difference, and to
coordinate ESEA technology programs with the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
Technology Development Program, which expands access to innovations in technology to
students with disabilities.

         Helping teachers integrate technology into their daily lesson plans will be another
special focus. Currently, only 20 percent of our teachers feel qualified to integrate technology
throughout the curriculum. The reauthorization proposal for Title III will focus on supporting
                                               16
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
State and local efforts to improve teacher quality, with a priority for developing partnerships
between local school districts, institutes of higher education, and other entities.

       We also want to strengthen our evaluation efforts to find proven and promising models
of how technology is improving achievement that we can bring to scale.

SUPPORTING STUDENTS WITH LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY

       Students with limited English proficiency (LEP) are the fastest growing population
served by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. According to State educational
agency data, the number of LEP students grew 67 percent between the 1990-91 and 1996-97
academic years.

       Growing numbers ofLEP students are in States and communities that have little prior
experience in serving them. For example, between the 1992-93 and 1996-97 school years, the
LEP popUlation more than doubled in Alabama, Alaska, Florida, Idaho, Nebraska, Nevada,
North Carolina, Oregon, South Carolina, and Tennessee.

       The President's goal is to hold schools accountable for ensuring that LEP students can
speak and read English after three consecutive years in our schools. We are equally
committed to ensuring that LEP students reach challenging academic standards in all content
areas. We also want to assure that States and school districts have the flexibility they need to
provide the most appropriate instruction for each child.

       I told you earlier that we cannot afford to waste the talents of one child. One of
America's greatest strengths has always been her diversity of peoples. Today, immigrants
and their children are revitalizing our cities, energizing our culture, and building up our
economy. We have a responsibility to make them welcome here and to help them enter the
mainstream of American life.

       Our reauthorization proposal for the Title VII bilingual education provisions seeks to
achieve these goals by emphasizing the same two key strategies we are pursuing throughout
the ESEA: improving teacher quality and strengthening accountability.

        To increase teacher quality, for example, all institutions of higher education applying
for Title VII grants would be required to show that their teacher education programs include
preparation for all teachers serving LEP students.

       To strengthen accountability, we would require both Title VII grantees and Title I
schools to annually assess the progress ofLEP students in attaining English proficiency.
These assessments will be used to inform parents of their children's progress and to help
schools improve instruction.

        LEP students who have been in U.S. schools for less than three years would continue
to be included in the Title I assessment system, but after three years reading assessments
would be conducted in English. Schools and districts would be held responsible, as part of
the larger ESEA accountability provisions, for ensuring that LEP students reach the three-year
English language proficiency goal.
                                                17
                                                               I leA- UU!ll[l Conversion


        I also believe that America's children need to become much more fluent in other
languages. We are very far behind other nations when it comes to giving our students a
mastery of other languages. There are teenagers in Europe who can easily speak three
languages. I am certain we can do a much better job at giving our students both a mastery of
English and fluency in at least one foreign language. There are currently over 200 two-way
bilingual education programs that teach English and a foreign language and allow all students
to truly develop proficiency in both languages.

     EXCELLENCE AND OPPORTUNITY IN PUBLIC EDUCATION

        As I travel around the country visiting schools, I continue to see the spark of
innovation and creativity in many public schools. Public education is changing quite rapidly
at the ground level and offering parents many more options in the terms of the type of schools
their children can attend and the courses they can take.

        This Administration is a strong advocate of public school choice as a way to
encourage and stimulate the creative efforts of school districts to give parents the opportunity
to find a school that best fits the needs of their children. Some discussions about choice
suggest that there is choice only outside of public education. Well, that is an assumption that
I want to challenge because it really has no basis in fact.

       You can go to school district after school district and find schools-within-schools,
magnet schools, school-to-work initiatives, high schools collaborating with local colleges, and
option and theme schools that focus in on specialized fields like the environment, the visual
and performing arts, communications and technology, back-to-basics, classical studies,
marine science, accelerated learning, the international baccalaureate, finance, and medical
sCiences.

        There is a great deal of variety in public education at the local level, from alternative
schools to community-based learning efforts, to schools-without-walls, to public schools that
focus in on the core-knowledge approach to education. There are public school districts like
Seattle that have a completely open choice model and many other school districts that offer
intra-district choice, inter-district choice, and controlled choice. Critics of public education
would do well to recognize that many public school districts are far more in touch with
parents than they think and are giving parents the choices they seek.

        I want to stress that one of the most important choices that parents can make about a
child's education is the choice of subjects and not schools. We have a growing body of
research showing that courses students choose in middle and high school are powerful
predictors of success-from mastery of high-level math to gaining entrance to top colleges
and universities. The best schools in America-whether they are public, private or
parochial-all share something in common: they place a strong emphasis on a rigorous and
engaging academic program. This is what makes these schools distinctive, and it is what
makes them work.

       That is why President Clinton has spent six years advocating the idea that by raising
standards, exciting families about their children's education, and putting quality teachers into
                                               18              Hex-Dwnp Conversion

every classroom, we can raise achievement for many, many more of our students-and
indeed, someday soon, hopefully all of our students. That is the best public policy for us to
support. Private school voucher programs affect only a small number of students, divert us
from our goal of high standards for all children, and take scarce resources from the public
schools that serve around 90 percent of America's children.

         While the Administration strongly opposes efforts to divert public funds to private
schools through vouchers or similar proposals, we want to encourage the development of new
choices within the public school system. This is why we worked very closely with Congress
to reauthorize the Charter School legislation that fosters creativity with accountability.

       This year we are proposing a new choice authority that would help us identify and
support new approaches to public school choice, such as inter-district magnet schools and
worksite schools, and promote a new, broader version of choice that works within all public
schools.

       We are interested in promoting public school choice programs in which the schools
and programs are public and accountable for results, are genuinely open and accessible to all
students, and promote high standards for all students. There are many successful public
schools that can provide models for improving low-performing schools, and one of our goals
must be to find ways to help States and local school districts to replicate these successful
models by leveraging"what works" for our children's education.

           MODERNIZING SCHOOLS FOR THE 21 ST CENTURY

       An additional priority for the Administration is to help communities build and
renovate the school buildings they will need to help all students reach challenging standards ..
The General Accounting Office has reported that States and school districts face over
$112 billion in repairs to existing schools. ill addition, many schools face severe
overcrowding as a result of the "baby boom echo."

        The Administration is proposing $25 billion in bonding authority to finance the
construction or renovation of up to 6,000 schools. As part of the President's tax legislation,
the Federal government will provide bondholders with tax credits in lieu of interest payments.
State and local bond issuers will be responsible for repayment of principal. ill addition,
through the reauthorized ESEA, we would make grants to involve citizens in designing
schools that reflect the needs of the entire community. The President's 2000 budget would
provide $10 million for these grants under the Fund for the Improvement of Education.

                                      CONCLUSION

        These are just the highlights of a comprehensive reauthorization proposal that will
span a dozen or so titles affecting nearly every area of Federal support for the Nation's
elementary and secondary schools. I encourage you to give careful consideration to our full
proposal when it is completed next month, and I look forward to discussing the specific
details of our plan as your work on your legislation.
                                               19                 Hex-Dump Conversion

       The framework for all of our thinking is the clear recognition that the days of
"dumbing down" American education are over. We want to "achieve up" and raise
expectations for all of our young people. As I have said so many times before, our children
are smarter than we think. We can and surely will debate the merits of the policy ideas that
we are putting forward today and that is healthy. Let us find common ground, however,
around the idea that we have both a moral and social obligation to give the poorest of our
young people the help they need to get a leg-up in life and be part of the American success
story.

         As I travel around the country visiting schools, I really do get a sense that things are
happening, that a very strong consensus has developed about what needs to be done to
improve our schools. All the elements are coming together: a new emphasis on early
childhood, better reading skills, high expectations for all of our young people, and
accountability for results. We are moving in the right direction and we need to stay the course
to get results and always remember that "the victory is in the classroom."

       In conclusion, I want assure you that the Administration is prepared to work with the
Congress to help and support local and State educators and leaders who are striving to raise
achievement levels. I hope that in the process, a new bipartisan spirit can evolve around
education issues. The last few years have been somewhat contentious here in Washington,
and we need to give a better account of ourselves to the American people.

       I will be happy to take any questions you may have.


ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   o   00:00:00.00

TEXT:
RFC-822-headers:
Received: from conversion.pmdf.eop.gov by PMDF.EOP.GOV (PMDF VS.1-9 #29131)
 id <01J7J8UXY7GG00006E@PMDF.EOP.GOV>; Tue, 9 Feb 1999 09:03:23 EST
Received: from storm.eop.gov by PMDF.EOP.GOV (PMDF VS.1-9 #29131)
 with ESMTP id <01J7J8QGWFCW00006U@PMDF.EOP.GOV>; Tue,
 09 Feb 1999 09:03:04 -0500 (EST)
Received: from vader.ed.gov ([165.224.216.253])
 by EOP.GOV (PMDF VS.2-29 #34437) with ESMTP id <01J7J7186F180002BS@EOP.GOV>;
 Tue, 09 Feb 1999 08:11:05 -0500 (EST)
Received: from smtpgwy1.ed.gov (smtpgwy1.ed.gov [165.224.16.166])
 by vader.ed.gov (8.9.1a/8.8.4) with SMTP id IAA01464; Tue,
 09 Feb 1999 08:10:56 -0500 (EST)
Received: from ccMail by smtpgwy1.ed.gov
 (IMA Internet Exchange 2.12 Enterprise) id 0033EFE2; Tue,
 09 Feb 1999 08:11:03 -0500
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 044 - FOLDER -008


[02/09/1999]
