        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

        CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-FEB-1999 15:06:58.00

        SUBJECT:     AmeriCorps speech draft

        TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TEXT:
        ---------------------- Forwarded by Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP on 02/09/99
        03:04 PM ---------------------------


           June Shih                   02/09/99 02:03:40 PM

        Record Type:       Record

        To:      Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP, Shirley S. Sagawa/WHO/EOP
        cc:
        Subject:         comments?

        2/9/99
        Shih
        PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
        REMARKS FOR AMERICORPSD, CALL TO SERVICE
        UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
        COLLEGE PARK, MD
        FEBRUARY 10, 1999

                   Acknowledge:

                For the past six years, I have said that AmeriCorps is one of my
        proudest achievements as President. Derek, T.J., Leslie, Justin, Pepe,
        youD,ve just shown us all why.  You make America proud. You and your
        fellow AmeriCorps members here and across the country -- are the reasons
        why America is stronger than ever.

                Today I want to talk to everyone here, those who are in AmeriCorps
        and those who are still thinking about it -- about why it is important to
        give more Americans the chance to serve through AmeriCorps.

                 I want you to remember what it was like when I first proposed
        AmeriCorps more than seven years ago. Many of you were still in high
        school -- or even elementary school. Back then, if you watched the news,
        or read the paper, or listened closely to the talk at the dinner table,
        you could tell that it was a time of doubt for America. Our economy was
        troubled, our deficit high, our people divided. Too many neighborhoods
        were falling prey to drugs and crime. Too many children were growing up
        without parents, without hope.   Some wondered whether AmericaD,s best days
        were already behind us. A book called D&America, What Went Wrong?DB was
        at the top of the bestseller lists.

                But I was confident that the heart and spirit of America were
        still strong.  Today, weD,ve earned the right to write a new bestseller,


D&America, What Went Right!D8 We are living in the longest peacetime
economic expansion in American history.   We have nearly 18 million new
jobs. We have the lowest peacetime unemployment remained since 1957
when your parents were kids or teenagers.   wages are rising at more than
twice the rate of inflation. Crime has fallen six years in a row.    Our
welfare rolls are shrinking. More people live in homes they call their
own.  We have opened the doors of college to all Americans -- making
student loans more affordable, expanding Pell Grants, creating new Hope
Scholarships and other tax deductions.

        On my first day in office -- on the steps of the United States
Capitol -- I said that D&there is nothing wrong with America that cannot
be cured with what is right with America.DB And what was right with
America then, what is right with America now, is this: Our ethic of
citizen service.  For more than 200 years, we the American people have
always believed in every citizenD,s duty to give something back to our
communities and to each other.

        But over the past few decades,  two competing visions of
government stifled this ethic of service. On one side were those who
believed that if there was problem, the best approach was to set up a
bureaucracy to solve it. On the other side, there were people who said
that government was the cause of all our problems -- and that the only way
to solve them was by citizens acting independently, and only in their own
interests.

        I believed we needed to move beyond these two visions of
D&something for nothingD8 and D&everyone for himself 08 to a new ethic of
D&mutual obligation.D8 Everyone -- government, the private sector, and
most importantly, every citizen, had to take responsibility and move
America forward.   We needed to restore the spirit of service to America,
to make citizen service once again the experience and expectation of every
American.

        And I believed that if we were going to rekindle the spirit of
service, we had to start with you, our young people. Throughout this
century, America has always found a way to bring the energy and idealism
of young people to the task of meeting each generationD,s greatest
challenges. During the Great Depression, President Roosevelt started the
Civilian Conservation Corps, and gave young people the chance to work
together and earn money clearing trails, fighting fires, planting trees in
our forests and range lands. They left behind a legacy of national and
state parks that we all enjoy to this day -- Appalachian Trail, Skyline
Drive in Virginia.

        In the D+60s, President Kennedy asked young people to serve
America by serving in the Peace Corps -- teaching English, providing
health care, bringing running water and electricity to some of the most
remote villages of Africa, Asia and South America. Many of my generation
who served in the Peace Corps came home with a greater sense of their duty
to their communities.  Like Harris Wofford, like my HHS Sec. Donna
Shalala, they went on to become todayD,s leaders.

         I fought to create AmeriCorps in the same spirit of the Peace
Corps and the CCC -- to give your generation a new chance to serve
America and tackle the challenges of our time, to earn' money for college,
and even, to gain the skills and inspiration to become the new leaders of
the 21st Century.

        Now six years later, AmeriCorps is thriving.   I travel around the


country often --- and everywhere I go, AmeriCorps members are hard at
work.  Just last month, I met dozens of AmeriCorps members who were
working with the Red Cross and other organizations to help the families of
my home state of Arkansas rebuild in the wake of tornadoes.

        I ask the people who are not in AmeriCorps to seek out the
AmeriCorps members and ask them share their experiences. Like Justin,
T.J., Derek, Leslie, and Pepe, theyO,ve got powerful stories to tell: What
itO,s like to hear the pride in a studentO,s voice when after months of
tutoring she can finally point to a book and say O&I can read it myselfOB
... or to see the delight in a childO,s eyes as he climbs around on a
playground AmeriCorps helped reclaim from drug dealers.

        As a boy, I went to an all-white school.  I did not get to know
many children of different races.  That was the law back then.  But even
now, too often, we still donO,t get to know people who are different.
AmeriCorps can help us knock down the walls that still divide us.  By
working side-by-side with fellow AmeriCorps members from all walks of
life, you learn that we all have much more in common than we thought; that
what matters most is not the color of your skin, but your ability to get
things done -- to hammer a nail, to teach a child to spell, to extend a
helping hand.

        Now, we must give more of our young people the same opportunity
-- to serve and learn about America through AmeriCorps. That is why I
challenge you -- todayO,s generation of young people -- to answer a new
Call to Service. Throughout this year, I will be working with Harris, the
First Lady, and my entire administration to recruit more and more young
people to make a difference through AmeriCorps. This fall, we can boost
the number of AmeriCorps members by one quarter to 50,000 members.  And in
my new balanced budget, I plan to keep expanding AmeriCorps every year so
that by the year 2003, 100,000 young people will be serving at any given
time.

        So I challenge all of you young people sign   up for AmeriCorps.   I
challenge you to see for yourselves what AmericaO,s   real problems are:
what keeps a child from learning to read or growing   healthy or staying on
the right side of the law.  Find out for yourselves   what works and
doesnO,t work in solving these problems. And share    them with your fellow
Americans.

        I challenge the high schoolers in this audience to begin serving
their communities now.  Service can be lifelong habit.   In my balanced
budget, I am propose to allow high schoolers to join AmeriCorps -- by
serving part time during the school year and full time in the summers.

        I challenge you to dedicate a year or two of your lives to a cause
thatO,s larger than yourselves.  You may be tired of old people like me
reminding you that you are living the most exciting times of your lives.
With more tomorrows ahead of you than behind you, so many of you have the
time, the freedom, the energy to tackle the work of AmeriCorps -- packing
your bag at a momentO,s notice to go fight a forest fire, or moving into
some of our most remote towns and Indian Reservations to teach children.

        I challenge you to prove that your generation has not become a
generation of cynics and slackers, but a generation of patriots and
doers.

        Have faith in your own power to change the world.  When I was a
student in college, Robert F. Kennedy inspired so many of my generation to
..
     follow our highest ideals.  He told us that D&each time a man stands up
     for an ideal, or acts to improve the lot of others, or strikes out against
     injustice, he sends forth a tiny ripple of hope, and crossing each other
     from a million different centers of energy and daring, those ripples build
     a current that can sweep down the mightiest walls of oppression and
     resistance.DB

      His words are still true today. Whether or not you work through
     AmeriCorps, I ask you to send forth those ripples of hope.  Together we
     can build a mighty current that will carry us past our challenges into the
     brighter future we all hope to live in.


