RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-FEB-1999 10:19:08.00

SUBJECT:   draft statement from the President on NAEP scores      feel free to page me

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a draft statement on the NAEP scores.    As I mentioned, the VP's
office thinks the President should not "put out a statement because it
would undermine the VP's message today and that this reflects prior
discussions between Pat Ewing and Sosnick.   I told Pat Ewing to call Bruce
to discuss further. Anyway, the draft statement below reflects where the
VP and Riley statements on this today.   The national Center for
Educational Statistics (NCES) will portray a somewhat more mixed picture.
NCES will report the positive news --that average scores in reading have
increased in 4th, 8th,and 12th grades between 1994 and 1998. But they
will also report that only 8th grade scores have increased since 1992, and
that 4th and 12th grade scores have merely returned to 1992 levels. They
will also report that while higher percentages of 8th grade students
scored at or above the basic and proficent level in 1998 thaan 1994, there
were no significant changes in the percentage of 4th graders reaching
these levels. More 12th graders scored at the advanced and proficient
levels in 1998 than 1994, but the percentage of 12th graders scoring at or
above the basic level has increased since 1994 but are still below 1992
levels.  Secretary Riley still feels strongly that we should portray this
as encouraging news, not overstate it, and call for accelerating progress
in improving education and enacting the Clinton-Gore education agenda. )


"Today, Vice President Gore and Secretary Riley are holding a press
conference on new results published today by the National Center for
Education Statistics. The 1998 National Assessment of Educational
Progress D&Reading Report Card for the NationD8 shows encouraging news.
For the first time, average reading scores have improved in each of three
grades measured -- 4th, 8th, and 12th grade -- between 1994 and 1998.
These gains are small but significant. This nation is headed in the right
direction, but we must pick up the pace of our progress.  ThatD,s why
Congress needs to enact my agenda to improve education -- to ensure that
we end social promotion, end the use of unqualified teachers, turn around
failing schools, have orderly classrooms, and report to parents on the
progress of every school. We also need to work together across party
lines to provide support for expanded after-school and summer programs and
build on last yearD,s down payment to hire more well-prepared teachers to
reduce class size in the early grades where children master the basics and
learn to read."


