RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD    1 )
CREATION DATE/TIME: 11-FEB-1999 13:38:11.00

SUBJECT:     gary black gets depressed

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce R. Lindsey ( CN=Bruce R. Lindsey/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This is the first Gary Black report I can remember that did not conclude
that PM and RN would outperform the market -- and he wrote this before the
jury awarded $50m in punitives, when he expected $4m.  We're back in
business.

TOBACCO

Is Dead Money Now Bad Money? Litigation, Pricing Risks Starting To Strain
Value
Proposition.



HIGHLIGHTS

   1.We believe tobacco stocks will remain dead money until a new
settlement is reached
      with the federal government, with credits for personal injury and
other claims not
      covered by the MSA. This could take 9-12 months. While valuations
remain extreme,
      the combination of negative litigation sentiment, and escalation in
promotional
      allowances, will unnerve investors near-term.

   2.The industry has now lost 3 of its last 5 trials, but appears
resistant to pricing personal
      litigation costs into cigarettes. Given our view that this jury will
award punitive
     damages in the $2-$4 million range -- to a not-sympathetic plaintiff
-- litigation risks are
     likely to increase sharply in California, where 9 of 12 jurors can
reach a verdict, and
     where plaintiffs collect even if 99% to blame.

   3.We are increasingly alarmed about the aggressive pricing posture
taken by industry
     leader Philip Morris -- even as it gains share. On Monday, Philip
Morris boosted its
     quarter-end retail buydown on Marlboro from $3.00/carton to a
jaw-dropping
     $5.50/carton (cost $150 million, $.04/share per quarter)    which RJR


matched on
     Camel and Winston (worth $40 million, $.07/share per quarter). PM
management cited
     the $6.50/carton allowance by Lorillard's Maverick and Old Gold, with
collective share
     of 1.1%.

   4.We remain perplexed that many in the industry believe that settling
the AG cases was
     justified as an end in to itself    i.e., was not a means by which to
separate tobacco from
     food. We have learned that outside counsel for Philip Morris has
again advised against
     spin-off of Kraft or tobacco. The former may pose fraudulent
conveyance risks; the
     latter, while not a fraudulent conveyance, could increase the number
of claims against
     the parent, and create conflicting interests between separate boards.

   5.We continue to believe that sale or joint venture of RJR
International will do little for
     RJR's stock price. Cash or stock received would get buried below the
corporate
     tobacco liability umbrella -- hence could not be distributed as a
dividend or as share
     repurchases without triggering the same fraudulent conveyance
concerns that has so
     far blocked spin-off or split off of Nabisco.

    6.The silver lining in this verdict    and risk to a possible downgrade
    is that the
      industry may now fast-track a settlement with DOJ of the still
unfiled federal lawsuit.
      We believe the industry would pay $150 -$200 billion over 25 years a
nd cede FDA
      jurisdiction in return for offsets for personal injury and other
claims. Obstacle: DOJ
      must sue the renegades to force them into settlement.

   7.0ur favorite in the group remains RJR: With $lB/share upside if
Nabisco is spun off,
     management has to articulate a clear plan to unlock value in the next
month or two
     or lose the proxy fight to Icahn (deadline 3/12; annual meeting 5/12) .
 RJR may
     consider spinning off tobacco, which might not add value near-term,
but create an
     arbitrage opportunity between the two Nabisco's.

   B.Perhaps the biggest obstacle to a turnaround in investor sentiment is
that all three
     judges in the cases ahead -- Kaye in Engle, Gwin in the Ohio Iron
Workers' case, and
     Bailey in Newcombe, seem to favor plaintiffs. The Florida Supreme
Court is unlikely to
     rule on an unfavorable Engle "verdict" in Phase I until after at
least one final
     adjudication in Phase II -- which could take 6-9 months.

INVESTMENT CONCLUSIONS



Philip Morris, RJR, and UST are rated outperform. For the past month, we
have expressed
our view that tobacco stocks would remain dead money through Spring, given
the negative
sentiment associated with four separate trials, and our perception that
the federal
government does have the authority to bring a claim for post-1996 claims
against the
industry. The factors that have caused us to raise our near-term
bearishness to a new level
are: 1) a $3-$5 million dollar loss in what was probably the easiest of the
 four trials; and 2)
Philip Morris' decision to ramp up promotional spending on Marlboro even
though it
continues to gain share and the competitors cited for being aggressive are
minuscule. The
two catalysts that could boost valuations -- settlement with the federal
government with
credits for personal injury and other claims, and spin-offs I
recapitalizations -- are still months
away; hence, won't help valuations.

ADDITIONAL DETAILS

   1.Philip Morris disciples will say no, but Henley verdict will affect
sentiment for months
     to come. Last night, the jury in the Henley case found liability on
all eight of the
     plaintiff's claims, including strict liability, negligence, various
fraud claims and
     conspiracy. The jury also decided to award punitive damages, and will
return today to
     decide how much. While the industry and many investors will dismiss
this verdict as
     another one that will be overturned (industry's perfect track record
at trial remains
     intact, following the Florida 1st district court's reversal of the
Maddox verdict; all four
     cases that the industry has lost over 30 years have been overturned),
we believe the
     industry cannot ignore these factors: 1) This judge in Henley didn't
seem particularly
     biased; 2) The plaintiff, Patricia Henley, was not terribly
sympathetic; 3) Philip Morris
     -- and not B&W -- tried this case, and the attorney (William
Ohlmeyer) who led the
     defense is considered one of the best in the industry; 4) The jury
found against the
     industry on each of the eight claims, including fraud; 5) The jury
will likely award
     punitives in the $2 - $4 million range, which will surely cause many
more cases to be
     filed in California, where the statute was changed in 1996 to permit t
obacco lawsuits.

     One silver lining in this verdict is that it may convince many in the
industry that
     settlement of the AG cases, as an end in to itself, is not a
defensible position. We


     believe that forward thinkers within the industry will use this
adverse verdict -- and the
     threat of more adverse verdicts to come -- as a wedge to convince
those who believed
     the AG settlement would bring closure to enter into negotiations with
the federal
     government to bring about a new settlement. As we have said before,
the new federal
     settlement would likely require the industry to pay $150 - $200
billion over 25 years
      ($8 billion per year, would raise prices by $.35/pack), but give the
industry offsets for
     moneys paid out on personal injury and other economic recovery claims
not covered by
     the Master Settlement Agreement reached with the Attorneys General.
We believe a
     federal settlement is at least 9-12 months away.

    2.The shot heard around the industry: Philip Morris brings a cannon to
shoot a gnat. Our
      second major concern is the continued escalation in promotional
spending, led by
      Philip Morris. We have long complained about the lack of financial
discipline at Philip
      Morris, and this week's announcement that Philip Morris would
increase its
      quarter-end retail buydown on Marlboro to $5.50/carton, from
$3.00/carton, while still
      gaining share, served notice to us again that the company does not
follow the normal
      logic of competitive behavior. We could overlook the increased
litigation risks if the
      industry was incorporating the costs to pay for these litigation
risks into their pricing
      decisions, but this is clearly not the case.

      When asked why it was increasing Marlboro's promotional allowances,
Philip Morris
      told us that Lorillard's Old Gold and Maverick brands, which
collectively had 1.1%
      share of market in 1998 (up from 0.6% in 1997), had put in place
$6.50/carton
      buydowns for 1Q, which end March 31. When we expressed our disbelief
that. Philip
      Morris, which increased its share from 48.7% in 1997 to 49.4% in
1998, behind a
      surge in Marlboro share from 34.0% to 35.3%, we were told that Philip
Morris had
      heard of at least one instance of B&W's GPC and RJR's Doral matching
the
      $6.50/carton buydowns in the midwest. (GPC currently is offering a
$5.00/carton
      buydown in about 10% of the U.S.; Doral is running a normal
$3.00/carton buydown in
      about 50% of the market). In talking to distributors, we heard that
Philip Morris is
      apparently trying to force retailers to sign contracts for its retail
leaders program
      before the end of 1Q; unless a retailer has a contract, they cannot
get the $.55/pack


      buydown. Because, this was also true of the $.45/pack buydown in 4Q
(following the
      $.45/pack price hike), we tend to discount this.

      While Philip Morris makes clear in its promotional announcement that
"the allowance
      for our Marlboro price promotion scheduled for May and June 1998
remains at
      $.30/pack / $3.00 per carton," RJR has already announced its plans to
match
      Marlboro's $.55/pack buydown on Winston and Camel, and will likely be
forced to take
      up buydowns on Doral, its largest brand. If the promotion just lasts
through 1Q, and
      then normal promotional activity resumes, we would have to take
$.04/share from our
      Philip Morris 1999 estimate, and $.07/share from our RJR estimate. If
the $.55/pack
      promotion becomes the norm -- as Philip Morris' escalation from
$.20/pack to
      $.25/pack to $.30/pack in 1998 became the norm, we would have to
quadruple these
      impacts (MO $.20/share, RN $.30/share for all of 1999).

     With litigation risks increasing, pricing problems mounting, and a
federal settlement at
     least 9-12 months off, we cannot in good conscience tell investors to
buy these stocks
     near-term.-Hence, we reiterate our dead money call from the beginning
of January, but
     alter our message to suggest that the period of dead money will
likely last 9-12 months
     rather than the 3-4 months we originally projected. While UST is
largely unaffected by
     any of this, our experience is that when one stock in the group
languishes, they all do.
     Our favorite at this point would be RJR, given our view that Icahn
can win the proxy
     fight, or will force management to unveil a credible plan to unlock
value. As we have
     said many times, we believe that selling or joint-venturing Reynolds
International will
     add little to RJR's stock price.

   3.Henley: The painful details -- Plaintiff wins 8 of 8 counts. After a
month-long trial, a
      jury in California yesterday found Philip Morris liable to a 52-year
old woman with lung
      cancer and awarded her $1.5 million. The jury found liability on all
eight of the
      plaintiff's allegations, including strict liability (defective
product), negligence, various
      fraud claims and conspiracy. The jury also decided to award punitive
damages. One
      factor that made it easier to find liability on all counts is that
California law requires
      only 9 out of 12 jurors to agree on the verdict as to each count, and
they do not have to
      be the same 9 with respect to each count. Another factor which
distinguishes this case


     from cases in many other jurisdictions is that California, like
Florida, is a pure
     comparative negligence state. This means that if the jury finds
Philip Morris even 1%
     to blame for the plaintiff's injuries, they can assess damages. In
states that have
     modified comparative negligence rules, by contrast, the defendant is
not found liable
     unless he is more than 50% to blame for the plaintiff's injuries.

     However, this did not seem like a very compelling case from the
plaintiff's
     perspective, which does not bode well for the tobacco companies in
future trials. First,
     there was some question whether the plaintiff's cancer originated
outside of her lung
     and thus was not caused by smoking. In addition, the plaintiff did
not present strong
     evidence of addiction. She only made one serious quit attempt before
she quit cold
     turkey in 1997. And she did not seem like the most sympathetic
plaintiff because she
     has reacted very well to her cancer treatments and she did not call
family members or
     friends to provide emotional testimony in her case. In addition, in
her testimony Ms.
     Henley purportedly did not attribute her smoking to statements or
advertisements by
     Philip Morris, but said she started smoking because a boy she had a
crush on smoked,
     her friends smoked and she wanted to look cool.

      From reading the lengthy instructions to the jury and the complicated
verdict form,
      where the jury had to answer several questions before finding
liability on each count,
      we can get an idea of the jury's reasoning. In general, the jury must
have reached the
      following conclusions: that Ms. Henley's cancer originated in her
lung and was caused
      by smoking; that Ms. Henley was addicted to cigarettes even though
she was able to
      quit cold turkey on one of her first serious attempts to quit; that
Philip Morris
      continued to deny the dangers of smoking even after there was no
legitimate
      controversy on the subject; and that Ms. Henley relied on Philip
Morris'
      advertisements, misrepresentations and/or public statements despite
all of the
      information available about the dangers of smoking.

      Specifically, here are some of the hurdles that the jury had to
overcome before finding
      Philip Morris liable on each claim:

        1.Defective product. The jury could find that the product was
either defectively
          designed because it was more dangerous than an ordinary consumer
would


          .expect or that it was defective for lack of an adequate warning.
The jury could
           have found that even though the general public had some idea
that smoking
           could cause cancer, consumers did not really understand the
scientific evidence
           and the seriousness of the danger posed by smoking. In order to
find that
           cigarettes lacked an adequate warning, the jury would have to
find that Philip
           Morris knew or should have known the dangers but that the
ordinary users did
           not know those dangers before the warning labels were put on pac
kages in 1969.
           In previous trials, plaintiffs have introduced evidence that
scientists knew, and
           so the tobacco industry should have known, by the early 1960's
that smoking
           could cause cancer. Yet even a large percentage of doctors
continued to smoke
           through the 1960's, which demonstrates that the public did not
fully grasp the
           dangers of smoking.

         2.Negligence. On this claim, the jury was asked whether Philip
 Morris acted with
            reasonable care, taking all actions that a reasonably prudent
 corporation would
            take. The company had a duty to warn of any dangerous condition
 that it knew
            about or should have known about, if the company had reason to
 think that
            consumers would not realize the danger. In the verdict form, the
 jury was asked
            two simple questions, whether Philip Morris was negligent and
 whether this was
            a cause of the plaintiff's injury. There was no instruction
 about the plaintiff's
            negligence because Philip Morris withdrew its comparative
 negligence defense.
            The jury must have concluded that Philip Morris should not have
 challenged the
            emerging scientific evidence in the early 1960' s, but in.stead
 should have made
            sure consumers were aware of that information.
            The defense would have a better chance of prevailing on this
·count in states that
            have modified comparative fault rules. Then, if the jury finds
 the plaintiff 50% or
            more to blame for choosing to smoke, the defendant would not be
 held liable.

        3.Express warranty. In order to find liability on this count, the
jury had to find that
          Philip Morris made affirmative representations about its
cigarettes and that the
          cigarettes did not conform to the promised quality. It seems
that the jury also
          had to find that Ms. Henley was addicted-- the instructions said
that a plaintiff


          may not recover damages for injuries caused by use of a product
which occurred
          after the person learned of the defect which is claimed to
constitute a breach of
          warranty, unless the jury finds that under the particular
circumstances a person
          of ordinary prudence would have used the product despite
knowledge of such
          defect. By the 1980's, Ms. Henley was exposed daily to warnings
about the
          hazards of cigarettes, specifically the risk of cancer. Yet,
from what we heard of
          the evidence, she did not seriously try to quit smoking before
1997. So the jury
          could not have awarded damages for this count unless they found
that any
          reasonable user would have continued to smoke even after
learning that
          smoking could cause cancer. To reach this conclusion, the jury
must have found
          that smoking is addictive.

        4.Fraud by Intentional Misrepresentation. The plaintiff had to
prove that Philip
          Morris made a representation of a material fact and that Philip
Morris knew that
          the representation was false or made the representation
recklessly. This
          seemed difficult to prove because scientists have not actually
proven that
          smoking causes cancer; rather, causation has been established
through
          statistical and epidemiological evidence. However, one
instruction to the jury,
          which must have played a role in their decision, said: "When one
party
          possesses superior knowledge regarding the subject of a
representation, and the
          other party is so situated that she may reasonably rely upon
such supposed
          superior knowledge, a representation made by the party
possessing such
          knowledge will be treated as a representation of fact although
if made by any
          other person it might be regarded as an opinion." Taking that
instruction into
          consideration, the jury must also have concluded that given
Philip Morris'
          special position, it was reckless in continuing to deny the
dangers of smoking.

          The plaintiff also had to prove that Ms. Henley relied on Philip
Morris'
          representations and that she otherwise would not have continued
to smoke. This
          seemed like a tough hurdle for the plaintiff, given the evidence
that the public
          knew the dangers of smoking at least by the 1960's, but the jury
must have
          believed that Ms. Henley was justified in relying on the tobacco


companies for
          information because of their special position. We are not familia
r with the details
          of the evidence in this case, but in Mr. Wilner's most recent
case in
          Jacksonville, he repeated this mantra throughout his closing
argument: "You
          buy, you rely." The jury must have accepted that premise because
they found in
          favor of the plaintiff. Ms. Henley may have made a similar
argument in this case.

        5.Fraud by Concealment. As with fraud by intentional
misrepresentation, the
          plaintiff had to prove that the fraud involved a material fact.
On this count, the
          jury also had to address this question: Would plaintiff have
acted as she did if she
          had known of the concealed or suppressed fact? Again, the jury
must have
          believed that Ms. Henley was justified in relying on Philip
Morris' statements
        . and disregarding all of the other information available to the
public about the
          dangers of smoking. We believe many other juries would reach a
different
          conclusion on this point and find that if the plaintiff did not
make serious
          attempts to quit by the 1980's, when the warnings on the
packages were strongly
          worded, then the plaintiff would not have quit even if the
industry had revealed
          all of its information on the dangers of smoking.

        6.Fraud by False Promise. Again, the jury had to find that Ms.
Henley would not
          have smoked except for her reliance on a promise made by Philip
Morris. It is
          unclear what false promise Ms. Henley allegedly relied upon; she
did not testify
          that she read the 1953 Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers or
was aware of
          the industry's promises contained in that statement. However, as
stated above,
          the jury may have inferred that Ms. Henley relied on Philip
Morris' promises
          from the fact that she continued to buy their cigarettes.

        7.Fraud by Negligent Misrepresentation. As with the other fraud
counts, the jury
           had to find that Philip Morris made a re~resentation as to a
material fact. And
           the jury also had to find that Philip Morris made the
representation without any
           reasonable ground for believing it to be true. The jury may have
based this
           finding on more recent misrepresentations by Philip Morris, made
long after the
           scientific community as a whole had accepted that smoking causes
cancer. Also,


          as with the other fraud counts, reliance is a hurdle for the
plaintiff to overcome.

        8.Conspiracy to defraud. In this count, the jury was told to
consider whether Philip
          Morris and other tobacco companies entered into an agreement to
conceal
          information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking.
However, the jury
          was told that if the plaintiff was nevertheless aware of the
concealed information,
          then Philip Morris should not be found liable on this count. The
jury must have
          found that Ms. Henley was not fully aware of the dangers of
smoking through
          general common knowledge, media articles, the Surgeon General's
Reports and
          cigarette warning labels. Other juries could certainly come out
differently on this
          point. The jury was also told that if the plaintiff would not
have acted differently
          even if she had the concealed information, then Philip Morris
should not be
          found liable. Although Ms. Henley did not make serious attempts
to quit even
          after the warning labels went on packages, the jury must have
concluded that she
          would have quit if the tobacco companies had shared all relevant
information with
          the public. Again, with similar facts, we would expect other
juries to reach a
          different conclusion on this point.


Punitive Damages. Yesterday, the jury decided to award punitive damages
but did not decide
an amount. Today there will be a short hearing on Philip Morris' net worth
and each side will
be given an opportunity to argue about the appropriate amount. Then the
jury will deliberate
agatn and decide what amount to award.

To find that punitive damages should be awarded, the jury had to find that
the plaintiff proved
by clear and convincing evidence that Philip Morris acted with oppression,
malice or fraud.
This is a higher standard of proof than that needed to prove liability for
compensatory
damages (preponderance of the evidence). The instructions said that clear
and convincing
evidence has such force that it demonstrates a high probability of the
truth of the relevant
facts. Oppression is defined as despicable conduct that subjects a person
to cruel and unjust
hardship in conscious disregard of that person's rights. Malice means
conduct which is
intended to cause injury or despicable conduct which is carried on with a
willful and conscious
disregard for the rights or safety of others. Despicable conduct is
defined as that so vile,
·
    base, contemptible, miserable, wretched or loathsome that it would be
    looked down upon and
    despised by ordinary people.

    Previously, only one jury has awarded punitive damages in a tobacco case,
    in Woody wilner'S
    last trial in Florida. That award was approximately $500,000 but it was
    overturned on appeal
    when a new trial was ordered; the appeals court decided that the case s
    hould have been tried
    in southern Florida, where the plaintiff was from, rather than in
    Jacksonville.


