RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-FEB-1999 11:25:55.00

SUBJECT:   State of American Education Speech

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I hope you received the materials I left you on the Secretary's speech.
I'll explain more in this e-mail.  Let me know how you would like me to
handle this.

The concept that may be in Secretary's speech is NOT the seven-year
recertification idea considered in the ESEA process, As the document I
left you describes, Riley would describe outline a model for teacher
certification and licensure that he would encourage states to consider.
The concept is essentially a 3-tiered licensing system, including 1) an
initial 3-year teaching license granted to a new teacher after passing
exams testing knowledge of content and pedagogy; 2) a "professional
license" granted after three years based on clear standards for what
teachers should know and be able to do, using assessments of performance
by their supervisor and other teachers, and 3) an "advanced license" which
is just a way of describing National-Board certification.

The Department is currently checking out likely reactions to this concept
and to the points described below.  They think -- but are not certain --
that reactions will be fairly positive. My sense is that the concepts are
good overall -- here are the few possible problems or points of contention
to consider:
1) One overall issue is why Riley is describing this model when the
Administration is not proposing it in ESEA.  Education's argument is that
Riley will describe this as a concept to begin exploring, but because it
is so untested, it is not something which we would require states or
school districts to do.  Education's view is that development of these
systems could be an allowable use of the "national demonstration programs"
piece of the teacher quality proposal in ESEA .

2) Their current document does say "renewal of the professional license,
whose frequency would be determined by the state, should include evidence
that teachers are keeping their knowledge and skills up-to-date".    I
don't think this is necessarily breaking much new ground, though it so so
vague that the press coverage of this would be affected by the way Riley
describes this in his speech and the way his staff answer questions from
the press.  It could be interpreted as periodic recertification and perhaps
 even opening the door for testing licensed teachers.  But Riley
apparently wants to include this idea, and Education is checking out
likely reactions today.
My view is that this could be OK if the language is developed and vetted
very carefully.


3) The current document also says that states or school districts could
supplement pay for teachers in high-need schools or shortage subject
fields.  I think this is a good concept, but this is another possible
point of contention.
4) Finally, the model includes extra pay for those teachers participating
in this new licensure system. As with these other issues, Education is
still gauging likely reactions to this concept.
S) The document I left you says this "wouldn't necessarily replace tenure"
but implies that it could.
Education has backed off this point, and will not mention tenure.  In
response to questions from the press, they would say tenure is a local
issue Riley's concept is not addressing.
Overall, I think the ideas are subtsantively good.  But I'll keep you
posted as Education apprises me throughout the day of reactions to these
ideas.  Let me know what you think about this and if you want me to handle
this differently.
"

