RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD]    )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-MAR-1997 19:26:57.00

SUBJECT:   Standards memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=ElenaKagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 03/03/97
07:29 PM ---------------------------




Michael Cohen
03/03/97 07:27:00 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         Standards memo

Attached is an edited version of the standards memo, based on your
suggestions this morning.   I've added a note in bold after the first
approach (lead a national crusade to impove reading and math ... ) that says
that the other approaches shouldn't be rolled out for 4-6 months, or we
may undermine our own initiative·.  I've then kept the "incremental
expansion" approach in. What do you think?

In addition, Pauline Abernathy is looking to put the current version into
FLOTUS briefing materials tonight. What do you think?




==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D36]MAIL49500716E.016 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750435F040000010A02010000000205000000817A000000020000555612F26FE3A439585B4B
CD97A5DE8EE626FB7E621AF1467DD8B42419B3C42601232DIC6A55OC2B2EC2DOEA75480923A3EB
36D5D42A3A2B7E4876F6lD8F3E5648COD926B3DC1B33D19567B4216A99F9242B006287A6FB8606
07AC9CODD9E7626161CD0064F1AD7AA132106BDD8CCBFD01CC256CAOF5EA3DCA75EEBB985D7E1E
A5630F1CB7AF6A4D288FB609996D1ED07B35A87EE8BFF4731F2245419~4CC62F09B96C509CA27F
983FD06A3DA252235243ABA86A24A8BBA9DB90EBE9EDAOB45CF2DB1035B5DB41EBFE86D33CBDEB
7CF3FD3A22942F3FFA1A7F51DC7COC8D46E8B847FOF4C77CC87D4088E13943AOF6DE5326C52484
C03AC778C6C1DB8279BEDD00085394C7CAF28BE773C2EBC66FE21EC756D94D1DD3E3A6862EAC1E
11EAA5C3D204EF1F40008F85F7081C4A3A84A7D315F7CF15F479CFD8E042DF1749A7C91A525A28
9976D18D7D5B772CCEB559C4FE6E43B05D777A66E016F50E3A207AD1615072D5536BF41FD7980B
624CE153F96331FD6D214BF87592DE52C022304A9B94A6454AFEOCD586F9B370A7F2CFOD19C336
45E15500AAE1E94FFE14DD76E15933342B8D75E450C9678EF4B8333E27150C9C6C9E96C1461907
11C7A1CE53E042AC6F897ADBC68F908A6BC3BD357DCC6E9282B62D6F18437A2555A92FB545012A
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

3/2                                                                         Draft


MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                 MICHAEL COHEN

SUBJECT:              NATIONAL STANDARDS AND TESTS: MEETING WITH EXPERTS

You will be meeting with a small group of experts (Marc Tucker, Diane Ravitch, E.D. Hirsch,
Rick Mills, Roy Romer, Hugh Price, Don Stewart) as well as Secretary Riley and Deputy
Secretary Smith, on national standards and tests on March 5. The purpose of the meeting is to
discuss a ragne of options about how to move this agenda forward. This memo should help to
prepare you for the meeting by summarizing the status of your proposal for 4th and 8th grade
standards and testing, and identifying several different directions future action could take.


I.     YOUR PLAN FOR NATIONAL STANDARDS AND NATIONAL TESTS IN 4TH
       GRADE READING AND 8TH GRADE MATH

Summary of Plan
In your State of the Union Address you challenged every state to adopt high national standards
and by 1999, to test every 4th grader in reading and every 8th grader in math to make sure these
standards are met. These national tests:

o      Will be aligned with widely accepted national content standards. In 4th grade
       reading, the test will be aligned with the National Assessment of Education Progress
       (NAEP) reading standards, developed through a consensus process involving reading
       specialists, curriculum experts, state officials and others throughout the nation. In math,
       the test will be aligned with the TIMSS internationa math standard agreed to by experts in
       41 countries, including the U.S .. The TIMSS standards are also very highly consistent
       with the national standards developed by the National Council of Teachers of
       Mathematics.

o      Will be based on existing, widely accepted tests, and will produce invividual scores
       for students and parents in terms of the national standards. The new tests will be
       based on the existing NAEP and TIMSS tests, which are designed to be administered to
       samples of students and produce national or state-level scores only. The new tests will
       provide comparable scores for individual students, revealing how well individual students
       perform relative to clear national or international performance standards .

o      Will be developed by recognized test developers. The U.S. Department of Education
       will contract with a test developer to create these tests. The contracting process will
       begin shortly. The tests will be piloted in Spring 1998, and available for use in schools
       throughout the country in the Spring of 1999.
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

o      Will be for voluntary use by states and local school districts. Use of these tests will
       not be required as a condition of receiving federal program funds.

o      Will be licensed to test publishers and interested states and school districts. As a
       result of this licensing agreement, the federal government will not be involved in
       administering or scoring the tests, and the tests will be readily available.

o      Will be available to parents and students on the Internet once the tests have been
       administered. Each year, after the tests have been administered, the test questions and
       answers will be released publicly and placed on the Internet, so that parents can find out
       whether their children are meeting national standards even if their state or district does
       not use the tests.

o      Will be the focal point for national efforts to prepare all students to reach the
       standards. The point of the national standards and tests is to help improve, not just to
       measure, student achievement. Between now and when the tests are first administered,
       there must be a focused, sustained effort, and the local, state and national level, to prepare
       students for these tests. America Reads is one component of such an effort.

We will provide you an overview of the implementation strategy for this initiative shortly.

Reactions To Date
The reactions to this plan have mainly been quite positive. The Washington Post, USA Today,
and many local and regional papers have expressed editorial support for this plan. As you
know, the BRT endorsed it the day after the State of the Union Address. Maryland has already
agreed to participate in the testing program, and Gov. Engler will announce his support later this
week. Diane Ravitch and Checker Finn wrote a very positive op-ed piece in the Washington
Post last week (copy attached). We expect other education and business groups to weigh in
positively as their Spring meetings occur. In addition, informal conversations with state and
local education officials and business leaders around the country have also been positive. They
welcome the tests, and believe. you have found a way of defining the issue that avoids old
political battles.

Criticism of this plan has taken three forms. First, some have said that your plan goes too far.
For example, Gov. Thompson wrote an op-ed piece in the New York Times, arguing that
standards should be left to the states and local communities. Second, some in the education
community have renewed the familiar argument that tests are not the solution to low
performance. Instead, they argue that additional funding, better teachers, safer and more caring
schools are what's needed. Third, some (e.g., David Broder, Robert Samuelson) have argued
that your plan does not go far enough, because it is limited to only two subjects and grade levels,
because it is not accompanied by significant new federal funding to prepare students to reach the
standards, or becuase you do not require students to pass tests in order to graduate from high
school or receive financial aid for college.

II. POSSIBLE NEXT STEPS
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

Your plan for national standards and tests in reading and math is a significant step forward,
especially in light of the controversy that has surrounded the standards movement in recent years.
 But it remains important to consider what else you can do to advance the standards movement
and improve student achievement. The key questions are whether to propose national standards
and assessments in other grades or subjects (and if so, in which), whether to leave these matters
entirely to the states, or whether to adopt some kind of intermediary position. In considering
these questions you should consider what steps make the most sense educationally, and also what
steps will move the country forward rather than reviving tired arguments. We must be
especially careful not to propose any new steps that will undermine state participation in this
initiative, because this will be the most visible indi.cator of success. Below I layout some basic
approaches.


Approach 1: Lead a sustained national effort to prepare students to reach the 4th and 8th
grade standards.
Setting national standards and creating national 'tests is not an end in and of itself; it should be
the starting point for serious efforts throughtout the country to prepare students to meet these
standards and thereby raise academic performance. The most important follow up to the plan
you have already announced is to lead a sustained effort to improve reading and math
performance even before the standards and tests go into effect. Your America Reads initiative,
is one significant element of this strategy, but there is more to be done. In reading, this includes
identifying and promoting effective instructional programs and teacher training programs,
especially through Title I and Goals 2000. And it involves a sustained effort to encourge
parents to read to their children on a regular basis.

A comparable effort is required in math. The TIMSS study highlights the need to undertake a
massive teacher retraining effort, and to challenge textbook publishers to create world class
textbooks. Employers and professionals, such as engineers and scientists, can be mobilized to
help by tutoring students, helping to train and support classroom teachers, assisting in developing
curriculum materials, and showing students how math concepts are used in the real world. We
have been working with OSTP, the Department of Education and the National Science
Foundation to develop a strategy for coordinating federal resources to improve teaching and
learning in math, and for systematically reaching out to the mathematical, scientific and technical
communities.

Pro's:
o      There is the more public support for a limited focus on the basics than there would be on
       a broader proposal involving other subect areas (e.g., history).

o      This approach has the best chance of avoiding debilitating old debates about national
       standards; by winning over Finn, Ravitch, Engler. et. aI., we have begun to transform the
       debate about national standards into a more productive one.                          '

o      Succeeding at this effort will make it easier to push a more comprehensive approach
       down the road; overloading it early on in the process with a more ambitious agenda may
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
       rekindle old debates and slow down progress on this more limited approach.
o      The most important thing to do is to help kids meet the standards; by sticking with this
       focused approach, we can spend scarce time and attention mobilizing resources to
       actually improve, rather than simply measure, student achievement.

o      If we can succeed in significantly raising student performance in these grades and
       subjects, achievement in other subjects and grades will also increase, because reading and
       math are a foundation for other learning, and because we will have demonstrated for the
       nation how to use standards and tests to boost achievement.

Con's:
o      Most of the arguments for national standards and tests in 4th and 8th grade reading and
       math can be made for other subjects as well: for the most part, well-crafted national
       standards will be more demanding than those set at the state and local level; we live in a
       mobile and diverse society, and national standards provide a common foundation for all;
       just as math is math regardless of where one lives, the same is essentially true of science,
       geography, and writing.

o      Our limited focus on reading and math could unduly restrict attention in local schools to
       these subjects, at the expense of science in elementary schools, history and literature in
       middle schools, etc.

o      Our limited proposal may seem small and inconsequential (even though it is not); we may
       be missing an opportunity to strike out more boldly.

o      As a strategic matter, we should recognize that whatever we ultimately accomplish will
       be less than what we aim for. Ifwe don't aim higher, we might not accomplish our
       current proposal.

The following approaches are intended as possible additions to, not substitutes for, the
approach described above. We believe that none of them should be pursued publicly over
the next 4-6 months, or they are likely to undermine efforts to sign states up for
participation in the 4th and 8th grade testing initiative.

Approach 2: Highlight the best standards in other subject areas and grade levels, and urge
states to adopt them.
States, local school districts, and a host of national organizations (e.g, National Geographic
Society, New Standards, etc.) have developed standards in all academic subject areas. These vary
in rigor and quality. This is the right time in the national standards process to take stock of
what has been developed, identify the most challenging and useful sets of standards from among
those developed by states and national organizations, and urge all states to adopt the best
standards and assessments that are identified. This would result in an overall improvement in the
level and quality of state standards, and greater commonality -- though not necessarily strict
uniformity -- in the standards among states. This 'bottom up" approach to national standards
would also retain a good deal of flexibility for states.
                                                                       H~GMWl8ion



This approach will work best if the judgements about the quality of existing standards are made
by a nonfederal source. It will be politically very difficult for the Education Department to
undertake this task. While no national organization is ideally suited for this role, the best
candidate is ACHIEVE, the new entity established by the governors and business leaders after
the 1996 National Education Summit in Palisades. The mission of this organization, once it is
operationaly, will be to assist states to develop and implement high quality academic standards
and tests. This approach, then involves reaching an agreement with the business leaders and
bipartsian group of governors that, together with them, you will urge states to adopt or adapt the
best standards identified by ACHIEVE.

Pro's:
o      By keeping the governors at the center of this approach, you will increase state
       committment to using the best standards and keep the approach a bipartisan one.

o      This approach can promote national consensus on what students should learn in various
       subject areas based on the best standards that are available, and without raising the
       specter of federal intrusion.

Con's:
o      ACHIEVE's capacity to do this work is untried. It has yet to hire an executive director
       or staff, or conduct any work. In addition, ACHIEVE was established explicitly to focus
       on state, rather than national standards, since the political atmosphere at the education
       summit was very much in opposition to both national standards and federal involvement
       in standards. It is not clear if the ACHIEVE governing board has the political room
       needed to alter its mission as envisioned here.

o      Unless the governors and business leaders actually push states aggressively to coalesce
       around a small number of high quality standards and assessments, this approach may
       make a difference in only a small number of interested states, while the rest continue to
       act independently.


Approach 3: Incrementally expand your proposal to include reading and math testing at
additional grade levels, and perhaps science as well. You can begin to broaden your proposal
by testing math in the 4th grade as well as 8th, and reading in 8th as well as 4th. (You could also
test both subjects in 12th grade, though the subject of high school testing is addressed in the next
approach, described below). In addition, you could expand your plan by including the TIMSS
science test at the 4th andlor 8th grades. Taken together, these steps would result in national
tests in 3 subjects at both the 4th and 8th grade level, with a broader and deeper impact on
teaching and learning.

Pro's:
o      Adding a 4th grade math test would give students and parents an additional, early
       benchmark to judge whether the student is proceeding on track. It would cause states,
                                                                        R~ ttJoWltSion

        schools, teachers and students to prepare sooner for international standards.
o       While not traditionally considered a basic skill, science is increasingly important.
        Adding science tests will help spur needed improvement in science curriculum and
        teaching. It also will increase support for the national testing plan from the scientific
        community, and will help grass roots efforts to involve scientists in efforts to improve
        public education.
o       A larger set of 3 subjects and 2 grade levels would make it more difficult to portray your
        plan as a small idea.

Con's
o       Expanding the original plan undermines our argument that we are focusing on the basic
        subjects at key transition points. Whatever the educational merits,this expansion will
        reduce our credibility and leave us vulnerable to the argument that the testing system will
        be expanded again in the future to include additional subject areas and grade levels.

o       Tests for three subject areas per grade level triples the amount of testing time required to
        participate in this initiative. This alone will be an obstacle to state or local participation,
        especially if these tests are added on top of state or local tests, rather than replacing them.

o       Though we have not yet costed out an expanded testing program, it is likely to be more
        difficutl to accomodate in the current year budget. Additional tests will probably not be
        available for the initial 1999 administration, and the cost of paying for the initial
        administration of all tests will be significantly higher than initial estimates.

o       It will be far more difficult to launch an effective national movement to prepare students
        for these tests, if the number expands from 2 to 6. Failing to launch an effective effort to
        prepare students will weaken your message that the point of the tests is to give students a
        hand up, not a failing grade.


Approach 4: Focus on High School Completion: Appoint a commission to figure out how
to get a good high school level test, appropriate for postsecondary education and
employment. The absence of a high school level test leaves the 4th and 8th grade proposal
seemingly incomplete. If standards are important, they are surely as important at the completion
of high school as they are at earlier transition points.

However, testing at the high school level poses far more difficult issues than at earlier grade
levels. There is no obvious 12th grade test to tum to, comparable to the 4th grade NAEP and
8th grade TIMSS tests. (The SAT's are not appropriate because they are only taken by
college-bound students, and are not aligned with any curriculum standard.) It also is not clear
what grade level(s) would be most appropriate for testing; 12th grade represents high school
completion, but leaves students who do not meet the standards with no real second chances to
improve. From this perspective, Oth grade testing would be preferable, if testing were to be done
at a single grade level. Alternatively, a number of states, including Maryland and New York, are
using a series of end-of-course tests each year in high school, instead of a single test or battery of
                                                                       RIlIt· · t;ooverslon



tests administered at one time. Finally, any high school testing proposal inevitably will raise
questions about the consequences of student performance on these tests -- for high school
graduation, college admission, financial aid and employment.

We believe that the best way to approach the issue of high school testing would be to appoint a
commission, with significant representation from the higher education and employment
communities, as well as from others with a stake in the education system. The charge to the
commission would be to make recommendations about the desirability and uses of national
standards and testing for high school completion, and for recommendations on the design,
development and implementation of the system it envisions. Through its work, the commission
would be expected to build a consensus around the recommended approach.

Pro's
o     It is even more important to have some kind of high-school level national standards and
      test than it is for 4th and 8th grade, because these standards determine what students will
      learn before they enter the world of work or postsecondary learning.

o      High School level tests, if they are challenging, will have a profound effect on teaching,
       curriculum, and learning throughout the K-12 system, since the entire system must be
       oriented to helping students pass the tests.

o      A commission, with a clear charge, will be seen as serious and important. It will
       demonstrate clear leadership, especially if its recommendations are bold and significant.

o      The high school level issues--including whether and/or how tests should be used for high
       school graduation, employment and student financial aid--are significant, and could
       benefit from sustained, visible national attention.

Con's
o     Precisely because high school standards and testing can have powereful effect throughout
      the K-12 system, this proposal can provoke criticisms of a federal. takeover of school
      curriculum.

o      Appointing a commission may be seen as a way of dodging tough issues, rather
       thanasserting bold leadership.

o      The commission may recommend steps that will be highly controversial, or that you may
       not wish to accept (e.g., require students to pass a national test in order to qualify for
       federal financial aid).


Overview of Implementation Strategy
o     State sign-up
      o       We intend to sign up a critical mass of states and local school districts over the
              next 4-6 months; 8-10 carefully selected states should provide considerable
           momentum, and provide both the incentive and the poffm;!t~y
           additional states to join. Maryland, Michigan set; California is a strong
           possibility as soon as late March. New York also looks promising. Over the
           next several weeks we will continue to identify states that are important
           bell weathers.

    o      Education Department and DPC staff have meet with testing experts, test
           publishers and key state and local testing officials, to seek the advice and support
           of the techical experts in the field. An adequate comfort level among the state
           and local testing officials will make it easier to sign up additional states and
           districts.

    o      You are scheduled to meet with 40-45 chief state school officers in mid-March to
           promote this plan

    o      You can, if necessary, take the fight directly to the opposition --speak to at least
           one legislature not likely to be favorably disposed (e.g., Montana, to demonstrate
           your resolye and to take opposition arguments on directly)

    o      We are developing a strategy to use Gov. Engler and Gov. Romer if possible, to
           recruite additional governors

    o      We are exploring the possibility of sign-up by defense schools

o   Constituency sign-up
    o      Business Roundtable has formally endorsed this plan, and we expect the business
           community generally to actively support your efforts

    o      DPC and Education Deparemtn are working to gain endorsements from education,
           parent and other business groups; should be possible

    o      We will work closely with key constituency groups (parents, business and
           teachers) to press target states to sign up;

o   Test development
    o      RFP for test development to be let soon
    o      advisory committee of teachers and others to be appointed soon
    o      pilot testing in Spring 1998

o   Focused efforts to improve reading and math achievement
    o     Build strong ties to America Reads
    o     launch effort withOSTP, NSF, math/science/engineering, education and business
          communities to mobilize broad-based efforts to support math learning
    o     identify and promote examples of proven practices, and increase use in federal
          programs such as Title 1
                                                                 Belt-Dump Conversion


       o       strengthen teacher training and professional development
       o       challenge textbook publishers to create world-class math textbooks




Summary of Plan
In the State of the Union Address you challenged every state to adopt high national standards
                                                                    Hex-DumP Conversion
and, by 1999, to test every 4th grade student in reading and every 8th grade student in math, to
see if they are meeting these national standards.

The 4th grade reading and 8th grade math tests to be used are based on existing, widely accepted
standards and tests.

The 4th grade reading test will be based on the framework (content standards) which have guided
the development of the National Assessment of Education Progress (NAEP) assessment. The
NAEP reading framework was developed by a consensus process involving reading and
curriculum specialists from around the country. The NAEP assessment is aligned with this
framework, and incorporates performance standards -- achievement levels (basic, proficient, and
advanced) which tell how well students have mastered the content.

As you know, NAEP is currently designed to be administered to national and state samples of
students, but cannot produce scores for individual students. Over the next two years, the
Education Department will contract with test developers to develop a new test, aligned with the
NAEP reading framework and designed to provide scores for individual students reported in
terms of the NAEP performance standards.

In eight grade math, the starting point is the TIMSS test. This test was based on a consensus
among experts in the 41 participating countries, including the U.S., regarding what students
should know and be able to do in math and science. In math, this framework overlaps
substantially with the widely accepted national math standards developed by the National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM). In tum, the NCTM standards have been the basis
for the standards developed by most states, and have also guided the development of the NAEP
math assessments. In short, in math, there is an extremely high degree of overlap between
international and national standards -- and the international and national assessments based upon
them.

Like NAEP, TIMSS is administered on a sample basis. Therefore, there is a comparable test
development process to be undertaken over the next two years in order to produce a test that will
provide scores for individual students.


