 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:16-FEB-1999 20:38:42.00

 SUBJECT:   gray davis

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 I wanted to give you an update on conversations that Mike Cohen and I have
 been having with Gray Davis' office. Davis raised his interest in getting
 a class size waiver in a conversation with the VP a couple of weeks ago,
 and I offered to arrange a conference call with the right people at the
 Department to explore this.

 Mike Cohen and I had conference calls with Davis' office at the end of
 last week to discuss what turns out to be Davis' very strong interest in
 getting a waiver to allow California school districts to use federal class
 size funding to reduce class size in high school in order to help prepare
 high school students for the graduation exam Davis is proposing. Davis is
 arguing that California has already reduced class size in the early grades
 to 20, and there simply isn' 't space or an adequate supply of well-q
 ualified teachers to go down to 18. Moreover, Davis has proposed this
 high school graduation exit test, and is looking for additional resources
 to help prepare 9th and 10th graders to well on this test. Mike Cohen and
 Mike Smith are both fairly open to the argument, though they both -- at a
 minimum -- want to be sure any CA waiver request and approval is crafted
 in ways to avoid opening the door to less well-founded waiver requests
 from other states. There also may be other issues that could complicate thi
 s further.

 Because the waiver request has to come from the SEA, we are working with
 Davis' office and Delaine Easton's office to help them develop a request
 for this waiver, and they are hoping to submit the request later this
 week. Davis' people are pushing hard for Riley and Davis to appear
 together Monday so that Riley can make a positive statement about the
 waiver request.
 Cohen made clear to them that RIley was unlikely to send positive signals
 about a waiver request until it had been fully reviewed by the Department
 -- and that was unlikely to take place by Monday. Assuming that a waiver
 is not requested and granted by Monday, Davis' office have indicated they
 will likely push for 2 things:

 1) They would like for Davis to be able to come   out of the NGA mtg
 monday,and tell the California media something    he has been able to get --
 or at least fight for -- on behalf of improving   education in California.
 His staff would prefer that Riley come out with   him to confirm this.

         What do you think of the following idea? I realize this would need
 to be   worked out in context of our overall discussions with the
 Governors. Davis        could say that he supports the President's
 agenda to strengthen accountability in public   schools (ending
 social promotion, etc.), but that Davis had pressed the Administration to
         provide states with flexibility in how this is carried out. Riley could


 say that he has heard   the Governors message, and that the
 Administration will develop legislation with these      concerns in
 mind.

 2) They would like the waiver request to be granted by late March, at the
 latest. Davis' education legislation will likely be approved by the end
 of March, and they want to be able to reference the approved waiver in
 their final legislation. Cohen told them this was a more reasonable time
 frame than next week.


