RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-FEB-1999 09:48:15.00

SUBJECT:    one man's version

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
tates' Governors Eager to Keep Tobacco
                 Money By SARAH KELLOGG

                     02/18/99 04:43:37 PM



                     c.1999 Newhouse News Service@

                     WASHINGTON -- The tobacco tug-of-war is about to begin.

                     The nation's governors come to Washington this weekend
for their
                     annual winter conference, but policy isn't the only thing
on their minds.
                     They're here to deliver a message to President Clinton:
Stay away from
                     our $206 billion in tobacco settlements.

                  "The federal government was invited to participate in
the lawsuits and .it
                 chose not to,"   said Terrell Gregovich, a spokeswoman for
the National
                 Governors' Association. "The states spent the time and
money and the
                 effort to put the lawsuit together. They have their own
ideas on how to
                 spend the money. ' ,

                     Armed with a variety of popular proposals, the governors
hope to win
                 the public's support for state control of the settlement
before Clinton can
                 even argue for a share of the funds.

                     Already, the governors have allies in Congress. A bill
co-sponsored by
                     18 senators would block any attempts by the federal
government to
                     shrink its Medicaid payments to the states in response to
the settlement.

                     " I don't see any legal basis for the federal government
to get a cent, ' ,
                     Sen. Spencer Abraham, R-Mich., said Thursday. "It's a


money-grab, ' ,
                    Abraham added. "It's aimed at funding other federal
programs. ' ,

                 The states aren't willing to share the funds they
squeezed out of the
                 cigarette manufacturers last year. They came away with
the $206 billion
                 to settle their smoking-related health expenses. The
money will be
                 distributed over the next 25 years.

                    "The federal government couldn't get the money itself,
so now it's
                 coming to steal ours, " said John Truscott, press
secretary to Michigan
                 Gov. John Engler. "The states did the work and bit the
bullet. It's state
                 money. ' ,

                    The Clinton administration claims that $18.9 billion of
the settlement
                    belongs to the federal government over the next fours
years. If states
                    won't write them a check, federal officials say they'll
reduce future
                    federal aid to offset their share of the tobacco
settlement.

                    "For 2001 and beyond ... our goal is to work on having a
list of
                    federal-state, agreed-upon priorities where states will
pick up the
                 burden and relieve some of the federal burden, " said
Jack Lew, director
                 of the White House Office of Management and Budget.

                    Lew believes the settlement reimburses states for
smoking-related
                    expenses incurred by their state Medicaid programs, which
are
                    underwritten by state and federal contributions. The
states say they
                    never mentioned which expenses they were being· reimbursed
for in the
                    settlement, so they don't feel compelled to share the
money.

                    To win this tobacco war, governors are crafting popular
initiatives to
                    spend the money closer to home.@

                    A dozen states have earmarked their dollars for health
initiatives, such
                    as granting merit scholarships to students, expanding
Medicaid coverage
                 to children without health insurance, creating health
insurance programs
                 for the working poor and establishing smoking prevention
programs.



                  Many of the tobacco-growing states, such as Florida,
Indiana and
                  Kentucky, will use the money to offset the losses that
tobacco farmers
                  expect to see from reduced sales.

                  In North Dakota, Gov. Edward Schafer, a Republican, has
proposed a
                  plan to spend the state's tobacco windfall on property
tax rebates and
                  operating expenses for local schools.

                  "The governor feels that since taxpayers have borne the
burden of
                  increased health care costs due to tobacco, then they
should get some
                  of the money back,"   said Julie Liffrig, Schafer'S
communications
                  director.


