RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Amy Weiss   ( CN=Amy weiss/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-FEB-1999 15:07:42.00

SUBJECT:   Ed q;s I need a's for ....

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
    Q    A lot of the governors were demanding that the
federal government meet its share of special education funding
before the President proposes, as he has already, a whole bunch
of new education programs.  I'm wondering what is his response
going to be to that, how is he going to try to -- or is he going
to try to assure --

          MR. LOCKHART: Let me look at that, because I'm not
aware of any special education issue between the states and the
federal government.  I think the President laid out his ideas for
what the federal government should do as far as lowering class
size, building new schools, and also as far as holding states
accountable to certain standards and results.  But on special ed,
I'll just have to look into it.

           Q    Could you take that on special ed?

           MR. LOCKHART:   Sure.

          Q    Supposedly, Head Start, they were saying that they
want those programs funded first before --

          Q    Was the President moved at all by what the
governors said about cutting the strings that he wants attached
to the additional education funding?

          MR. LOCKHART: Well, I think the President believes and
has believed, as a former governor, that the place where the
majority of educational decisions are made are on the state and
local level. And that will continue.   I think what the President
has said in his State of the Union and in the budget is that it's
time to stop throwing good money after under-performing schools
and schools that can't meet standards.  It's time to make people
reach a standard as far as what they expect to get from the
federal government.

          It's not about how they teach.  It's not about how they
make the decision of how they're going to run their school.  It's
about expecting some results.

          Q    Governor Leavitt said that the states -- or
certainly his state welcomes additional federal funding for
education, but in terms of being a limited partner and not a
managing partner. They feel that the federal government is
trying to impose its will on the state administration of


education.

          MR. LOCKHART:  I think they clearly haven't taken a
close enough look at what the President is talking about.   The
President is talking about looking around the country, finding
the best practices, trying to replicate best practices, looking
at programs that work. But the bottom line is results.    Schools,
local communities, local jurisdictions will continue to have the
ability to decide how they want to implement education, education
reform. But the bottom line is the federal government for too
long has put money into local school districts that are aren't
performing and it's time to start focusing on results.

          Q    Is it just results? I mean, is it just some
bottom line result? Isn't the President also suggesting to
people the way they should proceed, what kinds of students they
should work with, what kinds of programs should be set up for
them?

           MR. LOCKHART:  I think the President has said -- and
he's been saying for years -- that we need to look at a state
like North Carolina, where things are working, and say, what can
we draw from North Carolina, from programs that were started on
the state and local level and how we can replicate that around
the country. But there's no one in Washington that's trying to
tell people actually how they have to run their school districts
.We're saying that it's time to start demanding results.

          Q    Aren't there some things, though -- when you did
the State of the Union and you put out a little briefing paper,
there were three or four steps on various things, including
students that haven't met promotion standards for promotion.

             MR. LOCKHART:   Sure.

          Q    Isn't federal government laying out some things
that it will insist the states do, step by step, rather than just
saying you should do a better job on this front?

          MR. LOCKHART: No, they're expecting results. And one
of the results is that we stop moving people along before they're
ready to move along. And how states do that is, they can work
off of the models that have worked in other communities around
the country, they can come up with their own novel approach.   But
what the federal government is saying is, it's time to stop
allowing people just to keep promoting those, even though they're
not ready for the next level of education.

          Q    How do you decide, though, whether they are or are
not doing what you want them to do in order to get the money?

          MR. LOCKHART: Well, we're going to have to work with
states and local governments, but I think there are clear
standards that schools will have to meet in order to qualify for
some of the federal funds that are available.  You know, it's not
just you have to meet these standards or you're not getting it,
we have -- I think the P~esident has tripled the after-school
budget to work with the students who need the most help, to give
students who need extra help the attention they need in order to
get the skills they need to move on.


