RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Amy Weiss ( CN=Amy Weiss/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-FEB-1999 18:06:46.00

SUBJECT:   White House Watch: The Day After


TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
White House Watch: The Day After

 By Dana Milbank

 A few hours after the Senate acquitted President Clinton last Friday,
Paul Begala celebrated by taking
 his young sons to the rodeo. The weary presidential counselor had come
for some relaxation; instead,
 he found allegory. The rodeo announcer declared that a fellow named J.W.
Hart would be riding that
 night--for the first time since a nasty spill last year earned him 80
stitches and 30 staples in his head.
 Good 01' J.W., the announcer said, had to pullout some of the staples
that night just to put on his
 ten-gallon hat. "For me, it was a fitting metaphor," Begala says. "You
get sutured up and climb back
 on. My heart went out to him: there he was, back on that bull."

 The White House staff, too, was back on its prescandal bull this week.
After a three-day weekend
 and a presidential jaunt to Mexico, the senior staff meeting Tuesday was
almost boring in its
 efficiency. Counsel Charles Ruff, after months in the spotlight,
delivered a one-word report: "Nothing."
 Press Secretary Joe Lockhart stepped up the push for a first-in-ages
Clinton press conference amid
 signs the president might actually do it. The White House drug office, of
all things, delivered the
 longest report of the morning, and representatives of the bureaucracy's
alphabet soup--OMB, CEQ,
 DPC, NEC, NSC--basked in their sudden return to relevance.

 "All these people who had been on page twentyone for the last year are
now on page one," says one
 top Clinton aide. The White House plans a profusion of Social Security
and USA Account events, plus
 new attention for Kosovo, Iraq, and even Ghana. One long-neglected
national security adviser
 remarked excitedly to his colleagues: "Sixty-four foreign policy stories
today in The New York Times!
 It's like the old days!"

 As for the scandalmen, it's more like nap time. "I was thinking of having
a 'will spin for food' sign
 made up," says Jim Kennedy, the scandal spokesman. "It's amazing: my
pager didn't go off once on
 Sunday." Kennedy, who, like most staffers, took President's Day off, will


spend the next few days
 cleaning off his desk.

 Things are much the same for the White House press corps, which, after a
year of wishing away the
 scandal, seems to have more of a sense of dread than relief. There was an
eerie calm in Washington
 the Day the Scandal Died. Nobody was staking out the Mayflower. Not a
camera was posted outside,
 Monica's lawyers' offices. At the White House's Northwest Gate, where
Monica threw her
 now-infamous jealous fit upon learning from the Secret Service that her
man was in the Oval Office
 with another gal, all was quiet. Inside the briefing room, bored
photographers were watching a TV talk
 show titled "My Daughter Dresses Too Revealing." Out .on the lawn,
television correspondents were
 applying makeup, getting ready to tell the world what it already knew:
Clinton was off the hook. The
 only disturbance was a stiff breeze, which disrupted the correspondents'
equipment--and hairdos. A
 few minutes before the vote, a windswept Sam Donaldson stormed into the
briefing room, shouting
 "Jesus Christ!" A woman laughed. "Hold that toupee," she said after he
passed.

 There were occasional bursts of jubilation as the afternoon progressed,
first with the Senate acquittal
 and then with the Clinton acceptance speech. "He's free! Free Willy!" a
gentlelady of the press
 exclaimed. But despite the professions of relief, reporters quietly
confided to each other a different
 sentiment--boredom. "Who are we going to throw out now?" one asked. "It
doesn't feel very historical,
 does it?" mused another. "Now what are we going to write about?" a
reporter for a big daily asked.
 "That," somebody responded, "is what I'm afraid of." Me, too. How are we
going to fill our pages
 without the scandal? Are we now to turn to the much-neglected stories of
the past year? will we
 finally learn the details of the education policies Monica Lewinsky
shared with the president? will we
 explore the legal precedents in Ken Starr's defense of Meineke Discount
Muffler? The boredom has
 already set in. Even before the vote, the press was trying to make the
roll call into a parlor game,
 predicting the irrelevant matter of whether there would be 50 votes for
either charge. By the Monday
 following the vote, deflated networks were already returning to JonBenet
Ramsey. NBC's Jamie
 Gangel, who snagged the first Linda Tripp interview, was reduced Tuesday
to doing a way-too-Iong
 segment on the revival of roller derby.

 At the moment, the press is entertaining itself by trying to catch
Clinton and his aides in flagrante
 delicto, gloating. Lockhart felt compelled to declare the White House a
"gloat-free zone," and the
 no-gloat policy was so strictly enforced that the press-office staff
showed not so much as a grin when


 Clinton was acquitted. Lockhart's office curtains were drawn Friday to
hide whatever gloating
 happened inside. Photographers with telephoto lenses found an open window
on the second floor of
 the White House, but the gloaters quickly discovered the espionage and
drew the shades. After the
 acquittal vote, a White House janitor walked out with an empty case of
Maker's Mark
 whiskey--tantalizing evidence that somebody must be gloating somewhere
inside the mansion.

 Moments later, I was almost knocked over by a stampede of photographers
chasing Ruff's wheelchair
 as he made his way through the gate to the Bombay Club for lunch. A
reporter later asked Lockhart
 whether such a conspicuous departure for lunch was smoking-gun evidence
of gloating. "If you think
 walking out through one gate over another is some sort of signal to
someone, you're overthinking,"
 Lockhart said. Looking for gloating in all the wrong places and finding
none, journalists had to content
 themselves with fantasies about behind-the-scenes gloating. "They're
probably in there trying to stick
 rags down his throat," one correspondent said of Clinton after the
acquittal. When Lockhart's briefing
 was delayed, another journalist suspected surreptitious gloating. "Joe
can't keep himself from smiling,"
 he said. "They have to wait until he stops. It's a gloat-free zone."

 Actually, the only gloating I could detect at the White House was
gloating about not gloating. Relieved,
 they said. Content, yes. Liberated, certainly. But gloating? "No," said
Lanny Davis, who proceeded to
 parse the definition of gloating. "I don't mind saying I feel
vindicated," the spinner said. "I intend to
 constantly remind every Republican member of the House who voted for
perjury to call Fred
 Thompson and Richard Shelby," two GOP senators who voted against the
perjury article. But, Lanny,
 isn't that gloating? "That part of it isn't gloating," Davis said. "It's
vindication. It's legitimate."

 Clintonites have good reason not to gloat. For one, there's no predicting
what Starr might try next.
 "How many days you think will pass after the impeachment trial before
Starr files a sixty-three-count
 indictment against the president?" one Clinton aide asked. "He's on a
mission from God." A number of
 White House aides, burned out by the scandal, are heading for the door
now that it's over. Greg Craig
 and Lanny Breuer will leave the counsel's office; two other members of
the scandal team, Adam
 Goldberg and Don Goldberg, have already left. Elena Kagan, number two at
the Domestic policy
 Council, is off to Harvard; even Begala is said to be leaving.

 Too many White House aides have been saddled with huge legal bills, have
been personally
 devastated, or are just worn out 'by scandal management. "I feel as if
I've been hit by a truck," says


 Larry Stein, Clinton's top lobbyist. One senior Clinton aide says he's
tired of the "doe-eyed" looks of
 reporters who profess distaste for scandal and delight now that it's
over. "I'm sure it's hard to cover a
 fire," he says, "but don't dare tell me covering a fire is harder than
having the [expletive] house burning
 down around you."

 (Copyright 1999, The New Republic)


