RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-FEB-1999 12:45:56.00

SUBJECT:   revised draft

TO: Christopher C. Jennings    ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Devorah R. Adler ( CN=Devorah R. Adler/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 2/23/99 1:00pm
Tamagni

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR CHILDREND,S HEALTH OUTREACH EVENT
THE EAST ROOM
February 23, 1999

        I want to begin by thanking the First Lady for her tireless efforts to
make this campaign possible and for her lifelong commitment to ensuring a
healthier future for our children.  I want to· thank Secretary Shalala for
everything she is doing to make sure more of our children have the health
care coverage they need to thrive.  I want to thank Governors Carper and
Leavitt for being here today and for all the ways the National Governors
Association is helping us meet this challenge.    Finally, I want to thank
the Members of Congress [Sen. Specter; Sen Hatch; Rep's Jackson Lee;
DeGette, Engel, Eshoo, Stupak; Wynn] and all the organizations represented
here today for your dedication to our childrenO,s health.

        As you have already heard today, nearly eleven million children in
this country donD,t have health insurance.   For the families of those
children, the slightest cough, the smallest accident, can cause enormous
worry; a serious illness can cause financial ruin -- even tragedy.  I
believe that this is simply unacceptable in a nation with the best health
care system in the world -- a nation at the height of its prosperity -- a
nation that values its children.

        We know that many of these children are eligible for Medicaid --
but their parents donD,t know it.  Many other hard-working families make
too much to qualify for Medicaid, so they donD,t think their children are
eligible for any kind of assisted health insurance program.

        Two years ago, I signed into law our $24 Billion ChildrenD,s
Health Insurance Program as part of our all out effort to provide health
insurance to up to five million of these children.  But we knew then that
it would take more than money to reach them. We knew that to make our


childreno,s health insurance program more than an empty promise, all of us
would have to do our part to get the word. out to parents.

        Let me give you just one example of what I mean.  Last week at a
health care roundtable in New Hampshire, I met Christine Monteiro.  For 11
years, Christine and her husband have worked hard running a solar energy
business.  Like all small business owners, theyo,ve had their ups and
downs.  But for the MonteiroD,s, the hardest times came when they could no
longer afford health insurance for their daughters -- but thought they
were doing too well to qualify for any other kind.

        Last month, one of their children fell ill, requiring repeated
visits to the doctor.  Imagine ChristineD,s relief when a health care
worker at a medical clinic told her that children qualified for health
insurance through the CHIP program.  She applied immediately, and now, all
of her daughterso, doctors visits have been covered -- visits which would
have cost the Monteiroo,s more than $1,000 in one month alone.

        The Monteiroo,s were lucky -- but learning about childreno,s
health insurance shouldno,t take luck. I believe that we have an
obligation to use every tool we possess, every resource at our disposal,
to reach more hard-working families like the Monteiroo,s.

        First, government must do its part. That is why I am so pleased to
launch our new national campaign -- Insure Kids Now.  We have already
heard about the remarkable effort by the NGA in partnership with our
administration and Bell Atlantic to set up a national toll-free number
1-877-KIDS NOW -- that gives parents state-specific information about
childrenD,s health insurance.  Both Governors Carper and Leavitt are
taking the lead in their states to make it even easier for families to
sign up their children for health insurance, with a with a simplified
application and greater outreach through child care centers and schools.
And Secretary Shalala just told you about some of the other steps our
administration is taking to reach more uninsured children.

        But to make sure that more parents make the call that can keep
their children growing healthy and strong, everyone who touches the life
of a child must join our efforts. Today, I am pleased to announce
unprecedented new commitments from the media to business, from the health
care industry to grassroots organizations allover the country to inform
families of these new health insurance options.

         We begin with an all-out media campaign to reach as many families
as possible.    NBC is unveiling a new prime-time PSA to raise awareness
about childreno,s health insurance programs -- and Epatha [eh-pah-thah]
Merkenson, one of the stars of NBCo,s D&Law and OrderD8 who appears in the
PSA is here with us today. ABC and Viacom/Paramount will soon begin
airing a PSA the First Lady made to inform families about the Insure Kids
Now toll-free number. The National Association of Broadcasters will make
the First Ladyo,s PSA available to all of its member stations, and Black
Entertainment Television, and Turner Broadcasting will also run the ad.

        I am proud to unveil these new PSAo,s here today for the very
first time.  LetD,s take a look. [The PSAo,s are aired.]   Just think how
many families these PSAo,s will reach.   And Univision will run a PSA made
by HHS with the Insure Kids Now number in Spanish, guaranteeing that even
more parents will learn about our childrenD,s health insurance program.

        But weo,re not stopping there. Our goal is to reach every
eligible family in America, from the largest city to the most remote rural


area.   Major corporations from K-Mart and RalphD,s Grocery to McDonalds
to General Motors -- from American Medical Response to the Blue Cross Blue
Shield Association to pfizer -- will help us make sure that the Insure
Kids Now toll-free number appears on grocery bags and restaurant
placemats, on school buses and in doctors offices, even on toothbrushes
that dental hygienists give their patients. And with the help of
organizations like AmericaD,s Promise, the United Way, and a host of
community-based groups, families will hear about health insurance from the
people they trust the most -- teachers and school principals, doctors and
nurses, rabbis and ministers.

        But ultimately, we know that parents must take responsibility for
their childrenD,s health. Our message to parents must be: what you donO,t
know about your childrenD,s health can hurt them.  It is up to you to find
out if your child is eligible for this health insurance.  Call the
toll-free number -- 1-877-KIDS-NOW.   DonD,t wait until illness strikes to
give your children that security.

         If we do this -- working together in partnership, government,
business, community, and families -- I believe we can change the lives of
millions of children and build a stronger nation in the 21st Century.     I
thank you all for doing your part.


