RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Charles R. Marr ( CN;Charles R. Marr/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-FEB-1999 12:47:52.00

SUBJECT:   revised Davis-Bacon Memo

TO: kcurran ( kcurran @ fenix2.dol-esa.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce.Davie ( Bruce.Davie @ MS01.DO.treas.sprint.com @ inet [ UNKNOWN   1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Susan Frost     Susan Frost @ ed.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN;Tanya E. Martin/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sandra Yamin ( CN;Sandra Yamin/OU;OMB/O;EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Charles M. Brain ( CN;Charles M. Brain/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: MARTI.THOMAS ( MARTI.THOMAS @ MS01.DO.treas.sprint.com @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: JON.TALISMAN ( JON.TALISMAN @ MS01.DO.treas.sprint.com @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan H.톁chnur ( CN;Jonathan H. Schnur/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Debra J. Bond ( CN;Debra J. Bond/OU;OMB/O;EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Broderick Johnson ( CN;Broderick Johnson/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: David W. Beier ( CN;David W. Beier/O;OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN    1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN;Karen Tramontano/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Melissa G. Green ( CN;Melissa G. Green/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Sally Katzen ( CN;Sally Katzen/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a revised memo for tomorrow's meeting.  I have incorpated
comments.  Let me know if you have additional comments.  Thanks.====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00



TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D93]MAIL42791016F.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BF160000010A0201000000020500000096AF0000000200004ABF945COD82E30133D526
19B14A5C14E4567BF54DEF33155F14A0714A80E4F042F4CD93D76D8EF411DAB7A7326AC95E64AD


                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                             Hex텱ump Conversion
MEMORANDUM FOR

FROM:

RE:        Davis-Bacon and School Construction

The President's FY2000 budget again includes a significant school construction proposal --
Federal tax credits to pay interest on nearly $25 billion in bonds. Last year, our proposal and the
legislative versions introduced in Congress were silent on Davis-Bacon. Our publicly stated
position has been that Davis-Bacon would not apply.

Organized labor, especially the Building Trades, have urged the Administration to reconsider our
position and the President has agreed to take another look at the issue. The NEC has convened
an inter-agency working group (including DPC, OMB, Treasury, Education, DOL) to examine
the key policy questions. Specifically, the working group has focused on whether adding a
Davis-Bacon requirement to the President's school construction proposal:

       1)       Is administratively feasible?
       I1)      Is good labor policy?
       Ill) Is good tax policy?
       IV) And, how it would affect prospects of enacting the President's school construction
                proposal.

Following a discussion of these key policy questions, the memo discusses the pros and cons of
four options:
       1) Decide that Davis-Bacon does not apply.

       2) Remain silent on Davis-Bacon until it becomes critical during consideration of a bill.

       3) Directly add Davis-Bacon to the proposal now.

       4) Indirectly add Davis-Bacon to the proposal now.
A legislative history and a table on state prevailing wage laws are attached as appendices to the
memo. Thirty-one states currently have prevailing wage laws.

I. Administrative Feasibility
Legitimate concerns had been raised about enmeshing the IRS in the administration of a labor
program. There is consensus within the working group that Davis-Bacon could be applied m
such a way that the IRS would not have to play an enforcement role.

A Davis-Bacon requirement could be built into the process whereby states and school districts
submit school construction plans to the Department of Education for review and approval. It
could work as follows:
 The Department of Education would issue guidelines that would includ~~F"m
    Davis-Bacon prevailing wages as one of the required plan components.

   States and eligible school districts would submit the proposed plans to Education.

   Education would review the plans for completeness and compliance with construction plan
    guidelines, and approves compliant plans.

   States and school districts would issue bonds.

   States and school districts would insert the Davis-Bacon prevailing wage clause into their
    construction contracts.

   The Department of Labor would investigate any complaint filed regarding the wage rate paid
    on the contract. Treasury would have no role. rfDOL found a violation, it would require
    the contractor to pay back wages; and may also request the school board to withhold payment
    until the contractor has paid the back wages. DOL would not reach back to the bond.

    (Note: the Federal tax credit interest payments to investors would in no way be conditioned
    on compliance with Davis-Bacon).

II. Would it be Good Labor Policy?
Labor policy arguments in favor of adding a Davis-Bacon requirement to our school
construction proposal include:

   A basic underlying purpose of the Davis-Bacon Act is to prevent construction workers' wages
    from being undercut as a result of aggressive bidding on government construction contracts.
    The government's large purchasing power combined with the public sector's emphasis upon
    awarding contracts to the lowest bidder can easily create an environment that encourages
    contractors to cut costs by paying less than the locally prevailing wage rate.

   Even where no Federal money is directly involved to finance construction (e.g., HUD and
    FHA loan guarantee programs) it has been recognized that the application of Davis-Bacon
    labor standards is appropriate. These HUD and FHA programs recognize that the
    construction in question would not take place without the Federal support. The Federal
    government has a responsibility to ensure that its use of taxpayers' resources to support large
    construction programs does not serve to undercut locally prevailing wages.

   The application of the Davis-Bacon Act can help ensure quality construction. While the
    payment of locally prevailing wages does not guarantee that the most skilled and qualified
    craftsmen will be employed on construction projects, contractors that bid based on paying
    less that the prevailing local wage rate may find it difficult to hire and retain qualified
    employees which in turn may lead to inferior construction.

   The Davis-Bacon Act simply requires that contractors and subcontractors pay their
    employees the wage rates and fringe benefits prevailing in the locality where the construction
    work is performed. The Davis-Bacon Act does not impose federal standards inconsistent
    with the local labor market.
A counter-argument would be that:                                         Hex-Ournp Conversion

   Traditionally, school construction is funded by some combination of State funding and local
    bond initiatives. The Davis-Bacon Act has not applied to these locally-financed school
    construction projects and the current tax incentive program should not be the catalyst to
    change that dynamic.

   The Administration has been successful in protecting Davis-Bacon in connection with
    Federal outlays. Our position on Davis-Bacon could be weakened if we propose adding it to
    our school construction bill and then sign a version without Davis-Bacon.

III. Would it be Good Tax Policy?
Proponents of adding Davis-Bacon to our school construction proposal have made the following
tax policy arguments:

   The tax code includes instances where favorable tax consequences of bond financing have
    been conditioned. For example, the interest from state and local bonds is exempt from
    Federal taxation, if, among other conditions, the bonds are used for a government purpose.
    When marketing these bonds, state and local governments describe how proceeds will be
    used and include covenants on the necessary actions that will be taken to preserve the tax
    exemption.

   The tax code includes "multiple objective" tax benefits. For example, there is a tax credit
    for wages paid to a member or an Indian tribe. The credit, however, is not available if the
    employee is performing certain gaming activities.

The Treasury Department has raised a range of tax policy arguments against adding a
Davis-Bacon requirement:

   Currently there is no reference to the Davis-Bacon Act anywhere in the Internal Revenue
    Code. Conditioning School Modernization Bonds on compliance with the Act would
    establish the dangerous precedent of using a tax code incentive to implement social policies
    unrelated to the benefit that is the object of the tax incentive.

   It would invite attempts to impose compliance with Davis-Bacon on the whole range of
    construction projects financed with tax-exempt bonds, low-income housing credits, historic
    rehabilitation credits, and other tax code proviSions.

   Ifthe tax code is used to apply Davis-Bacon, efforts to apply Buy America rules, restrict
    abortion, meet energy efficiency targets, and obtain other unrelated objectives would surely
    follow. It would not be long before insertion of such extraneous requirements into the
    Internal Revenue Code would require enforcement by the IRS, imposing upon it an
    impossible administrative task entirely foreign to its tax collecting mission and its efforts to
    be more taxpayer friendly.

   Proponents cite complex requirements associated with other tax incentives as precedent.
    Such requirements are in the tax code to identify clearly the kind of activity for which the tax
    benefit is intended and the class of taxpayers eligible to claim the benefit.
                                                                                        COrds
                                                                                  n~;(.   ump Conversion
   The tradition of tax-exempt State and local financing has always been regarded jealously as a
    prerogative of State and local governments, free from totally unrelated conditions imposed by
    the Federal government. Conditioning School Modernization Bonds, that differ from
    tax-exempt bonds essentially in terms of the depth of the interest subsidy, on compliance
    with the Act would be considered by State and local governments as an intrusion on their
    autonomy.


IV. Impact on Prospects for Enacting School Construction Proposal

Legislative Arguments in Favor of Adding Davis-Bacon:

   The moderate Republicans most likely to support the President's school construction
    proposal tend to be pro-Davis-Bacon. Adding Davis-Bacon could provide another reason
    for these moderates to support the President's proposal.

   Enactment of school construction will come down to the endgame. Ifthere is a tax bill,
    which is an open question, success will hinge on the President rallying people behind school
    construction and insisting that Republicans include it, and not on whether Davis-Bacon is in
    or out.

   Adding Davis-Bacon would energize the building trades to become strong advocates for the
    school construction proposal.

Legislative Arguments Against Adding Davis-Bacon:

   Given that the Republicans are ready to propose their own method of financing school
    construction, however insignificant, it would be dangerous for Democrats to lose their focus
    by opening a debate on competing proposals among themselves.

   Expanding Davis-Bacon into this new arena would only strengthen the resolve of the
    opposition and provide them with a ready-made excuse to kill the President's bill and to pass
    an alternative oflesser magnitude or of no magnitude.

   It is possible that if Davis-Bacon were added, some of the groups could be forced to support
    an alternative proposal put forth by the RepUblicans. For instance, NSBA is on record as
    opposing a "federal mandate" that overrides state and local prevailing wage laws. As
    mentioned above, the School Board constituency is one of the strongest in support of the
    President's proposal.

   Injecting the expansion of Davis-Bacon into this debate could split the coalition of education
    groups, community-based organizations and architects that has been working together over
    the last two years to build public support for the President's proposal. This would make it
    more difficult for Democrats who would have to choose between two opposing sides - voting
    for the expansion of Davis-Bacon, particularly in a tax bill, and for more federal control over
    education decisions than the constituency can support, or voting for the President's current
    proposal that can potentially garner bipartisan support.
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
   While the House voted to protect Davis-Bacon in the FY1998 DC Appropriations bill by a
    vote of234-188, further analysis shows that a majority of the members of the Ways and
    Means Committee voted against maintaining Davis-Bacon. So although an expansion of
    Davis-Bacon may have more success on the House floor, it is unlikely that it would ever be
    passed out of committee in the first place. Moreover, the previous Davis-Bacon votes have
    focused on its repeal or its application to spending proposals. The accuracy of those vote
    counts in predicting the outcome on an expansion of Davis-Bacon to a tax proposal is
    questionable. Thus, the whole school construction bill could be stalled without gaining any
    ground on Davis-Bacon.

   The President has made flexibility and accountability major themes in his State of the Union
    education message. In the President's speech to the National School Boards Association on
    the day he released his budget, he made it clear that he did not want to micromanage schools
    and school districts, but rather he wanted to invest in what works and stop investing in what
    does not. Allowing school construction to be used as a vehicle for expanding Davis-Bacon
    into the tax arena would raise the issue of increased federal intervention and control not only
    in the school construction debate but also in the debate over results and accountability for all
    of the President's education agenda.


Options:

1) Decide that Davis-Bacon does not apply.
We would convey to the Hill and to Labor that we are sticking to our existing position that
Davis-Bacon does not apply to our school construction tax credit proposal.

Pros:
 Keeps focus on our underlying school construction proposal and keeps our coalition of
   education supporters together (e.g. school boards).

   Avoids setting tax policy precedent as described above.

   Takes pressure off of our allies on the Hill.

Cons:
 Misses an opportunity to advance a deeply held goal -- decent wages for construction (and
   all) workers.

   Rejects a key Labor priority and to this extent could diminish support for the underlying bill
    from at least part of this constituency.

2) Remain silent on Davis-Bacon until it becomes critical during consideration of a bill.
This option would have us continue our posture of "we're taking another look" until we would it
became critical later in the year when a bill is actually being considered.

Pros:

   Keeps our options open and avoids offending a key constituency before we know how this
                                                                                 Hex텱ump Conversion
    will play out.
   Avoids (at least temporarily) setting tax policy precedent as described above.



   Staying in limbo could hamper our ability to push the school construction proposal as
    aggressively as we otherwise would.

   It is unclear how sustainable this is. Hill may soon press us more flatly -- what is your
    position?


3) Directly add Davis-Bacon to the proposal now
Either through drafting our own bill or urging Hill Democratic sponsors, we could add a
provision that states that Davis-Bacon applies to this legislation.



   Would advance a deeply held goal-- decent wages for workers.

   Would add an enthusiastic supporter -- building trades.



   Sets a major tax precedent with potentially serious ramifications.

   Jeopardizes the prospects of the underlying proposal -- risks turning battle over school
    construction into a fight over Davis-Bacon, dividing the education coalition that is now
    strongly behind our proposal, and handing Republicans an excuse to be against our proposal
    and to coalesce around the Archer arbitrage.

4) Indirectly add Davis-Bacon to the proposal now
We could apply Davis-Bacon indirectly by placing the school construction proposal under the
General Education Provisions Act (GEP A), which includes a Davis-Bacon requirement. The
school construction legislation, therefore, would not say Davis-Bacon, but the result would be
that Davis-Bacon applies. Below are two sub-options for indirectly requiring Davis-Bacon by
applying GEP A.

A) Deem GEPA to apply
A provision could be added that would deem the school construction proposal to be an applicable
program administered under the GEP A, which as mentioned above includes a Davis-Bacon
requirement.



   Would advance a deeply held goal-- decent wages for workers.

   Would add an enthusiastic supporter -- building trades.
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion



   Would likely be transparent to Congressional members and interested organizations that
    oppose application of Davis-Bacon to school construction bonds.

   Sets a major tax precedent with potentially serious ramifications.

   Jeopardizes the prospects of the underlying proposal-- risks turning battle over school
    construction into a fight over Davis-Bacon, dividing the education coalition that is now
    strongly behind our proposal, and handing Republicans an excuse to be against our proposal
    and to coalesce around the Archer arbitrage.

   Could require joint referral of the bond initiative to the tax and education committees in the
    House.

B) Add and outlay component to proposal
A new grant program would be created, administered by the Secretary of Education under the
GEPA, that provides resources to states and eligible school districts for administrative expenses
related to the bond. Examples of administrative expenses include developing the construction
plan, monitoring and overseeing the construction project, and annual reporting to the Secretary
on progress and modifications made regarding the construction plan. The grant provision would
be drafted such that the bond program could only be implemented to the extent the grant program
is implemented.

< Award $250,000 to states and $100,000 to each eligible school district annually. The
    amount of the grant could also be sized by the school age population within the state or
    eligible school district.

< The bond funds would be subject to Davis-Bacon indirectly due to the link with the grant
    program. The bonds could not be issued absent the grant. It is unclear whether some
    entities would not take advantage of the bond due to Davis-Bacon application. OMB
    estimates the cost of this proposal to be $25.5 million.

Pros:   (same as A above, plus)

   Applies Davis-Bacon while avoiding tax policy precedent.


Cons: (same as A above, plus)

   Adds a new and very late layer of complexity at a time when we need to make our proposal
    as understandable as possible.
                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                                  Hex텽ump Conversion
FY1998
In the FY1998 budget, the President requested $5 billion over 5 years in mandatory spending that
would have leveraged up to $20 billion in bonds over a four year period. The Administration
made it clear that Davis-Bacon would apply to this initiative since it was a federal spending
proposal.

The Administration's bill was introduced by Rep. Nita Lowey in the House and Senator Carol
Moseley-Braun in the Senate. There was no action on the bill in either the authorizing or the
appropriations committees. The Republican leadership actively kept potential Republican
supporters off the bill and repeatedly argued that the federal government had no business getting
involved in building schools at the local level. Several Republicans touted the Davis-Bacon
requirement as proof of "federal intervention in local education decisions."

The education constituency was split on this issue. AFT, NEA, and urban school
superintendents supported the bill, but the National School Boards Association (NSBA), one of
the most vocal constituencies, could not support the President's proposal because of the federal
Davis-Bacon requirement. This split weakened the support of other groups, such as the National
PTA and rural and suburban superintendents.

Although school construction was one ofthe last items left on the table when the Balanced
Budget Agreement was struck in the summer of 1997, the Republican leadership refused to
move off their position that the federal government had no role in communities' decisions to
build schools. The only provision they accepted was Rep. Rangel's Qualified Zone Academy
Bonds (QZABs) for a total of$800 million of new bonding authority (compared to the potential
$20 billion that would have been leveraged in the President's request). Davis-Bacon was not
applied to the QZABs.

FY1999
The President once again made School Construction a major priority in his FY1999 budget, but
this time the proposal provided a tax credit in lieu of interest and involved no direct federal
spending. The initiative would have provided federal funding to pay the interest on $22 billion
in bonds. The Administration was silent on whether Davis-Bacon applied to this proposal in the
President's budget submission. In Qs and As, however, Administration officials twice
confirmed that Davis-Bacon had not applied to provisions in the tax code to date and was not
expected to apply in this case. Further, in a widely vetted letter to Rep. Ballenger, the Director
ofOMB stated "given that the bond initiative would offer a tax incentive for purchasing bonds
(as opposed to a direct grant, loan, or loan guarantee) and that the Federal government would not
be a party to a construction contract, the Administration determined that the Davis-Bacon Act
does not apply."

This allowed NSBA to become active in the Rebuild America's Schools coalition in support of
the revised proposal. School board members became strong advocates at the State and local
level for the proposed federal partnership arguing that the initiative would help leverage local and
State dollars for construction but would leave decisions on where and how to build schools to
local communities. Partly as a result of this more unified constituency support, Democrats were
                                                                                        H~~DYmp Conversion.

able to make a strong case for their school construction bill to the voters. This was reflected in
the polling results and the Democrats' winning message on education.

Republicans continued to argue against this popular initiative, and in the process lost support for
their position. The House Ways and Means Committee refused to act on the President's
proposal, although Chairman Archer included a much smaller arbitrage provision in the
multi-billion dollar House tax bill that was never signed into law. Rep. Rangel succeeded in
forcing two House floor votes on the issue - an amendment to instruct conferees to include
school construction as an amendment to the Coverdell education savings account failed 192-222,
and an amendment to substitute school construction for Coverdell failed 196-225. Eight
Republicans were allowed to break ranks with the leadership on one or both of the votes (Leach,
IA; Morella, MD; Forbes, NY; Gilman, NY; Weller, IL; Johnson, CT; LoBiono, NJ; and
McHugh, NY).

Senator Moseley-Braun offered her school construction bill as a substitute to the Coverdell
savings account on the Senate floor. A motion to table the amendments passed 56-42 with
D' Amato and Specter voting against the motion and 4 Democrats voting in favor (Biden, DE;
Byrd, WV; Lieberman, CT; and Torricelli, NJ).

Although support for school construction was building, in the end there was no significant tax
bill that the Administration supported and could use to force an agreement on school
construction. Republicans rejected Administration efforts to attach school construction to the
tax extenders package.

FY2000
The President's FY2000 budget request for school construction expands the FY1999 tax bond
proposal, this time paying the interest on $24.8 billion in new bonds. Placeholder bills have
been introduced by Senators Daschle, Lautenberg, and Robb and Rep. Rangel is preparing to
introduce one in the House. The Senate bills have remained silent on Davis-Bacon. House
Democrats are working through this issue now and are looking for any signals from us.

Unlike the last two years, the Republican leadership has come out publicly in support of school
construction and is backing their own school construction proposals. Chairman Archer has
introduced a $1.4 billion arbitrage initiative similar to his proposal on the tax bill last year.
While inadequate and flawed, the Archer proposal allows Republicans to argue that they are
addressing school construction.

The Speaker has mentioned this initiative as a high priority. However, Democratic efforts to get
bipartisan cosponsorship of the President's proposal have not been successful. It appears that
the Republican leadership understands they must advance some kind of school construction bill
this year - the question is whether our proposal will prevail.
                                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                        Appen dOIX- S tate PrevaIling w age L aws

                State                  Dollar Threshold Amount for Contract Coverage

Alaska                                                        $2,000

Arkansas                                                      75,000

California                                                     1,000

Connecticut                            400,000 for new constructionllOO,OOO for remodeling

Delaware                                100,000 for new constructionll5,000 for remodeling

Hawaii                                                         2,000

Illinois                                                       none

Indiana                                                      150,000

Kentucky                                                     250,000

Maine                                                         10,000

Maryland                                                     500,000

Massachusetts                                                  none

Michigan                                                       none

Minnesota                                 25,000 where more than one trade is involved
                                              2,500 where a single trade is involved

Missouri                                                       none

Montana                                                       25,000

Nebraska                                  none, except 40,000 for public school projects

Nevada                                                       100,000

New Jersey                                                    2,000

New Mexico                                                    20,000

New York                                                       none

Ohio                                    55,574 for new constructionlI6,672 for remodeling

Oregon                                                        25,000

Pennsylvania                                                  25,000

Rhode Island                                                  1,000

Tennessee                                                     50,000

Texas                                                          none

Washington                         none (separate 17,500 threshold for state college/university)
                                                                        .

West Virginia                                                  none

Wisconsin                                 160,000 where more than one trade is involved
                                             32,000 where a single trade is involved
                                            (no threshold for state highway contracts)



States Without Prevailing Wage Laws:                                       AYmmlltGd Records Management System
                                                                                  HGX.oYmp Conwrsion

Alabama (repealed in 1980)

Arizona (invalidated by 1980 court decision, repealed by referendum in 1984)

Colorado      (repealed in 1985)

Florida     (repealed in 1979)

Georgia

Idaho      (repealed in 1985)

Iowa

Kansas (repealed in 1987)

Louisiana (repealed in 1988)

Mississippi

New Hampshire (repealed in 1985)

North Carolina

North Dakota

Oklahoma       (invalidated by 1995 court decision)

South Carolina

South Dakota

Utah        (repeal in 1981)

Vermont

Virginia


(Source: Department of Labor)


