RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Lyn A. Hogan ( CN=Lyn A. Hogan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-MAR-1997 18:54:34.00

SUBJECT:   OPM

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
1)      I wasn't able to set up the internet meeting as of tonight --I
couldn't get a hold of anyone.  I'll try again in the a.m.

2)      Doug Walker at OPM called.   He had a couple of additional
comments on the proposal.

First, he reiterated OPM's desire to go with existing hiring authority and
wondered what we'll be putting in the memo to the President.  I indicated
that we may send him options between the two and he didn't think that was
a good idea. OPM really does not want a new hiring option.   I told him
that you were rewriting the memo to reflect your conversation with Jim
King, and I didn't really know if you'd layout both options or just one.

Second, he doesn't really like the EITC idea. He believes that there
already exists such a directive from the IRS and he is checking into it.
I mentioned that Mary Strand told me that OPM does not notify Federal
employees about the EITC or that they can recieve it in their regular
paychecks so it would be a good idea to have POTUS direct them to do so.
He isn't keen on it, but is getting back to me tommorrow. (It highlights
the fact that they haven't done so. maybe we should drop it.)

Third, he said they had neglected to mention to us that they charge a
users fee to agencies, states and/or social service offices to acess
USAJOBS and USACAREERS. This would be money in addition to the computer
upgrade funds. He is getting back to me tomorrow with cost figures.

My suggestion: To go forward with the four point proposal, I go back to
my original suggestion--we need to bring all of the people involved in any
facet of this directive together to work out the details.  Without face to
face meetings with all involved, we end up with half information and no
one is bought in.

My preference: I suggest we go with a minimalist approach--all the press
cares about is that we do something, there doesn't have to be pizzaz
around it.  Jim King and the President could get up at the press podium,
the President talks about the necessity for the Federal government to
hire welfare recipients, Jim King lays out his plan to do so -- whatever
he is comfortable with-- and we are done.

What do you think?


