RECORD TYPE: PRESIOENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPO/O=EOP [ OPO 1 )

CREATION OATE/TIME:25-FEB-1999 19:14:26.00

SUBJECT:     Tobacco Farmer News

TO: J. Eric Gould ( CN=J. Eric Gould/OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO   1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Three stories on tobacco: 1. plant closes ending 1,400 jobs; 2.     tobacco
farmer tractorcade;              .
3. Company split with Unions. Its a long file so delete it.

            Thursday, February 25, 1999

 Phillip Morris to close plant; 1,400 losing jobs

                                             By JOE WARD, The
Courier-Journal

                                             Philip Morris will close its
Louisville
                                             plant -- the state's last
major
                                             cigarette manufacturing
facility
                                             eliminating 1,400 jobs by the
end of
                                             2000.

                                             The world's most powerful
tobacco
                                             company had little to say
yesterday
                                             as it delivered a brutal
lesson to a
                                             city whose economy has been
                                             linked to tobacco for
generations.

                                             "It's all about capacity,"
said Philip
                                             Morris spokesman Rusty
Cheuvront.
                                             "It's going to allow the


company to
     properly align production with demand."

     Philip Morris has operated a cigarette plant in Louisville since
1944, providing some of the
     highest-paid factory jobs in the city. Workers earned an average of
$21.50 per hour, and the
     loss of the 1,400 jobs will cost the local economy nearly $63 million
in annual payroll.

      "To be frank, this announcement means a loss of jobs that will really
hurt," Louisville Mayor
      Dave Armstrong said. "But Philip Morris is also a significant
supporter of many community
      activities and causes, and I don't want to see that commitment fade
away. "

     The company invested heavily in the arts, sponsored Kentucky Derby
Festival events and
     other community programs and contributed heavily to such projects as
the historic
     Farnsley-Moremen Landing.

     Gov. Paul Patton said Philip Morris officials told him two years ago
that closing the
     Louisville plant was a possibility, but yesterday's announcement came
as a surprise.

     Patton said he has asked Philip Morris officials to meet with him to
determine what, if
     anything, the state can do to prevent or lessen the magnitude of the
layoffs.

     Community leaders say Louisville will recover, but the people losing
their jobs are reeling.

     "Our workers are shocked," said Robert Hines, president of tobacco
workers union Local
     16. "They don't understand. We've done everything Philip Morris has
asked of us."

     Employees had expected the plant to close in two or three years, but
were not prepared for
     yesterday's announcement.

     Cheuvront, who just a month ago had denied rumors that the plant
would close soon,
     attributed yesterday's decision by the company's board to slumping
sales and having more
     production capacity than the company needs. He said the Louisville pI
ant, which covers
     several acres south of 17th Street and Broadway, has been operating
at 50 percent of
     capacity so far this year, after operating at 75 percent last year.
The company refused to
     release exact production figures.

     Both domestic and export sales are down, Cheuvront said, as a result
of the tobacco
     industry's recent $206 billion national settlement agreement with 46


states, the Asian
     economic crisis and other factors.

     Cheuvront said Philip Morris will consolidate its cigarette
production in larger, more modern
     plants in Richmond, Va., and Cabarrus, N.C. "This action is in no way
a reflection on our
     employees and their performance," he said.

     The phaseout of Louisville manufacturing operations will begin this
year. When it is
     complete at the end of next year, it will leave Philip Morris with
about 150 workers in its
     local tobacco leaf processing and warehouse facilities. Joe Phelps,
secretary-treasurer of
     the tobacco workers union, said the closing will come in phases. He
said workers will be
     laid off in July 1999, April 2000 and July 2000, and the final round
of cuts will come in
     December 2000.

     Steve Magre, president of the Louisville Board of Aldermen, 'said the
phaseout of jobs is
     "like getting hit with a right cross.     . But it was not like we
didn't know we were in the ring"
     and that cuts were inevitable at some point. But, he said, "I hate to
see it. Philip Morris is
     synonomous with Louisville, Kentucky."

     Employment at the plant peaked at about 4,000 in the mid-1980s, the
company said. A
     number of retirement packages and layoffs had trimmed the ranks to
about 1,900 at the
     start of this year, Cheuvront said, and 300 retirements and 50
layoffs have occurred since.
     Louisville, once a major cigarette manufacturing center, lost 1,000
jobs in 1970 when the
     American Tobacco Co. stopped producing cigarettes in the city. It
lost 3,000 jobs when
     Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp. -- which still has its headquarters
in Louisville -- moved
     production out in 1981. Lorillard moved 900 cigarette-making jobs to
North Carolina in 1984.

     Cheuvront said Philip Morris will eliminate about 1,100 hourly jobs
and 300 salaried jobs.
     The largest group of hourly workers are members of Hines' union
local, but their number
     also includes pipefitters, electricians and oilers.

     The Philip Morris announcement said all employees will receive
"generous" separation
     packages. Hines said his union's contract with the company includes
13 to 52 weeks of
     separation pay, depending on years of service. The company said some b
enefits will
     continue for up to 18 months after separation. Workers also will
receive help with resumes
     and other job-search activities. Hourly workers are eligible for job
training and continuing


     education -- including college -- for up to three years after
separation.

      The company said it will offer enhanced retirement benefits to
eligible salaried employees,
      and may provide better retirement benefits for hourly employees as
well.

     Hines said the union already had scheduled contract negotiations with
the company for next
     week, and now will use those talks to try to get better separation
bene{its. In addition, the
     company and Hines said some of the displaced workers may get jobs at
the Virginia and
     North Carolina plants.

     Robert Bordogna, president of Todd Investment Advisors Inc. in
Louisville, expressed
     disappointment at the plant closing, but said it shouldn't have come
as a surprise after the
     tobacco industry's settlement agreement with the states -- which
already has driven up
     cigarette prices by 45 cents a pack.

     "You had to expect that they were going to be trying to cut costs
everywhere they possibly
     could. They've got $220 billion spread out over the coming years.
That has to be paid for
     somehow, and you can't get it all back with price increases,"
Bordogna said.

      Brian Eisenbarth, a tobacco securities analyst with Collins & Co. in
San Francisco, said,
      "In general, when you substantially raise the price of a product, it
causes quantity sold to
      reduce. Which means the productive capacity they are using may be too
much. "

     Hines said the union members blame the closing in large part on
President Clinton.

     "He continues to attack us," Hines said. "He has a special agenda for
us -- to get rid of us."

     But he said the workers believe the company's investments in
manufacturing facilities
     overseas also playa part -- though he said workers recognize that
some such production is
     in response to mandates from countries where Philip Morris sells
cigarettes.

     Cheuvront said about 27 percent of Louisville cigarette production --
which includes the
     Marlboro, Virginia Slims, Basic and Benson & Hedges brands -- is for
export.

     But he said operations Philip Morris has overseas had no bearing on
the decision to phase
     out the Louisville plant. He said he didn't have time yesterday to
supply information on those


     operations, except that they were begun or acquired in the mid-1990s.

     An article in the Winter 1998 issue of Tobacco Reporter, a trade
journal, said Philip Morris
     had 10 joint ventures overseas, in the Czech Republic, Eastern
Germany, Hungary,
     Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Ukraine, Russia and Poland. The publication
estimated Philip
     Morris' investment at more than $675 million, and annual production
at more than 105 billion
     cigarettes. Scott Ballin, a consultant with the Washington-based
Campaign for
     Tobacco-Free Kids and a noted anti-tobacco activist, said that
yesterday's plant-closing
     announcement was "an effort by the company to send shock waves
through the workers
     and farmers," to get them "to do the political bidding of the
companies in Washington,"
     while the companies themselves "are moving overseas, making profits
overseas. II

     The plant closing sends a shudder down the spines of burley growers,
said state Senate
     President Pro Tern Joey Pendleton, D-Hopkinsville.

     "They're thinking, 'What's going to be next?' " said Pendleton, who
heads the legislature's
     Tobacco Task Force. "Here's one of the largest cigarette
manufacturers, and it's moving out
     of Kentucky . . . . Are they going to be in business here in the
United States?"

     U.S. Sen. Jim Bunning, a Republican, said cigarette makers like
Philip Morris "can buy
      (tobacco) from anywhere . . . . What's the advantage then of buying
Kentucky burley?"

     U.S. Rep. Anne Northup, a Louisville Republican and a noted critic of
the tobacco industry
     when she was a state legislator, said she doesn't know if the
company's overseas
     operations had a bearing on yesterday's announcement, but said that 1
eaders in Kentucky
     should have been asking about it.

     "The political leadership refused to ask tough questions," she said.
"Questions such as,
     'Why are you building those plants? What are you doing to protect
workers and tobacco
     farmers?' "

     she said tobacco lobbyists discouraged agricultural diversification
by assuring state
     legislators that "as long as we don't do anything to discourage
smoking, we don't have to
     worry about anything else." Now, she said, tobacco farmers have s
uffered a devastating cut
     in the amount of tobacco they can grow, and tobacco jobs are
disappearing.


     "My concern is that there have been a lot of tobacco farmers and
workers who have given
     their hearts and souls and faith to Philip Morris . . . and I don't
believe that faith has been
     well-placed," Northup said.

     u.s.    DEPARTMENT

     u.s. Department of Agriculture figures show that u.s. production of
cigarettes peaked at
     755 billion in 1996, and then began dropping off. Exports peaked the
same year at almost
     244 billion cigarettes, then dropped to 217 billion the next year,
and u.s. consumption
     dropped from a 1996 peak of 487 billion to 480 billion the next year.

Tobacco farmers to rally
                      tractors in Raleigh

                          DO They say they are protesting shortcomings in
                          foundation that is proposed under settlement

                          By David Rice

                          JOURNAL RALEIGH BUREAU

                          RALEIGH

                          A group of Eastern North Carolina tobacco farmers
says that if its
                          voices can't be heard in Raleigh, maybe its diesel
engines --
                          several hundred of them -- can.

                         So the group plans to stage a massive
, 'tractorcade"    Monday in
                         Raleigh.

                          The growers say they expect 500 to 1,000 tractors to
start from
                          the State Fairgrounds and wind their way into
downtown Raleigh,
                          circling the governor's mansion, the Legislative
Building and the
                          state Capitol.

                          The growers, who have secured a city permit for the
                          demonstration, say they want to draw attention to the
                          shortcomings in a proposed foundation that would set
aside half of
                          the state's tobacco-settlement money to assist
tobacco-dependent
                          communities.

                          "It's our way to make a statement,"    said Dale
Lucas, a farmer
                          from Dunn who is one of the event's organizers.
, 'How would you
                          like to lose 35 percent of your ability to payoff
your debts? All we


                           want is security."

                           In particular, the growers say they want guarantees
similar to those
                           in a bill approved by Virginia legislators that sets
aside $1.2 billion
                           as a guarantee for tobacco farmers until a separate
trust fund for
                           growers and quota holders is cemented.

                           "We ain't going to get nothin' compared to what
virginia got, ' ,
                           Lucas said.   "Do you know the difference between a
virginia
                           tobacco farmer and a North Carolina tobacco farmer?
Respect. ' ,

                           As the General Assembly decides whether to set up
the foundation
                           for tobacco-dependent towns, the growers say they
want formal
                           assurances that they will be protected.

                           "Gov.   (Jim) Hunt and Attorney General (Mike) Easley
said we're
                           going to be all right. Can we get a loan on that?"
said Jimmy Lee,
                           an organizer from Johnston County.

                           Though Easley told a House committee yesterday that
use of the
                           money can be defined in the foundation's bylaws,
Lucas said he
                           wants to know more specifics.

                           , 'They're wantin' to set the foundation up, then
write the rules, "    he
                           said.   "We've been taking care of our communities
for the past 250
                           or 300 years. We were doing pretty good 'til this st
ate settlement
                           came along.' ,

                           Lucas said that tobacco growers were not among the
participants
                           who negotiated either the nationwide settlement or
the separate
                           trust fund to compensate growers.

                           , 'We had nobody there really representing us, "    he
said.   "All we
                           have is a promise -- a statement -- from the
governor. I went to
                           my banker. It didn't impress him."

                           And by last night, 18 tractors were already parked
in orderly rows
                           in a parking lot at the fairgrounds.

                           DO For more information on the tractorcade, contact


Jimmy
                         Lee at (919) 269-7812.




        THE POLITICAL FALLOUT
        Tobacco industry losing labor ally

        By ROBERT T. GARRETT, The Courier-Journal

     When the Philip Morris factory in Louisville is closed next year, the
tobacco industry will
     lose a key cog in its political machine in Kentucky -- organized
labor.

        The company's decision, announced yesterday, will wipe out close to
40 percent of
     Kentucky's employment base in tobacco manufacturing and processing,
according to a
     Courier-Journal analysis of state statistics. And although some of
the smaller operations
     that remain in the state are unionized, the labor clout that was at
Big Tobacco's disposal in
     Frankfort --and Washington -- flowed almost entirely from two big
union locals representing
     line workers and machinists at the Philip Morris plant in western
Louisville.

     "We've written the letters; we've made the phone calls and been on
the street in support of
     the tobacco industry," said Ron Harsh, business manager of the
machinists' local and
     president of the Greater Louisville Central Labor Council. "After
all, they're our jobs."

     After other cigarette manufacturers closed plants in Louisville to
head for non-union pastures
     in Georgia and the Carolinas, the jobs at Philip Morris constituted
the tobacco industry's
     last significant manufacturing presence in Kentucky.

     That presence, though ever--dwindling, was crucial to the arguments
the state's tobacco
     growers made in trying to fend off federal anti-smoking measures.

     "In the national fight, going (to Washington) and talking about
employment numbers and
     those type of things is crucial to you in making your arguments and
winning support," said
     Rod Kuegel of Owensboro, president of the Burley Tobacco Growers
Cooperative.

        "So it's devastating," said Kuegel, who spoke of losing a crucial
ally.

     Tobacco has never needed much of a lobbying effort in Frankfort. But
loss of the Philip
     Morris factory could change that some.



     U.S. Rep. Anne Northup of Louisville recalled yesterday that when she
was in the General
     Assembly earlier in the decade, and pushed measures to prevent
teen-agers from smoking,
     the unions at Philip Morris' Louisville plant persuaded other Ie
gislators from Jefferson County
     not to support her.

     plant workers were "also meeting with whomever else in the
legislature that the company
     would set up meetings for them," she recalled.

     Kentucky House Speaker Pro Tern Larry Clark, D-Okolona, said the plant
closing will
     "dilute" tobacco's political strength in Frankfort. "When you lose a
tobacco-manufacturing
     plant in an urban area, then the urban legislators don't feel such a
close relationship to
     tobacco," he said.

     The unions at Philip Morris also wielded influence locally.

     One example came in 1987 when county government ordered its health
department to quit
     offering free stop-smoking clinics. It did so after then-County
Judge-Executive Harvey
     Sloane, himself a physician, met with Philip Morris executives and u
nion officials, and then
     told an aide to tell the health department to shift its attention to
AIDS education.

     At the time, the local tobacco industry provided 6,000 jobs.

     That's more tobacco-manufacturing and -processing jobs than the
entire state has today,
     according to last year's Kentucky Directory of Manufacturers, which
the state Chamber of
     Commerce and Economic Development Cabinet publish jointly.

     And the number of such jobs the directory said exist statewide
5,045 -- seems inflated. It .
     includes 550 white-collar jobs at Brown & Williamson, which has its
corporate headquarters
     in Louisville. The directory also lists 2,412 jobs at Philip Morris'
plant, which The Associated
     Press said yesterday had employment of 2,100 in 1998, before the
company made an
     earlier retirement and buyout opportunity available to employees.

     If more conservative figures for those. two companies are used, the
1,400 layoffs announced
     yesterday constitute 35 percent to 40 percent of the manufacturing
and processing jobs left
     in the state.

     In 1964, there were four cigarette manufacturers in Louisville: Brown
& Williamson,
     American Tobacco Co., P. Lorillard and Philip Morris. Total
employment at the four was


     about 9,000. Philip Morris has the only plant still operating.

     Its departure will make Pinkerton Tobacco Co., which has 450
employees at a
     smokeless-tobacco factory in Owensboro, the largest tobacco plant in
Kentucky, according
     to the directory.

      Philip Morris has long been known as a leading contributor to the
campaigns and political
      causes of members of Congress. To help it defeat national
anti-smoking legislation in the
      last two years, it gave $2 million in unregulated "soft money" to the
Republican National
      Committee and its affiliates, and $419,164 to their Democratic
counterparts.
      Campaign-finance reformers said the company was the biggest
soft-money donor in
      1997-98.

     Kentuckians in Congress, except for Northup, have been big recipients
of Philip Morris'
     largesse.

     But the plant, which has locals affiliated with seven unions, has
made friends in Frankfort,
     too.

     The political-action committee of the Bakery, Confectionery and
Tobacco Workers, whose
     Local 16 in Louisville has about 1,400 members, gave $2,000 to the
state Democratic Party
     last fall.

     The PAC of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace
Workers, which has
     223 Philip Morris workers in Local 681, gave $7,500 to the party in
the 18 months after
     then-Lt. Gov. Paul Patton, a union ally, won the Democratic nomin
ation for governor in May
     1995.

     Philip Morris' PAC gave the state Democratic Party $2,500 last June.

     News of the plant's closing brought finger-pointing from state
politicians, with all of the
     Republicans -- except Northup -- blaming President Clinton's crusades
against smoking.

     Clinton "is making progress in his continuing assault on Kentucky's
No.1 cash crop," U.S.
     Sen. Mitch McConnell, a Republican, said in a statement. He said
Kentucky's tobacco
     industry has lost 15,000 farms and "thousands of jobs" since Clinton
took office, and he
     said the Philip Morris announcement "is an inevitable result of the
president's war on
     tobacco."

     Freshman Republican Sen. Jim Bunning also blamed the White House.



·        "We have made growing burley tobacco and producing cigarettes harder
    and harder for the
         last seven years," he said in an interview.

         The recent settlement between cigarette makers and the states, and
    Clinton's threat of a
         federal suit are "eventually going to force production of cigarettes
    offshore," Bunning said.

         But Northup said Philip Morris was moving factories and plantations
    overseas, no matter
         what American politicians did.

         "Philip Morris had a corporate strategy that threatened their jobs
    far more than anything we
         did to discourage kids from smoking in Kentucky," she said.

         Staff writer Tom Loftus contributed to this story.

                    BACK TO NEWS DIGEST
                                               TO NEWS ARCHIVE




                              All pages . 1998-99 The Courier-Journal Terms of
    Service


