.   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Paul J. weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-MAR-1999 14:45:28.00

    SUBJECT:   final memo

    TO: Bruce·N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    ---------------------- Forwarded by Paul J. weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP on
    03/01/99 02:45 PM ---------------------------




    Sarah Rosen
    03/01/99 02:25:46 PM
    Record Type:    Record

    To:      Melissa G. Green/OPD/EOP
    cc:      Paul J. weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP, Roger S. Ballentine/WHO/EOP
    Subject:         final memo

    attached

    note that Treasury wanted us to note that Sarbanes wants POTUS to sign.     I
    added that on the final page in the near term strategy section.

    They are okay with Paul's last change.     And my changes to note that we
    still don't have final bill.

    please make sure that Roger B. is okay with this going in and the CoS are
    okay with how the issue is posed to POTUS on pages 1 and 3.

    Note:  I am assuming that Paul read the faxed copy, not the email, because
    the emailed file did not have all their changes.  If not, make sure he
    double checks.  tks.



    ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D27]MAIL418525464.036 to ASCII,
     The following is a HEX DUMP:

    FF5750432A060000010A02010000000205000000626A000000020000313412EFDBEFCFC1866B56
    D16DE455771B9930DBE7699CABB521FFFEEC6B6FA6FFE24491B3E251C4A135EADEB7CEA1C7C7CE
    06D124A26C2E7709CC335A44482296E5DOFF40F05AFD3EF4C0853A8D4C64FEB6357688B057COD1
    80804E53F84C317050FEB2E9BE5629EA72D2CF2D54B4E29844C4E5001C7AA259B06963697E4554
    E6C5952C7FC5F5097BA59F8041E680EB72DFA78736EOD1E5803FB14A4226BFD51FFDCAB014F14F
    98A57F6B63101520B4201DED3A64DE8A059EE9540FA1074256435FC45BCE33FDDA75C04A784CE8
    8C50A594D80D25B2CB433F5989C768E3E1F9F88381F52D8060F1A1DA13596BAF62DD94897EDC33
                                                                                    Hell..l)iJmp Conveos;on



                                           March 1, 1999


    MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

    CC:           THE VICE PRESIDENT

    FROM:         ROBERT RUBIN                 GENE SPERLING
                  LARRY STEIN                  BRUCE REED

    SUBJECT:      Financial Services Legislation


    ACTION-FORCING EVENT: On March 4, the House and Senate Banking Committees
    are both scheduled to mark up major financial services legislation. The House bill,
    developed by Chairman Leach and Ranking Democrat LaFalce, is generally acceptable.
    But the Senate bill being developed by Chairman Gramm is seriously flawed. While we
    expect to see another draft of the Gramm bill later today, the most recent draft would
    remove outmoded barriers to affiliations among different types of financial services firms,
    but it would also: (1) weaken the effect of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA); (2)
    erode the national bank charter and the Administration's role in financial services
    policymaking; (3) provide inadequate consumer protections; and (4) provide increased
    leeway for affiliations between banks and nonfinancial firms.

    RECOMMENDED ACTION: That John Podesta on your behalf (or you) sign the
    attached letter stating that you would veto the Senate bill in its current form (Attachment
    A).

    Agree __                    Disagree _ _                     Discuss

    BACKGROUND: Both Houses of Congress are currently considering legislation to
    permit the full range of financial services firms-including banks, securities firms, and
    insurance companies-to affiliate with one another. This memorandum describes the
    current status of such "financial modernization" legislation and outlines a strategy for
    countering the most objectionable features of the Senate bill.

           Attachment B provides a more detailed discussion of the issues in question.

    In General

           The 1933 Glass-Steagall Act generally prohibits affiliation between banks and
                                                                                Hex-DiJmp Conver:;ion

securities firms. The Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 generally prohibits affiliation
between banks and insurance companies. Large financial services firms strongly support
removing these barriers to affiliation, although consumer and community groups generally
see little benefit in such changes.

        Repealing barriers to affiliation among financial services firms has the potential for
giving consumers greater choice and lower costs. However desirable the general goal of
financial modernization, it does not warrant accepting a seriously flawed bill. Financial
modernization is already occurring in the marketplace, and will continue even without
legislation.

        Over the years, efforts to enact financial modernization legislation have repeatedly
failed in the face of infighting among different types of financial services firms. By the end
of the last Congress, however, a financial modernization bill known as H.R. 10 had
received broad support from the banking, securities, and insurance industries. The bill
passed the House but died on the Senate floor for two reasons. First, Senators Gramm
and Shelby opposed what they characterized as an expansion of the Community
Reinvestment Act. Second, the Administration objected that the bill would have undercut
its role in financial services policymaking and had the effect of weakening CRA.

Status of Legislation

       As this Congress turns to financial modernization legislation, the inter-industry
consensus on the need for such legislation remains intact. Both the Banking Committees
are scheduled to mark up financial modernization bills on March 4. Given that early start
and the momentum for some sort of legislation, the prospects for passage of legislation are
stronger than in the last Congress, though still uncertain.

       House. The Leach-LaFalce bill has been developing along very constructive lines,
       and we anticipate that it will merit our support. As discussed in Attachment B, the
       bill accomplishes the basic work of financial modernization-allowing affiliations
       among different types of financial services firms-and does so consistent with our
       views on the Community Reinvestment Act, banking structure, and other issues.
       The House Leadership is by all accounts committed to moving some sort of financial
       modernization bilI. The House Commerce Committee, however, may seek
       changes that could be unacceptable.

       Senate. Chairman Gramm is scheduled to release a committee print on March 1.
       As further described in Attachment B, Gramm's recent draft bill runs counter to
       our views on CRA, banking structure, consumer protection and promoting a
       separation between depository institutions and commercial firms.         Senator
       Sarbanes, the Ranking Democrat, is working with the Treasury to unite Banking
       Committee Democrats behind an alternative bill that will have much in common
       with the Leach-LaFalce bill. The Committee is likely to approve the Gramm bill on
       a straight party-line vote.
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

eRA: The current version of the Leach-LaFalce compromise requires a bank to have and
maintain a satisfactory CRA record in order to engage in newly authorized non-banking
activities-a requirement not included in the Administration's 1997 bill, but which we have
since argued is essential to maintaining the vitality of CRA. The draft Gramm bill
contains no such "have and maintain" requirement, and includes two amendments that
would seriously undermine CRA. Some House Democrats may seek to go on the offensive
by proposing to expand CRA. For example, Representative LaFalce may offer an
amendment to make explicit that public comment on an institution's CRA record must be
considered in applications for newly authorized activities, an amendment we could support.
 Last year, Representative LaFalce introduced an amendment requiring financial
institutions to report on their progress in meeting publicly announced "commitments"
under CRA; currently no such reporting occurs. Other House committee Democrats may
offer amendments to extend the reach of CRA to.insurance companies and securities firms.


Near-Term Strategy

       Our near-term goal is to assist Leach and LaFalce in moving their bill forward,
while doing everything possible to block the Gramm bill. This strategy has four
advantages. First, we would help advance the better of the two bills. Second, we would
take a strong stand against weakening CRA. Third, we would help unite Senate
Democrats against the Gramm bill. Fourth, we would be taking a visible stand against a
bad "financial modernization" bill, while simultaneously supporting a good bill.

        To further this strategy, we recommend that John Podesta on your behalf (or you
-- as requested by Senator Sarbanes) send a short letter stating that you would veto the
Gramm bill if it were presented to you in its current form. The proposed letter would cite
two reasons from last Congress: The bill's weakening of the effect of CRA, and the bill's
flawed banking structure issues. It would also cite two new reasons: the bill's inadequate
consumer protections (notably the failure to provide adequate investor-protection
safeguards on the sale of securities to bank customers), and its extensive expansion of
non-financial firms' ability to affiliate with banks.

       Secretary Rubin would send a letter setting forth a fuller explanation of our reasons
for opposing the Gramm bill. He would also send a letter supporting the Leach-LaFalce
bill.

       Finally, your advisors are discussing the merits of various eRA proposals and how
we should respond to amendments that would enhance enforcement of eRA, such as the Lafalce
amendments. Some think that supporting something along these lines could strengthen our hand
in negotiations later on; moreover, as we provide the industry with new opportunities, they argue,
we should insist on some new responsibilities. However, some of these amendments would
present an uncomfortable vote for moderate Democrats, have slim prospects for passage, and
could possibly jeopardize the eRA provisions already in the House bill ..
                      Hex-Dump ConvelSion


Attachments
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


                        ATTACHMENT A: PROPOSED LETTER
                             TO CHAIRMAN GRAMM



Dear Mr. Chailman:

       This Administration has been a strong proponent of financial legislation that would
reduce costs and increase access to financial services for consumers, businesses and
communities. Nevertheless, we cannot support the "Financial Services Modernization Act of
1999" now pending before your Committee.

        In its current fornl, the bill would undermine the effectiveness of the Community
Reinvestment Act, a law that has helped to build homes, create jobs, and restore hope in
communities across America. The CRA is working, and we must preserve its vitality as we
write the financial constitution for the 21 st Century. The bill would deny financial services
firms the:) freedom to organize themselves in the way that best serves their customers, and
prohibit a structure with proven advantages for safety and soundness. The bill would also
provide inadequate consumer protections. Finally, the bill would expand the ability of
depository institutions and non-financial firms to affiliate, at a time when experience around the
world counsels caution in this area ..

          The President [I] agree[s] with you that reform of the laws governing our nation's
financial services industry would promote the public interest. However, he [I] will veto the bill
if it is presented to him [me] in its current form.

                                           Sincerely,
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion ' .


                              ATTACHMENT B: KEY ISSUES

1. Community Reinvestment Act

Current law. CRA requires a bank to serve the convenience and needs of all communities in
which it operates. Although banks are examined periodically for CRA compliance, enforcement
comes only when a bank files an application to merge with another bank or open a new branch.
The regulator must then consider the bank's CRA record in evaluating the bank's application,
and the public has an opportunity to comment on the application. A bank's CRA record is not
currently scrutinized in connection with applications to affiliate with non-banking companies.

        Early in your Administration, and at your request, the banking regulators revised the
regulations implementing CRA to focus on performance, not paperwork. They now base CRA
ratings on a three-pronged test: lending, services, and investments. Regulators also revised and
streamlined the examination process, particularly for smaller institutions.

Conditioning authority to conduct new lIoll-banking activities on banks having a satisfactory
CRA record. We have argued that financial modernization legislation must preserve the
relevance of CRA for the 21st century, and must not weaken the effect of CRA. CRA's
relevance should be maintained by conditioning authority to conduct new non-banking activities
on banks having a satisfactory CRA record. Although the Administration's 1997 bill did not
impose a link between CRA and non-banking activities, we have insisted in this Congress that a
bank both have and maintain an adequate CRA record as a condition of engaging in newly
authorized non-bank activities. This would provide additional means for enforcing existing
CRA obligations. Noncompliance would result in submission of a compliance plan (and
ultimately, albeit unlikely, forced divestiture).

        The Leach-LaFalce compromise requires the bank to have and maintain a satisfaGtory
CRA rating, though amendments (including by Leach himself) are possible. Secretary Rubin
has testified that if we wish to preserve the relevance of CRA, at a time when the relative
importance of bank mergers may decline and non-bank financial activities are becoming
increasingly important, authority to engage in newly authorized non-bank financial activities
must be conditioned on satisfactory CRA performance.

        Gramm's draft bill imposed no such condition. Gramm views such a requirement as an
unprecedented expansion of CRA to non-bank activities, and has told the Secretary that he would
prefer no bill to a bill with such a condition. We have argued, though, that the financial services
system of the future may include rather fewer banking applications (and therefore fewer
opportunities for enforcement of CRA) and more non-banking activities (where an ongoing
requirement of a satisfactory CRA record would be a meaningful incentive for compliance).
Thus a bill that is silent on CRA (and thus supposedly neutral) would, in our view, tend to
weaken the effect ofCRA, and we would oppose such a bill.

Gramm's safe harbor amelldmellt. Gramm has proposed a safe harbor for applications
                                                                                  Hex·Dump Conversion

now subject to CRA. A satisfactory CRA rating at a bank's most recent examination
would conclusively establish the bank's CRA performance, unless a public comment
provides substantial verifiable information to the contrary. A regulatory agency could not
review the bank's CRA .'ecord unless there were an adverse public comment meeting the
test-even if the previous examination were old or otherwise stale. And Gramm would
create a rebuttable presumption favoring approval of the application. In so doing, he
would place a significant burden of proof on consumer and community organizations that
generally have less access than the bank to relevant information. He would also, in effect,
force community groups to stretch their limited resources to comment on many
examinations, instead of focusing those resources on major applications (e.g., for mergers
or acquisitions). Secretary Rubin has testified that such a safe harbor would tend to
eviscerate the effectiveness of CRA, and the Administration has repeatedly threatened
vetoes of bills containing safe harbors provisions.

Gramm's allti-extortion am en dmellt.      Gramm has also proposed a so-called
"anti-extortion" provision which may be dropped from the bill. We strongly oppose
extortion. Yet laws punishing extortion, bribery, and false statements already protect
against misuse of the CRA process. Gramm's broad and vague proposal would
criminalize normal, legitimate arms length transactions and cooperation between banks
and community groups (e,g" bank grants to support community groups' home ownership
counseling programs)-the very sort of activity CRA seeks to foster.

      It is important to note that if we should end up opposing a bill, for whatever reason,
CRA will be the issue best able to unite Democrats behind us.

2. Allowing Firms the Choice of Operating through Subsidiaries as Well as Affiliates.

      Since 1995, the Treasury has advocated giving financial services firms that include
banks the option of conducting newly authorized financial activities (e.g., securities
underwriting) in through a subsidiary or an affiliate.


                                   BANK HOLDING COMPANY

                                    I
                                BANK                  AFFILIATE




                                    I
                                SUBSIDIARY
                                               I

The Fed, by contrast, has insisted that new activities be allowed only in Fed-regulated
affiliates.
                                                                             Hex·DiJmp Conve:1lion



       We have emphasized four points to Members of Congress:

             Absent a demonstrable public interest to the contrary, financial services
             firms should have the same freedom as other businesses to organize
             themselves in the way that best serves their customers.

             The subsidiary approach has strong safety and soundness advantages. If
             the subsidiary prospers and the bank falters, the bank's interest in the
             subsidiary can be sold to help replenish the bank's capital-or reduce any
             loss to the FDIC. Yet if the bank prospers and the subsidiary falters, the
             bank faces no greater risk than if an affiliate faltered. Four past and
             present Chairmen of the FDIC have strongly agreed with this point, arguing
             that the subsidiary offers better protection to the FDIC and the taxpayer.

             Banks with ncw financial activities in subsidiaries wiII have more earning
             assets, and thus will be stronger and better able to serve their communities
             under CRA.

             The subsidiary/affiliate option would also help preserve the current balance
             among the rcgulatory agencies by giving both Treasury/OCC and the Fed a
             role in supervising new financial activities. In so doing, it would help
             safeguard the role of the President and the Executive Branch in financial
             services policy making.

       These efforts appear to be bearing fruit. On the House side, the Leach/ LaFalce
compromise includes the subsidiary option, and permits subsidiaries to conduct all
financial activities except insurance underwriting. On the Senate side, Chairman
Gramm's discussion draft would allow the subsidiary option only to banks with less than
$1 billion in assets-an approach that Secretary Rubin has labeled a non-starter. We
understand, however, that several Banking Committee Republicans (Bennett, Grams,
Shelby) strongly support our position (and may well be joined by Hagel and Mack).
Among the Democrats, Scnator Sarbanes, formerly a critic of the subsidiary option, wiII
include the Leach-LaFalce subsidiary in the Democratic substitute.

3. Consumer Protection

We believe that financial modernization legislation should contain appropriate consumer
protections, including safeguards relating to the sale of non-banking products to bank
customers (e.g., suitability and disclosurc requirements). The Leach-LaFalce bill contains
such protections. Yet the Gramm bill, although it would significantly expand the potential
for affiliations between banks and sccurities firms, fails to provide adequate investor
protections in connection with the sale of securities to bank customers.

3. Banking and Commercc
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
·
           Considerable controversy has arisen recently over proposals to "mix banking and
    commerce", i.e., to allow depository institutions to affiliate with non-financial firms.
    Secretary Rubin has expressed serious reservations about allowing affiliations of
    depository institutions and non-financial firms. Experience in Asia raises concerns that
    mixing banking and commerce can lead to inefficient allocation of resources and exposure
    of the banking system to risk. Chairman Greenspan has expressed similar sentiments,
    arguing that we should assess the effect of allowing full affiliation among financial firms
    before allowing affiliations with non-financial firms. Senator Sarbanes strongly opposes
    mixing banking and commerce. Assistance on the subsidiary issue was conditioned on our
    support on this issue. Chairman Leach also opposes mixing banking and commerce.

           The draft Gramm bill proposed a significant expansion of banking and commerce.
    For example, under the Gramm draft, a large banking organization could own a mid-sized
    commercial firm, and a large commercial firm could own a small bank. Also, any
    commercial firm would be permitted to own a savings association (thrift) of any size, as
    under the current "unitary thrift holding company" law.

            The Leach-LaFalce bill contains what may be an acceptable compromise. New
    commercial affiliations would not be permitted, and the unitary thrift holding company
    would be prohibited going forward (with existing ownership grand fathered). The
    compromise depends, though, on a slightly broader definition of permissible financial
    activities, which we will necd to negotiate.
