RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL             (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. weinstein Jr.             ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-MAR-1999 15:41:25.00

SUBJECT:      FINAL THAT WENT TO STAFF SECY

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP on
03/01/99 03:41 PM ---------------------------




Melissa G. Green
03/01/99 03:38:53 PM
Record Type:     Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject:         FINAL THAT WENT TO STAFF SECY




Message Sent
To:
Pau~l~J~.~W~e~i-n-s~t-e-l~·n--J~r--.~/-O~P~D~/~E~O~P~------------------------------------

Mindy E. Myers/WHO/EOP
Carolyn T. Wu/WHO/EOP
Roger S. Ballentine/WHO/EOP
Cathy R. Mays/OPD/EOP
Sarah Rosen/OPD/EOP
Rhonda Melton/OVP @ OVP


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D83]MAIL49808546B.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750437B060000010A020100000002050000004B6C0000000200001BBD084D03BEE39AFDD9C8
F4C09441C3C56E02C2AF14BE056D70105D2731308DCE9793259D3BFA48D1DA02951DC6487B1088
760AAC94022340EC6273912766377F4BDDD9208FD7B16CFC640E892C25BBD81A652668094C5487
4A3FOC738D04C1DB33415556A52886B3474615C3D245AD7DD8DA2AA7F75154B86CED7F50F1A2A9
7553E087B1414A5211EC5B015BF41B1F9C5CB5E256C498300A89AFF3C9E87DDS723813D753D40A
A472A26628516E3E43A0945ADF14D8F9421931DAF7D1C30E68C5F31FE3892CB6ED4AC9146A98DC
784EB421871BF21498481C75649D8D5FA739CAB3E9CFF9A5741F268B4D707D946A3ACAE28D46F8
88CFEC02A612B53F74569C274B4FCE1BDC43DEF121E33C77D2A4FD226084216F36FAC39CA10D4D
ADEE7C5D1A2973FAB3FB48932EEE3D8A1C98SD81F874C6A4E3AOAC41EAOE260F7AS0027AE6B311
                                                                           Hex.Dump Conversion



                                       March 1, 1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

CC:           THE VICE PRESIDENT

FROM:         ROBERT RUBIN
              GENE SPERLING
              BRUCE REED
              LARRY STEIN

SUBJECT:      Financial Services Legislation

ACTION-FORCING EVENT: On March 4, the House and Senate Banking Committees
are both scheduled to mark up major financial services legislation. The House bill,
developed by Chairman Leach and Ranking Democrat LaFalce, is generally acceptable.
But the Senate bill being developed by Chairman Gramm is seriously flawed. While we
expect to see another draft of the Gramm bill later today, the most recent draft would
remove outmoded barriers to affiliations among different types of financial services firms,
but it would also: (1) weaken the effect of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA); (2)
erode the national bank charter and the Administration's role in financial services
policymaking; (3) provide inadequate consumer protections; and (4) provide increased
leeway for affiliations between banks and nonfinancial firms.

RECOMMENDED ACTION: That you or John Podesta on your behalf sign the attached
letter stating that you would veto the Senate bill in its current form (Attachment A).

Agree __                    Disagree _ _                     Discuss

BACKGROUND: Both Houses of Congress are currently considering legislation to
permit the full range of financial services firms-including banks, securities firms, and
insurance companies-to affiliate with one another. This memorandum describes the
current status of such "financial modernization" legislation and outlines a strategy for
countering the most objectionable features of the Senate bill.

      Attachment B provides a more detailed discussion of the issues in question.

In General

        The 1933 Glass-Steagall Act generally prohibits affiliation between banks and
securities firms. The Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 generally prohibits affiliation
between banks and insurance companies. Large financial services firms strongly support
removing these barriers to affiliation, although consumer and community groups generally
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
see little benefit in such changes.

        Repealing barriers to affiliation among financial services firms has the potential for
giving consumers greater choice and lower costs. However desirable the general goal of
financial modernization, it does not warrant accepting a seriously flawed bill. Financial
modernization is already occurring in the marketplace, and will continue even without
legislation.

        Over the years, efforts to enact financial modernization legislation have repeatedly
failed in the face of infighting among different types of financial services firms. By the end
of the last Congress, however, a financial modernization bill known as H.R. 10 had
received broad support from the banking, securities, and insurance industries. The bill
passed the House but died on the Senate floor for two reasons. First, Senators Gramm
and Shelby opposed what they characterized as an expansion of the Community
Reinvestment Act. Second, the Administration objected that the bill would have undercut
its role in financial services policymaking and had the effect of weakening CRA.

Status of Legislation

       As this Congress turns to financial modernization legislation, the inter-industry
consensus on the need for such legislation remains intact. Both the Banking Committees
are scheduled to mark up financial modernization bills on March 4. Given that early start
and the momentum for some sort of legislation, the prospects for passage of legislation are
stronger than in the last Congress, though still uncertain.

       HOllse.  The Leach-LaFalce bill has been developing along very constructive lines,
       and we anticipate that it will merit our support. As discussed in Attachment B, the
       bill accomplishes the basic work of financial modernization-allowing affiliations
       among different types of financial services firms-and does so consistent with our
       views on the Community Reinvestment Act, banking structure, and other issues.
       The House Leadership is by all accounts committed to moving some sort of financial
       modernization bill. The House Commerce Committee, however, may seek
       changes that could be unacceptable.

       Sellate. Chairman Gramm is scheduled to release a committee print on March 1.
       As further described in Attachment B, Gramm's recent draft bill runs counter to
       our views on CRA, banking structure, consumer protection and promoting a
       separation between depository institutions and commercial firms.         Senator
       Sarbanes, the Ranking Democrat, is working with the Treasury to unite Banking
       Committee Democrats behind an alternative bill that will have much in common
       with the Leach-LaFalce bill. The Committee is likely to approve the Gramm bill on
       a straight party-line vote.

eRA:    The current version of the Leach-LaFalce compromise requires a bank to have and
maintain a satisfactory CRA record in order to engage in newly authorized non-banking
activities-a requirement not included in the Administration's 1997 bill, but which we have
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


since argued is essential to maintaining the vitality of CRA. The draft Gramm bill
contains no such "have and maintain" requirement, and includes two amendments that
would seriously undermine CRA.
Some House Democrats may seek to go on the offensive by proposing to expand CRA. For
example, Representative LaFalce may offer an amendment to make explicit that public
comment on an institution's CRA record must be considered in applications for newly
authorized activities, an amendment we could support. Last year, Representative LaFalce
introduced an amendment requiring financial institutions to report on their progress in
meeting publicly announced "commitments" under CRA; currently no such reporting
occurs. Other House committee Democrats may offer amendments to extend the reach of
CRA to insurance companies and securities firms.

Near-Term Strategy

       Our near-term goal is to assist Leach and LaFalce in moving their bill forward,
while doing everything possible to block the Gramm bill. This strategy has four
advantages. First, we would help advance the better of the two bills. Second, we would
take a strong stand against weakening CRA. Third, we would help unite Senate
Democrats against the Gramm bill. Fourth, we would be taking a visible stand against a
bad "financial modernization" bill, while simultaneously supporting a good bill.

         To further this strategy, we recom~end that you --as requested by Senator
Sarbanes -- or John Podesta on your behalf send a short letter stating that you would veto
the Gramm bill if it were presented to you in its current form. The proposed letter would
cite two reasons from last Congress: The bill's weakening of the effect of CRA, and the
bill's flawed banking structure issues. It would also cite two new reasons: the bill's
inadequate consumer protections (notably the failure to provide adequate
investor-protection safeguards on the sale of securities to bank customers), and its extensive
expansion of non-financial firms' ability to affiliate with banks.

       Secretary Rubin would send a letter setting forth a fuller explanation of our reasons
for opposing the Gramm bill. He would also send a letter supporting the Leach-LaFalce
bill.

       Finally, your advisors are discussing the merits of various eRA proposals and how
we should respond to amendments that would enhance enforcement of eRA, such as the Lafalce
amendments. Some think that supporting something along these lines could strengthen our hand
in negotiations later on; moreover, as we provide the industry with new opportunities, they argue,
we should insist on some new responsibilities. However, some of these amendments would
present an uncomfortable vote for moderate Democrats, have slim prospects for passage, and
could possibly jeopardize the eRA provisions already in the House bill.

Attachments



                                                3
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conve:-sion .




                        ATTACHMENT A: PROPOSED LETTER
                             TO CHAIRMAN GRAMM



Dear Mr. Chairman:

       This Administration has been a strong proponent of financial legislation that would
reduce costs and increase access to financial services for consumers, businesses and
communities. Nevertheless, we cannot support the "Financial Services Modernization Act of
1999" now pending before your Committee.

       In its current form, the bill would undermine the effectiveness of the Community
Reinvestment Act, a law that has helped to build homes, create jobs, and restore hope in
communities across America. The CRA is working, and we must preserve its vitality as we
write the financial constitution for the 21st Century. The bill would deny financial services
firms the freedom to organize themselves in the way that best serves their customers, and
prohibit a structure with proven advantages for safety and soundness. The bill would also
provide inadequate consumer protections. Finally, the bill would expand the ability of
depository institutions and non-financial firms to affiliate, at a time when experience around the
world counsels caution in this area.

         The President [I] agree[s] with you that reform of the laws governing our nation's
financial services industry would promote the public interest. However, he [I] will veto the bill
ifit is presented to him [me] in its current form.

                                           Sincerely,




                                                4
                                                                                   Hex-DiJmp Conversion


                              ATTACHMENT B: KEY ISSUES

1. Community Reinvestment Act

Currellt Law. CRA requires a bank to serve the convenience and needs of all communities in
which it operates. Although banks are examined periodically for CRA compliance, enforcement
comes only when a bank files an application to merge with another bank or open a new branch.
The regulator must then consider the bank's CRA record in evaluating the bank's application,
and the public has an opportunity to comment on the application. A bank's CRA record is not
currently scrutinized in connection with applications to affiliate with non-banking companies.

        Early in your Administration, and at your request, the banking regulators revised the
regulations implementing CRA to focus on performance, not paperwork. They now base CRA
ratings on a three-pronged test: lending, services, and investments. Regulators also revised and
streamlined the examination process, particularly for smaller institutions.

Conditionillg Authority to Conduct New Non-banking Activities on Banks Having a
Satisfactory eRA Record_ We have argued that financial modernization legislation must
preserve the relevance of CRA for the 21st century, and must not weaken the effect of CRA.
CRA's relevance should be maintained by conditioning authority to conduct new non-banking
activities on banks having a satisfactory CRA record. Although the Administration's 1997 bill
did not impose a link between CRA and non-banking activities, we have insisted in this Congress
that a bank both have and maintain an adequate CRA record as a condition of engaging in newly
authorized non-bank activities. This would provide additional means for enforcing existing
CRA obligations. Noncompliance would result in submission of a compliance plan (and
ultimately, albeit unlikely, forced divestiture).

        The Leach-Lafalce compromise requires the bank to have and maintain a satisfactory
CRA rating, though amendments (including by Leach himself) are possible. Secretary Rubin
has testified that if we wish to preserve the relevance of CRA, at a time when the relative
importance of bank mergers may decline and non-bank financial activities are becoming
increasingly important, authority to engage in newly authorized non-bank financial activities
must be conditioned on satisfactory CRA performance.

        Gramm's draft bill imposed no such condition. Gramm views such a requirement as an
unprecedented expansion of CRA to non-bank activities, and has told the Secretary that he would
prefer no bill to a bill with such a condition. We have argued, though, that the financial services
system of the future may include rather fewer banking applications (and therefore fewer
opportunities for enforcement of CRA) and more non-banking activities (where an ongoing
requirement of a satisfactory CRA record would be a meaningful incentive for compliance).
Thus a bill that is silent on CRA (and thus supposedly neutral) would, in our view, tend to
weaken the effect of CRA, and we would oppose such a bill.



                                                5
                                                                          H~):'()\lmp Con'le:sion


Gramm's Safe Harbor Amendment. Gramm has proposed a safe harbor for applications
now subject to eRA. A satisfactory CRA rating at a bank's most recent examination
would conclusively establish the bank's eRA performance, unless a public comment
provides substantial verifiable information to the contrary. A regulatory agency could not
review the bank's eRA record unless there were an adverse public comment meeting the
test-even if the previous examination were old or otherwise stale. And Gramm would
create a rebuttable presumption favoring approval of the application. In so doing, he
would place a significant burden of proof on consumer and community organizations that
generally have less access than the bank to relevant information. He would also, in effect,
force community groups to stretch their' limited resoQrces to comment on many
examinations, instead of focusing those resources on major applications (e.g., for mergers
or acquisitions). Secretary Rubin has testified that such a safe harbor would tend to
eviscerate the effectiveness of CRA, and the Administration has repeatedly threatened
vetoes of bills containing safe harbors provisions.

Gramlll's Allti-extortion Amendment.        Gramm has also proposed a so-called
"anti-extortion" provision which may be dropped from the bill. We strongly oppose
extortion. Yet laws punishing extortion, bribery, and false statements already protect
against misuse of the CRA process. Gramm's broad and vague proposal would
criminalize normal, legitimate arms length transactions and cooperation between banks
and community groups (e.g., bank grants to support community groups' home ownership
counseling programs)-the very sort of activity eRA seeks to foster.

     It is important to note that if we should end up opposing a bill, for whatever reason,
eRA will be the issue best able to unite Democrats behind us.

2. Allowing Firms the Choice of Operating through Subsidiaries as Well as Affiliates.

      Since 1995, the Treasury has advocated giving financial services firms that include
banks the option of conducting newly authorized financial activities (e.g., securities
underwriting) in through a subsidiary or an affiliate.


                                   BANK HOLDING COMPANY

                                    I
                                BANK                  AFFILIATE




                                    I
                                SUBSIDIARY
                                                 I
The Fed, by contrast, has insisted that new activities be allowed only in Fed-regulated

                                             6
                                                                         Hex·Dump Conversion ·
affiliates.

        We have emphasized four points to Members of Congress:

              Absent a demonstrable public interest to the contrary, financial services
              firms should have the same freedom as other businesses to organize
              themselves in the way that best serves their customers.

              The subsidiary approach has strong safety and soundness advantages. If
              the subsidiary prospers and the bank falters, the bank's interest in the
              subsidiary can be sold to help replenish the bank's capital-or reduce any
              loss to the FDIC. Yet if the bank prospers and the subsidiary falters, the
              bank faces no greater risk than if an affiliate faltered. Four past and
              present Chairmen of the FDIC have strongly agreed with this point, arguing
              that the subsidiary offers better protection to the FDIC and the taxpayer.

              Banks with new financial activities in subsidiaries will have more earning
              assets, and thus will be stronger and better able to serve their communities
              underCRA.

              The subsidiary/affiliate option would also help preserve the current balance
              among the regulatory agencies by giving both Treasury/OCC and the Fed a
              role in supervising new financial activities. In so doing, it would help
              safeguard the role of the President and the Executive Branch in financial
              services policy making.

        These efforts appear to be bearing fruit. On the House side, the Leach/ LaFalce
compromise includes the subsidiary option, and permits subsidiaries to conduct all
financial activities except insurance underwriting. On the Senate side, Chairman
Gramm's discussion draft would allow the subsidiary option only to banks with less than
$1 billion in assets-an approach that Secretary Rubin has labeled a non-starter. We
understand, however, that several Banking Committee Republicans (Bennett, Grams,
Shelby) strongly support our position (and may well be joined by Hagel and Mack).
Among the Democrats, Senator Sarbanes, formerly a critic of the subsidiary option, will
include the Leach-LaFalce subsidiary in the Democratic substitute.

3. Consumer Protection

We believe that financial modernization legislation should contain appropriate consumer
protections, including safeguards relating to the sale of non-banking products to bank
customers (e.g., suitability and disclosure requirements). The Leach-LaFalce bill contains
such protections. Yet the Gramm bill, although it would significantly expand the potential
for affiliations between banks and securities firms, fails to provide adequate investor
protections in connection with the sale of securities to bank customers.


                                            7
                                                                 Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                                         Hex-Oump Conversion
    4_ Banking and Commerce

           Considerable controversy has arisen recently over proposals to "mix banking and
    commerce", i.e., to allow depository institutions to affiliate with non-financial firms.
    Secretary Rubin has expressed serious reservations about allowing affiliations of
    depository institutions and non-financial firms. Experience in Asia raises concerns that
    mixing banking and commerce can lead to inefficient allocation of resources and exposure
    of the banking system to risk. Chairman Greenspan has expressed similar sentiments,
    arguing that we should assess the effect of allowing full affiliation among financial firms
    before allowing affiliations with non-financial firms. Senator Sarbanes strongly opposes
    mixing banking and commerce. Assistance on the subsidiary issue was conditioned on our
    support on this issue. Chairman Leach also opposes mixing banking and commerce.

           The draft Gramm bill proposed a significant expansion of banking and commerce.
    For example, under the Gramm draft, a large banking organization could own a mid-sized
    commercial firm, and a large commercial firm could own a small bank. Also, any
    commercial firm would be permitted to own a savings association (thrift) of any size, as
    under the current "unitary thrift holding company" law.

            The Leach-LaFalce bill contains what may be an acceptable compromise. New
    commercial affiliations would not be permitted, and the unitary thrift holding company
    would be prohibited going forward (with existing ownership grandfathered). The
    compromise depends, though, on a slightly broader definition of permissible financial
    activities, which we will need to negotiate.




                                                8

