RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-MAR-1999 16:45:13.00

SUBJECT:     Drilling Royalties

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD                1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP on 03/02/99
04:45 PM ---------------------------



        jcoleman @ ps-b.com (Jenifer Coleman)
        03/02/99 04:19:40 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject: Drilling Royalties



 March 1, 1999


                        Lawmakers Want To Reserve oil Cash


                         A.P. INDEXES: TOP STORIES   I   NEWS   I   SPORTS   I   BUSINESS   I
TECHNOLOGY    I   ENTERTAINMENT


                         Filed at 1:32 a.m. EST


                    By The Associated Press
                    WASHINGTON (AP) -- More than $4 billion in annual
offshore oil-drilling royalties collected by the federal government has
become a tempting windfall for lawmakers.

                    Legislation in both houses of Congress would designate
about half the cash for states and the environment -- $1.9 billion next
year
under the Senate formula and $2.1· billion under the House plan.

                    Six states -- Louisiana, Texas, Alaska, California,
Mississippi and Alabama -- would be the biggest winners because they have
offshore oil drilling.


                    Louisiana would get the most next year, $359 million
under the Senate plan, and Texas would finish second with $196 million.

                     But coastal states without offshore rigs also would
benefit. New York would take in $79 million and Washington state would net
$31 million under the Senate formula. And every state and u.S. territory
would get something.

                    "This bill will improve the lives of every American, ' ,
Rep. Don Young, R-Alaska, said in introducing the House measure last month.
The Senate bill was introduced in January by Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La.

                    Royalties from drilling more than six miles off u.S.
coasts now go to the u.S. Treasury to finance an array of programs. A
portion, about $300 million annually in recent years, finances the land and
water conservation fund, used by the federal government to buy
environmentally sensitive land.

                    Some royalties would continue to go to the Treasury
under both bills    50 percent in the Senate measure and 40 percent in the
House version.

                    The rest would be split·three ways.

                    --Both bills would allocate 27 percent to 30 states and
five territories bordering oceans and the Great Lakes. The lawmakers say
coastal states have special needs to fight erosion, improve water quality
and address offshore-drilling impact. Coastal states with offshore
drilling,
extensive coastlines and large populations would get the lion's share.

                    --About one-fourth of the money in the House bill, less
in the Senate version, would go to the conservation fund and for urban
parks
and recreation. Based on expected royalties next year, the Senate formula
would allocate about $661 million to the conservation fund, while the House
bill would provide $900 million.

                    --One-tenth of the money in the House bill, less in the
Senate, would go to fish-and-game programs in alISO states.

                    The proposals are among the most closely watched pieces
of environmental legislation in the 106th Congress -- especially since
Young, chairman of the House Resources Committee, and another supporter,
Sen. Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, head of the Senate Energy and Natural
Resources Committee, have been criticized by environmentalists in the past
for not doing enough to protect wildlife.

                    They're winning praise by those groups now for trying
to
increase revenues going to the land and water conservation fund.

                    "What I really like is we're going to do something,"
said Rindy O'Brien, vice president for policy at The Wilderness Society.
"You've got all the right people lined up. ' ,

                    The proposal also has caught the eye of state
officials.

                    "We've got a lot of people paying attention to this,"


said Carol Jolly, a policy adviser for Washington Gov. Gary Locke. She said
the revenues would be useful for salmon restoration and local acquisition
of
land for parks and trails.

                    But the bills are drawing fire from private-property
groups. By mid-February, about 100 groups had formed a new organization
called the Keep Private Lands in Private Hands Coalition to fight the
proposals.

                    "What is astounding here is that this is an effort led
by some Republicans who are going desperately astray, " said R.J. Smith,
senior environmental scholar at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a
public policy think tank here.

                    The opponents say the government already owns too much
land, especially in the West. Setting aside money for more land purchases
will infringe on landowners' rights and hurt rural economies, they say.


