RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-MAR-1999 17:33:29.00

SUBJECT:    Ed Vids

TO: Elena Kagan       CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Transcripts from today's videos
---------------------- Forwarded by Karin Kullman/OPD/EOP on 03/03/99
04:36 PM ---------------------------




Brenda M. Anders
03/03/99 05:31:53 PM
Record Type:     Record

To:      Karin Kullman/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         Ed vids

      THE WHITE HOUSE

                      Office of the Press Secretary



                 VIDEOTAPED REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT
           FOR NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
                        PRINCIPALS CONVENTION


           THE PRESIDENT:  I'm pleased to greet you as you open
 your 78th annual meeting today.  Every great school I've ever
'visited has had a great principal.

          I'd like to take this opportunity to recognize the
exemplary leadership of my good friend, Sam Sava, for his 18
years of dedication and service to the NAESP.  For most of those
18 years, Sam, we've worked together.

          Today, 'I want to talk with you about the ways we can
continue to work together to strengthen our schools for the 21st
century. As principals, you provide the leadership that is so
crucial to help all our children to meet high academic standards.


And better than anyone else, you know the challenges our schools
face.  There are more students in our nation's schools today from
more diverse backgrounds than ever before. Too many of our
schools are overcrowded and in desperate need of repair, and
there's a growing well-prepared teachers.

          I'm proud of the progress we've made together so far.
Math scores have risen in nearly all grades nationwide.  Reading
scores are up, too. But there's still a problem. While our 4th
graders out-perform their peers in other countries in math and
science, our 8th graders are about average and our 12th graders
rank near the bottom.

          We must, and we can, do better. That's why the budget
I sent to Congress last month calls for $1.4 billion to help
local communities hire new, better-trained teachers.  That's a
17-percent increase over the amount in the balanced budget I
signed last fall.  It moves us closer to our goal of hiring
100,000 new teachers over seven years. Our budget also calls for
Congress to build or modernize up to 6,000 schools. And it
triples funding for after-school and summer school programs --
enough to keep over one million of our children off the streets
during the hours when parents work and juvenile crime soars.

          While we invest more in what works, we must also stop
investing in what doesn't.   That's the idea behind my Education
Accountability Act.  It says every state and school district
accepting federal money must do five things: end social
promotion; turn around failing schools; ensure teachers know the
subject they're teaching; set reasonable discipline codes and
enforce them; and empower parents with report cards on their
schools. These are ideas that work -- you have proven that. We
got them from you, not from Washington. As a nation, we must
commit ourselves to raising standards for all our schools and all
our students.

          Working together in every community, at every level of
government, we can give America's children the education they
need to succeed in the new millennium.  Principals are the key to
strong schools -- strong schools are the key to a strong America.
That's what you're doing, and I thank you again for your service.

                                * * * * *
D,


                             THE WHITE HOUSE

                      Office of the Press Secretary



                VIDEOTAPED REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT
            FOR THE CHARTER SCHOOLS NATIONAL CONFERENCE



          THE PRESIDENT: Thank you for giving me this
opportunity to speak with you today at our second Charter Schools


     National Conference. Your efforts are adding energy and
     opportunity to public education all across America.  I salute
     your work; I thank you for your leadership on behalf of our
     nation's children.

               It's no secret that I believe charter schools will play
     a vital role in renewing American education.   Charter schools
     offer choice, promote competition, and foster excellence that all
     our children need to succeed in the new economy of the 21st
     century. They create hope and opportunities for students to
     achieve high standards; for teachers to find new ways of working
     together; for communities to playa direct role in shaping how
     their schools are run.  With your leadership and hard work,
     charter schools are becoming powerful examples of how communities
     can use greater freedom and accountability to create public
     schools to improve education fo.r all children, regardless of
     their background or ability.

               Through two decades of personal experience, as governor
     of Arkansas and now as President, I became an early champion of
     charter schools.  In 1993, research made clear what many of you
     know -- lack of access to start-up funding has been the number
     one obstacle to launching new charter schools. That's why, since
     1994, we've invested nearly a quarter of a billion dollars for
     starting and running charter schools.

               When I was first elected President, there was just one
     charter school in our entire nation.  Last fall there were over
     1,000 of them, serving more than 200,000 children. We're well on
     our way now to meeting our goal of 3,000 charter schools by early
     in the next century. This year, I'm calling for another major
     increase in federal start-up funding for charter schools, funding
     new partnerships to help you share your best ideas with other
     public schools across our nation, and taking steps to make sure
     that you get your fair share of other federal education funds.

               Across the nation, there are waiting lists to get in to
     charter schools, and there's a simple reason for that -- parents
     know they work.  Communities and school systems are taking
     notice, and I'm confident they will continue to respond in
     constructive ways.

               Thank you again for your innovation, your dedication,
     and your leadership.

                                 * * * * *
     D,


