RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: MaryEllen C. McGuire ( CN=MaryEllen C. McGuire/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1999 11:15:57.00

SUBJECT:   AmeriCorps Visibility Conference Call

TO: Jennifer M. Palmieri ( CN=Jennifer M. Palmieri/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Stacie Spector ( CN=Stacie Spector/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Andrew J. Mayock ( CN=Andrew J. Mayock/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: JGompert ( JGompert @ cns.gov @ inet    [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Thurgood Marshall Jr ( CN=Thurgood Marshall Jr/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Anne E. McGuire ( CN=Anne E. McGuire/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Shirley S. Sagawa ( CN=Shirley S. Sagawa/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: TWest ( TWest @ cns.gov @ inet   [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Ruby Shamir ( CN=Ruby Shamir/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays   ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Carolyn T. Wu ( CN=Carolyn T. Wu/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:


Reminder:
We will be having our biweekly AmeriCorps Visibility Conference call this
coming Monday, March 8th at 4:00pm, 757-2100, code 4129
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                 March 5, 1999


MEMORANDUM TO THE CHIEF OF STAFF

CC:                       Doug Sosnik
                          Karen Tramontano

FROM:                     Bruce Reed
                          Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:                  Long Term Priorities


MAJOR PRIORITIES

1. EDUCATION

Our major objectives on education over the next few months will be to: 1) win the argument that
accountability, class size, and school construction must be national priorities; 2) keep Democrats united
behind our accountability agenda; and 3) attack Republican efforts to regain credibility on education,
such as Domenici's jumbo block grant and Coverdell's education savings accounts.

      A. Education Accountability Act. Legislation to reauthorize the Elementary and Secondary
      Education Act which will require states and districts receiving federal funds to end social promotion,
      fix failing schools, end use of unqualified teachers, issue report cards, and institute discipline codes.
      Programs that are part of ESE A include Title I, After-School, Class Size (see below), Bilingual, Safe
      and Drug-Free, Technology, Charters, and Teacher Quality

            I. Legislative Status: The administration plans to transmit its bill to Congress around the
            Easter recess. The reauthorization process is expected to run through much of 1999 and
            possibly into next year. The House has already started hearings on the bill. The Senate and
            House are expected to start mark-up this summer.

           II. Presidential Actions:
            Announcement in late March or early April of bill transmittal, perhaps preceded by leaks on
           key unannounced components such as a new teacher quality initiative.
            Release of Dept. of Education social promotions guide. The President would like to visit a
           school district that has ended social promotion. He could accompany Tony Blair who is
           visiting Chicago's schools before the NATO Summit in late April.
            Release of Dept. of Education study on choice initiatives; the President would like to do an
           event at a charter school.
            Visit to a poor, rural school in Appalachia or the Delta.
            Address to a state legislature.
            Commencement at a teacher college.
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
      III. Republican Agenda: ESEA is the centerpiece of the federal government's K-12
      education policy. This is a top priority item for Republicans, who will seek to have ESEA
      reflect their key education initiatives -- flexibility, block grants, and possibly vouchers.

B. Ed-Flex Demonstration Program. Legislation to expand Ed-Flex to give all 50 states
authority to waive certain federal rules in exchange for showing results.

     I. Legislative Status: The Senate began debate on this bill this week, with a vote expected
     next week. The House Education and Workforce Committee is also planning to vote on
     counterpart legislation this week. The President has indicated that he will sign an Ed-Flex bill
     that has strengthened accountability to better link the waivers to student performance.

     II. Presidential Actions:
      See below

     III. Republican Agenda: Republicans have made Ed-Flex expansion their number one
     priority. It will be the first education vote this session. Flexibility is a key theme of their
     education agenda, and they will claim passage as a victory unless Democrats succeed in
     passing a class size amendment (see below).

C. Class Size. Legislation to authorize $11.4 billion more over six years to complete the hiring
100,000 teachers and reduce class size in the early grades to the national average of 18. (We will
still also need to appropriate $1.4 billion in FY 2000).

     I. Legislative Status: Senators Murray and Kennedy plan to offer a class size amendment to
     the Ed-Flex bill next week to authorize the program for the remaining six years in the
     President's proposal. The President strongly supports this amendment. In the House,
     members of the Education Committee will offer a class size amendment to the Ed-Flex bill this
     week, but this amendment probably will be blocked as non-germane.

     II. Presidential Actions:
      March 6th radio address to release Dept of Education Class Size program guidance, and
     challenge Senate to adopt Murray-Kennedy amendment.
      Release today of local allocations for Class Size program.

     III. Republican Agenda: This is not a program Republicans love, but they funded it in the
     last appropriations bill and are thus on record in support. Republicans would prefer to make
     class size an allowable use of a block grant proposal.

D. School Modernization. Legislation to create tax credits to support $25 billion in bonds to help
build, repair, or modernize up to 6,000 schools.

     I. Legislative Status: Rep. Rangel will introduce the administration's school modernization
     proposal in the House. A Sense of the Senate resolution on this issue may be offered during
     the Ed-Flex debate. Ultimate success will come, if at all, on a larger tax vehicle.
     II. Presidential Actions:
      Events or statements coordinated with legislative action.

                                                2
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

          III. Republican Agenda: Republicans will try to push an alternative "school construction"
          proposal, which would change arbitrage provisions for school bonds. The school
          superintendents organization supports this proposal; we will have to work hard to make the
          case that this proposal is fundamentally flawed (because the proceeds do not have to be used
          for school construction and go to districts that do not need assistance).

    E. 텲ducation FY 2000 Appropriations Bill. Legislation to fund federal education programs,
    including after-school; turning-around failing schools; class size; Troops to Teachers; master
    teachers; GEAR-UP; Title I; technology grants; choice initiatives (charters, work-site and magnets);
    and Safe and Drug-Free Schools.

          I. Legislative Status: Appropriations Committee hearings begin in March; final bills will get
          to the President in the late fall/early winter.

          II. Presidential Actions:
           National Teacher of the Year event in April.
           FY 99 grants announcements -- U, after-school, charter school, teacher recruitment and
          quality, Gear-Up, technology.
          - Reports on various issues -- U, charter schools, teacher quality, after-school.

          III. Republican Agenda: Republicans probably will support increases in funding, but will
          try to push block grants and target increases towards IDEA (essentially a politically viable
          form of block grants). Recent court rulings and new federal regulation may strengthen the
          Republican case for increases in IDEA funding. We will have to counter with sustained
          campaigns for increases in our priority programs.


2. CRIME

We have two major strategic goals on crime over the next few months: (1) an extended, high-profile
rollout of our new crime bill to build the case for another 50,000 police beyond the 100,000 mark we'll
reach in May; and (2) a continued effort to keep Republicans on the defensive on guns, as the gun
industry heightens press interest in the issue.

    A. 21st Century Crime Bill. The President's omnibus crime proposal will: add up to an
    additional 50,000 police on the street; give crime-fighting technologies to state and local law
    enforcement; provide more drug testing and treatment for offenders under criminal justice
    supervision; close the loophole on gun shows and extend the Brady waiting period; authorize
    new measures to combat international, juvenile, and white collar crime; and reauthorize popular
    anti-crime programs created in the 1994 Crime Act.

          I. Legislative Status: We are preparing to introduce the President's omnibus crime
          legislation immediately after the congressional recess. Although we do not necessarily
          expect the crime bill to move right away, we want to take the offensive before Republicans



                                                    3
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

gain any traction in attacking our budget proposals in this area or moving their own
juvenile crime legislation.
   a. March: Commerce-Justice State appropriations hearings scheduled for March 9th,
   11 th and 17th. Also, the Senate Judiciary Committee plans to hold a hearing to
   criticize our FY 2000 crime budget.
   b. April: The President's proposed legislation should be transmitted to Congress no
   later than the first week of April.
   c. June-July: Appropriations bills expected to be marked up by the full
   appropriations committees and sent to House and Senate floor for consideration.

II. Presidential Actions:
 March-April: We should build a drumbeat for the introduction of our crime bill
throughout this month with a series of events and press leaks on key components of the
bill. We recommend that the President unveil the entire bill in a speech to a police
academy class over the Easter recess. Possible events/leaks include:
    Health Care Fraud: Tougher criminal penalties for obstructing a fraud investigation,
   and a crackdown on illegal kickback schemes.
    Telemarketing Fraud: Legislation to give federal law enforcement same power to
   block telephone service to telemarketing scam artists that we already have for illegal
   gamblers.
    Pension Fraud: A new federal crime for defrauding pension or retirement plans, and
   tougher penalties for embezzlement.
    Bioterrorism: New penalties for possessing, using or failing to report biological
   agents and toxins. (The President should announce this to the Firefighters on March
    15.)
    Money Laundering: Treasury is finalizing a national strategy to crack down on money
    laundering.
    Gun Trafficking: New legislation to expand gun tracing of used firearms.
    Police Misconduct: Radio address March 13 outlining a list of proposals to deal with
   police integrity and racial stereotyping.
 May: During National Police Week (May 10-15), we propose that the President hold an
event to commemorate funding of the 100,000th police officer under his COPS initiative.
This represents one of the Administration's most important policy milestones. Thousands
of police officers will already be in town that week to attend the Fraternal Order of
Police's Peace Officers Memorial.
 June-August: Possible events/meetings with Mayors, law enforcement organizations,
and other groups holding annual conferences to help build support for the crime bill.

ill. Republican Agenda:
 Juvenile crime: Senate Republicans have re-introduced their juvenile crime legislation
from last seSSion, and have signaled that they are prepared to taI<:e it directly to the floor
this spring. If they do, we should be prepared to propose the provisions in our crime bill
as an alternative. With more money for police and prosecutors, tough gun provisions, and



                                         4
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

       increased drug testing and treatment, our bill offers a broader and more popular alternative
       for Congressional Democrats.
        Drugs: Senate Republicans also have proposed the Drug-Free Century Act, which
       increases spending for drug interdiction and enhances penalties for certain drug offenses.
       Again, our omnibus crime bill offers a more comprehensive alternative that Democrats
       should offer if the Senate Republicans bring the Drug-Free Century Act to the floor.

  B. Firearms Enforcement. The President's budget contains $28.8 million in new funds for
  additional ATF agents and federal prosecutors to enforce our firearms laws. These funds are
  closely linked to the President's proposal to close the gun show loophole, as well as to a
  proposed directive on enhanced gun enforcement that we expect the President to sign soon.
  We are also reviewing other gun legislation, including proposals to limit sales to one gun a
  month and to subject gun manufacturers to greater scrutiny.

       1. Legislative Status: Appropriations hearings on the Treasury enforcement budget
       began in late February. Commerce-Justice appropriations hearings to fund additional
       federal prosecutor funding will be held in March. Consideration by the full
       appropriations committees and the full House and Senate will likely take place between
       June and July. Related legislation requiring all firearms sales at gun shows to include a
       background check will be included as part of the President's crime bill to be introduced in
       late March.

       II. Presidential Actions:
        Issue a directive to the Attorney General and Treasury Secretary to strengthen federal
       firearms enforcement and prosecutions, as is occurring in cities like Philadelphia.
        Closely monitor settlement discussions between communities and the gun industry.

       III. Republican Agenda: The firearms enforcement initiative will help us rebut the
       NRA's criticisms that U.S. Attorneys are not prosecuting enough firearms cases, and will
       provide us with an alternative to Republican/NRA amendments in the
       Commerce-Justice-State appropriations bill to simply mandate more federal firearms
       prosecutions. Unlike other firearms initiatives, this proposal should receive some
       measure of bipartisan support.


3. HEALTH CARE

  A. Patients Bill of Rights.

       1. Legislative Status: The best chance to produce a strong bill is in the House; if we
       succeed in doing that, it will put pressure on the Senate. Congressman Dingell has
       reintroduced his bill from last year and believes he can attract as many as 210 cosponsors.
       Congressman Ganske has introduced a modified version of the Dingell bill, which slightly
       alters the enforcement provision by dropping the punitive damages section. It is unclear
       whether the best strategy is a normal committee markup or a discharge petition. Right

                                               5
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
    now, Dingell intends to proceed with markup. The goal is to pass strong bipartisan
    legislation by the August recess.

    II. Presidential Actions:
     Bipartisan event to highlight widespread support for strong, comprehensive legislation.
     Vice President to join Democrats to unveil Dingell Kennedy bill.

    III. Republican Agenda: It is unclear how Speaker Hastert will handle this issue. We
    believe he wants a bipartisan bill, but without a significant enforcement provision. Delay
    would seem to work to his advantage.

B. Long Term Care.

    I. Legislative Status: Senator Daschle introduced the Health Protection and Assistance
    for Older Americans Act, which includes key aspects of our long term care initiative,
    including the $1000 tax credit, the National Family Caregivers Program, and the OPM
    program. Expanding the list of co-sponsors will be difficult, because Daschle also
    included our Medicare buy-in (see-below) as part of the legislation. We are considering
    the question of Democratic sponsorship in the House; Reps. Cardin, Levin, or Stark are
    options. A hearing is scheduled on the OPM part of our proposal on March 18th, and we
    can expect additional hearings over the course of the year. We should expect the tax and
    non-tax provisions of this initiative to move (or not) on different vehicles.

    II Presidential Actions:
     The Vice President will host a series of forums around the country to highlight this
    issue, which he will continue to do.
     Additional events to highlight this proposal as events on the Hill warrant.

    III. Republican Agenda: There is a fair amount of bipartisan support for this legislation.
     We are trying to determine which Republicans on House committees of jurisdiction are
    likely supporters, and we will reach out to these members.

C. Jeffords-Kennedy.

    I. Legislative Status:  One issue gaining a great deal of bipartisan support,
    particularly in the Senate, is the Jeffords-Kennedy-Roth-Moynihan Work Incentives
    Improvement Act. The Senate has already held hearings on this legislation and is
    planning a March 4 markup. Senator Roth has asked that members refrain from
    amending the legislation to ensure its swift progress through the committees of
    jurisdiction. Although no companion bill has yet been introduced in the House, Reps.
    Johnson, Lazio, and Waxman may take a leading role in the legislation. We are still
    looking for sponsors for the tax credit and assistive technology pieces of our disabilities
    initiative.



                                           6




                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
          II. Presidential Actions:
           Issue statements, hold a bipartisan event with supportive members of Congress, or
          host another Task Force meeting to highlight this proposal as it moves through
          Congress .
           Highlight this policy at the White House Conference on Mental Health.

          m. Republican Agenda: This is one issue that has a great deal of bipartisan
          support. We should continue to highlight the issue to ensure that we pass a bill this
          year.

     D. Ensuring Access to Health Insurance And Health Care Services. The FY 2000 budget
     includes a number of policies to increase access to health insurance and health care services for
     the uninsured, including: $1 billion over 5 years to fund comprehensive health care delivery
     systems that traditionally provide services to the uninsured; legislation to enable Americans aged
     55 to 65 to buy into Medicare; legislation to encourage small businesses to offer health
     insurance to their employees through new tax provisions and technical assistance; improving
     transitional Medicaid for people moving from welfare to work; and budget proposals to enhance
     children's access to health insurance by restoring Medicaid and CHIP eligibility for legal
     immigrants affected by welfare reform, extending Medicaid eligibility to foster children up to age
     21, and providing states with $1.2 billion over 5 years for children's health outreach activities.

          I. Legislative status:                              .
          - HHS will work with the Appropriations COmmittees to secure funding for the initiative
          providing funds to communities to develop comprehensive health care delivery systems.
          We also will include the initiative on the tobacco recoupment menu.
          - Senator Daschle included our Medicare buy-in proposals in the Health Protection and
          Assistance for Older Americans Act, which he introduced at the beginning of this session.
          This legislation has the support of most Democrats, but we do not expect it to go far this
          term -- except possibly in the context of broader Medicare reform that raises the eligibility
          age.
          - Although we currently have no sponsors for our proposal to provide tax credits to small
          business purchasing cooperatives, there is bipartisan interest in this proposal and strong
          support from the small business community.
          - Because of state support for our outreach proposals, we stand a chance of passing some
          or all of them, though they will be linked to unpopular Medicaid savings.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - President, Vice President, and First Lady can amplify our message on the Medicare
          buy-in, especially given evidence that this problem has gotten worse since last year.
          - Issue guidance to States to encourage them to conduct outreach to families leaving the
          TANF program who are still eligible for Medicaid.
          - The other policies can be amplified in the context of coverage issues generally.


                                                   7
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
     III. Republican Agenda:
     - This proposal bears some similarity to a number of Republican proposals floated during
     health care reform. Republicans are generally supportive of this policy, although States
     may be opposed to any version of this policy that does not give them control of the funds.
      Most Republicans view the Medicare buy-in as a Medicare expansion and strongly
     oppose it.
      Republicans generally support the tax credit for small businesses. The Republican
           version of the Patients' Bill of Rights introduced last year in the House included a
     flawed version of this proposal.
      Republicans are generally supportive of our outreach policies, with the exception        of
     restoring eligibility for benefits to legal immigrants.

E. Public Health. We have requested an increase in funding for a number of these programs,
including: $1.5 billion for Ryan White, a 7 percent increase over 1999 funding levels, and an
additional $50 million to address HIV and AIDS issues in minority communities; $359
million for Mental Health block grants _. a 24 percent increase over 1999 and the largest
increase ever; and $145 million for health education, prevention, and treatment services for
minority populations.

     I. Legislative Status: We are working with appropriators to ensure sufficient funding for
     these programs.

     II. Presidential Actions:
      The President, Vice President, or First Lady could highlight the HIV initiative at events
     and remarks on health care, on their own and in conjunction with the race and health
     initia tive.
      The proposed increase in the mental health block grants could be highlighted at the
     White House Mental Health Conference this June with the President, First Lady, Vice
     President and Mrs. Gore. We could also announce the release of Surgeon General's report
     on Mental Health this fall.
      Given recent news about disparities, highlight the need for the Race and Health initiative
     through reports, grants, and other administrative actions.

     III. Republican Agenda:
      Republicans tend to be supportive of Ryan White. It is unclear, however, whether they
     will support the CBC efforts.
      Last year, Congress put in more dollars in mental health than we proposed. If       we
     can include the Republicans in our Conference and our other efforts, they may well
     support our proposed increase.




                                             8
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
- The Republicans were not particularly responsive to the Race and Health       initiative last year
and wanted all of the increases to go into Community Health Centers. We will need to work closely
with the groups to assure funding for this initiative.

F. Biotechnology.

Genetic Discrimination. Legislation to prevent health insurers and employers from
discriminating on the basis of genetic information.

   I. Legislative Status: Senator Daschle, together with Senator Kennedy, is introducing a
   bill next week. There is some bipartisan interest on the issue, mostly on the health
   insurance side (see below).

   II. Presidential Actions:
    Issue an executive order prohibiting discrimination against employees based on genetic
   information.

   III. Republican Agenda: The Republicans have proposed legislation addressing genetic
   discrimination for health insurance in their Patients' Bill of Rights legislation. It is
   possible that we can continue to work with them in this process.

Privacy of Medical Records. Legislation or executive action to provide privacy protections for
medical records.

   I. Legislative Status: It is important to note that DOJ and HHS have a continuing
   disagreement about law enforcement's access to medical records. This issue is extremely
   controversial and will probably attract attention as privacy legislation moves forward.

   II. Presidential Actions:
    Hold bipartisan event to highlight the need for Congress to pass strong privacy
   legislation and the ability of HIP AA to establish privacy protections for electronic medical
   records if Congress fails to do so.
    Assuming Congress does not pass legislation by this fall, take executive action on
   electronic medical records.

   III. Republican agenda: Some Republicans have made efforts to pass privacy legislation,
   but to date these proposals have been unacceptable. In fact, the Republicans last year
   included privacy provisions in their patients' bill of rights that undermined current state
   laws protections. The Republicans may want to work in a more bipartisan manner this
   year, but the odds are against legislation.

Medicare Cancer Clinical Trials. A budget request for $750 million over four years to give more
Americans access to cutting-edge cancer treatments.



                                                9
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
   I. Legislative Status: Senators Rockefeller and Mack are planning to introduce their bill
   quite soon_ It is most likely to move in the context of broader Medicare reform.

   II. Presidential Actions:
    Highlight this effort in the context of broader cancer events, such as breast cancer
   awareness month.

   III. Republican Agenda: This proposal has bipartisan support. However, it is unclear if
   it will move in this Congress.

ADDITIONAL PRIORITIES

1. CHILDREN AND FAMILIES

A. The President's Child Care Initiative. Expansion of Child Care and Development Block
Grants and creation of Early Leaming Fund; new stay-at-home tax relief and expanded child care
tax relief; new business tax credit; and after-school program expansion.

   I. Legislative Status: Ranking Subcommittee Democrat Ben Cardin plans to introduce the
   parts of the Administration's child care initiative that falls within the jurisdiction of the Ways
   and Means Committee next week, in time for a hearing the week after. Senator Dodd has
   introduced a similar (though more expensive) bill in the Senate as one of the top Democratic
   ~eadership bills. Increased funding for after-school programs will be addressed in
   appropriations.

   II. Presidential Actions:
    Announcement of child care block grant state spending numbers.
    Announcement of after-school grants in late Spring.

   III. Republican Agenda: Rep. Nancy Johnson (R-CT), chair of the Ways and Means
   Subcommittee on Human Resources, is likely to introduce her child care tax relief bill from last
   year, which includes expansion of the CDCTC and stay-at-home tax relief (which received
   broad support from moderate Republicans last year). Chafee may reintroduce his bill
   combining subside expansion (through the Block Grant) with child care and stay-at-home tax
   relief.

B. Support for Young People who "Emancipate" from Foster Care. The President's budget
includes $280 million over five years to: provide Medicaid coverage, enhance the Independent
Living Program, provide new time-limited financial support, and increase the Transitional Living
Program.

   I. Legislative Status: Ranking Subcommittee Democrat Ben Cardin has introduced legislation
   incorporating our proposal. The Subcommittee will hold a hearing next week. Senator
   Rockefeller may introduce our bill soon and is looking for a Republican co-sponsor.


                                                 10
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
   II. Presidential Actions:
    First Lady may hold events in the Spring.

   III. Republican Agenda: Some Republicans have indicated an interest in pursuing a child
   welfare block grant, which the Administration opposes. Other Republicans, however, have
   expressed interest in our proposal.


2. TOBACCO

Raise the price of cigarettes and other tobacco products; re-affirm full FDA authority to regulate
tobacco products; support public health efforts to prevent youth smoking; protect farmers and
farming communities; and work with states and Congress to enact tobacco legislation to settle
Federal Medicaid claims.

   I. Legislative Status: Bipartisan legislation (Hutchison and 36 cosponsors) has been added to
   the supplemental to prevent the federal government from recouping the federal share of the
   tobacco settlement. The President has made clear that we oppose this legislation because it
   gives up the federal share of the states' tobacco settlement without any commitment by the
   states to use the funds to prevent youth smoking, protect tobacco farmers, improve public
   health, or assist children. We are working with Senator Daschle to foster an alternative to the
   HutchisonIBliley legislation that would waive federal claims in exchange for a commitment by
   the states to use the federal share for specified purposes. We do not expect to be able to attach
   our proposed 55 cents-per-pack cigarette tax, nor do we believe there is a significant prospect of
   passing this tax as part of another vehicle.

   II. Presidential Actions:
    To reinforce the importance of FDA's authority over tobacco products, release new data on
   the results of retailer "stings" targeted at reducing youth tobacco access.
    On April 14, Kick Butts Day.
    Work with the Justice Department to leak developments in preparing federal litigation to
   recover federal health costs.

   III. Republican Agenda: Congressional Republicans are generally supportive of the
   HutchisonIBliley bills, but some are concerned that these bills set a bad precedent for the
   Medicaid program.


3. WELFARE REFORM

A. Reauthorize Welfare-to-Work Program and Related Budget Initiatives. Legislation to
reauthorize the Welfare-to-Work program in FY 2000 and appropriations requests to double
funding for Access to Jobs transportation grants, provide a 50 percent increase in welfare-to-work
housing vouchers, and extend employer tax credits for hiring welfare recipients and other
disadvantaged individuals.

                                                  11
                                                                                Hex텱ump Conversion .

   I. Legislative Status:
    We1fare-to-Work reauthorization -- Rep. Cardin has expressed interest in introducing
   legislation. Senate sponsors are still being determined, as is the possibility of bipartisan
   support. The House Ways and Means Committee plans to hold hearings on welfare reform in
   March and April. The major challenge on the Hill is justifying additional Welfare to Work
   funding when states have significant unobligated T ANF reserves.
    Access to Jobs -- Secretary Slater will testify on the DOT budget March 4th and 17th.
    Housing Vouchers -- Secretary Cuomo will testify on the HUD budget March 1Othl11 th and
   again in April. Senator Mikulski is key and needs convincing on this issue; House support
   needs to be developed.

   II. Presidential Actions:
    Release final T ANF rule in April.
    Demonstrate support for the Welfare-to-Work initiatives while also fighting to maintain
   funding for the T ANF block grants in speeches dealing with welfare reform.
    Release $75 million in FY 99 Access to Jobs grants in mid-March.
    Participate in Fathers Day event focusing on responsible fathers, highlighting a local program
   that is using current WtW funds to help low income non-custodial fathers and building support
   for our FY 2000 initiative. We could probably identify some new research findings to
   announce.
    The Welfare to Work Partnership has a major convention scheduled for August 2-4 in Chicago
   which will bring together several thousand businesses and service providers. If caseload
   reductions continue at current pace, we should be able to announce that the President has cut
   welfare rolls in half since he took office.
    In mid to late summer, the Administration will award $200 million in bonus funds to states
   that have done the best job placing welfare recipients in jobs and ensuring they succeed in those
   jobs.

     ill. RepUblican Agenda:
    With the exception of the Fathers initiative within Welfare-to-Work, Republicans have not
   expressed support for Welfare-to-Work reauthorization to date. Some Republicans continue to
   look at the T ANF reserves as a potential funding source for other priorities. Last session, Rep.
   Shaw introduced 'Fathers Count' block grant legislation. While there continues to be interest
   among RepUblicans on this issue, it is not yet clear whether Rep. Johnson will introduce similar
   legislation now that she has assumed leadership of the Human Resources Subcommittee.

B. Restoring Benefits to Legal Immigrants. Proposal to restore additional SSI, Medicaid, and
Food Stamp benefits to vulnerable categories oflegal immigrants, at a cost of$1.3 billion over five
years.

   I. Legislative Status: Legislation similar to the Administration's may be introduced by Sen.
   Moynihan and Rep. Levin. No hearings pertaining to this issue are scheduled. In the House,



                                                12
                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                                  Hex텱ump Conversion
        the Agriculture, Commerce and Ways and Means Committees will have jurisdiction. In the
        Senate both the Finance and Agriculture Committees have jurisdiction.

        II. Presidential Actions:
         The importance of this initiative can be mentioned in speeches concerning: welfare, legal
        immigration, nutritional assistance programs, kids' health care, and disability assistance,
        particularly in states with large immigrant populations.

        III. Republican Agenda: The tide has turned on anti-immigrant sentiment and the usual strong
        opposition from Republicans on this issue seems to have been replaced by muted restraint.
        They are unlikely to openly oppose the package for fear of offending Latinos and other
        minorities, but they should not be expected to actively support it either.


     4. CIVIL RIGHTS

     A. Hate Crimes Legislation. Legislation to strengthen the ability of the Justice Department to
     prosecute hate crimes based on race and religion by removing needless jurisdictional requirements
     and giving the Department the power to prosecute hate crimes committed because of the victim's
     sexual orientation, gender, or disability.

        L Legislative Status: Senators Kennedy and Specter will reintroduce the bill this month.

        II. Presidential Actions:
         A scheduling request has been submitted for the President to host a White House event with
        the bipartisan Senate and House co-sponsors of the bill, on the occasion of its re-introduction in
        Congress. MTV is prepared to release a poll on the day of the event relating to youth and hate
        cnmes.

        III. Republican Agenda: There has been some Republican criticism that including women as
        a category in the bill would lead to federal intervention in all assaults against women. Senator
        Hatch has indicated he will not support the bill at the present time. Senators Specter and
        Gordon Smith have already signed on, and Senators Chafee and Jeffords may decide to do so.

     B. Equal Pay. We have supported Senator Dashcle's Paycheck Fairness Act, which would
     increase remedies available for women under the Equal Pay Act. We are also in the process of
     analyzing whether we could support (1) a strengthened version of the Daschle bill requiring greater
     disclosure of wage infonnation by employers and (2) legislation sponsored by Senator Harkin on
     comparable worth.

        I. Legislative Status: Senator Daschle's bill has 20 Democratic cosponsors, and
        Congresswoman DeLauro's equivalent bill, H. R. 541, has 34. Senator Harkin's
        comparable worth bill had eight cosponsors in the last Congress, while the House version
        garnered 64 cosponsors.


                                                     13
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
     II. Presidential Actions:
      A scheduling request is pending for the President to hold a roundtable event on fair pay on
     April 7.

     m.  Republican Agenda: Republicans probably will continue to oppose Senator Daschle's bill.
     Ifwe support Senator Harkin's comparable worth bill, it might become a high-profile target for
     Republican attacks.


5. COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT

A. Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC). Legislation to increase the cap on the LIHTC
by 40 percent to create an additional 150,000-180,000 new rental housing units for low-income
American families over the next five years.

      I. Legislative Status: Last year, over two-thirds of House and Senate members were
      co-sponsors on bills to raise the cap on the LIHTC -- more support than on any other tax
     ,legislation.

     II. Possible Presidential Actions:
      Bipartisan event after we reach a certain number of cosponsors.

     m.   Republican Agenda: Finance Chairman Roth's staff have privately indicated that LIHTC
     will pass if there is a tax bill this year.


6. FOOD SAFETY

A.    Congressional Action on Food Safety:
Our major objective over the next several months will be to re-affirm the Administration's
position as the leader in the fight for better regulation of food and place opponents in the
spotlight for being against needed measures. We intend to highlight our pro-consumer
position by supporting our food safety budget initiative, and pushing two legislative
measures which will increase USDA's authority to regulate unsafe food production and
provide better oversight of imported food.

          1.   Legislative Status: The food safety budget will be the subject of congressional
          hearings beginning in mid-March. The SAFER Meat and Poultry Act, which
          gives USDA the ability to recall products and impose civil fines, is included in
          the Senate Democratic Leadership package. Senator Harkin has the lead. Our
          bill to give FDA greater authority to halt food imports from countries that do
          not have adequate food safety inspection systems has been the subject of interest
          to Senator Collins, a key Committee chair. She has told the FDA that she would

                                                  14

                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
          push for a compromise bill if the Administration agreed to support it. We have
          not responded to her. If we agree, the bill could well pass. If we do not, the
          bill is unlikely to leave committee.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - We are exploring events with new technologies in the food safety area that
          highlight the need for investments in prevention and surveillance. In addition,
          the July 4th radio address is an excellent opportunity to urge passage of our
          budget request and food safety legislation.

               III. Republican Agenda: Republicans in the past have opposed new
               spending in this area and our legislation to give agencies greater authority.
               Last year we were able to obtain most of our requested initiative funding
               following a Senate floor battle. We will likely have a similar dispute this
               year. On the imported food legislation, Senator Collins has held hearings
               on the problem and will likely continue to work on the issue seeking a
               bipartisan compromise. Republicans have indicated that under the
               Administration bill they are worried that farmers in the U.S. will be faced
               with new regulations.



      7. POLITICAL REFORM

          A. Bipartisan Campaign Finance Reform. The McCain-Feingold and
          Shays-Meehan legislation would ban soft money and increase disclosure of
          independent expenditures.

               I. Legislative Status: Shays-Meehan passed the House last year and should be
               able to muster a majority again this year. The Senate sponsors are taking a
               House-first approach.

               II. Presidential Actions:
                Invite sponsors to the White House.

               m.    Republican Agenda: The Republican Leadership strongly opposes this
               legislation. Speaker Hastert has placed this bill on the back burner. Getting the
               bill to the floor may require another successful discharge petition.




                                                  15


