 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1999 11:44:56.00

 SUBJECT:     revised radio

 TO: Elena Kagan         CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Revised Draft 3/5/99 11:45am
 Tamagni


 PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
 RADIO ADDRESS ON CLASS SIZE INITIATIVE
 THE WHITE HOUSE
 March 6, 1999


         Good morning. This week, we learned the good news that our
 efforts to raise academic standards for our children are beginning to pay
 off.  The National Assessment of Education Progress, or D&NAEP,D8 state
 test scores released on Thursday show that our childrenD,s reading scores
 have risen, with some of the greatest gains in states that once scored
 below the national average. Today, I want to talk to you about what I
 believe we must do to build on our progress, by putting more teachers in
 the classroom and reducing class size in schools around the country.

                  We all agree that to build a stronger nation, we must
 build up our nationD,s public schools.   I have proposed a comprehensive
 education agenda to strengthen and improve our public schools, with more
 accountability, higher standards, more well-trained teachers -- and
 smaller classes.

         As any parent, teacher, or school principal can tell you, smaller
 classes make a huge difference in our childrenD,s lives.  Studies show
 that teachers in smaller classes spend less time on discipline and more
 time teaching; students spend less time competing for attention and more
 time learning.  Student in smaller classes outperform their peers.  For
 children in struggling communities -- from remote rural areas to inner
 city neighborhoods -- smaller class size is even more critical. And with
 school enrollments at record highs and expected to keep rising, we must
 act now to reduce class size in all our nationD,s public schools.

         Across the country, more and more communities are recognizing the
 importance of smaller class size and trying to do something about it. To
 help them meet this challenge, I called on Congress early last year to
 pass my initiative to reduce class size by helping school districts hire
 100,000 highly trained teachers.  I am pleased that Republican m~mbers of
 Congress did the right thing and joined us in making a big downpayment
 toward meeting our goal.

         Today, the Department of Education is releasing guidelines that
 will let every school district in the country know how much money it will
 receive and how best to use those funds to reduce class size in time for
 school in the Fall. But communities deciding now whether to hire and
 train new teachers for next year need to know whether they can count on


 the commitment Congress made to help them reduce class size for years to
 come. We cannot leave them in doubt and leave our children without the
 smaller classes they need to reach their highest potential.  It is time to
 finish the job.

         This week, the Senate will vote on a bill that gives states the
 flexibility they need to improve their schools.  I support this bill, and
 I strongly support Senators Murray and KennedyD,s efforts to add an
 amendment to it that will fully fund 100,000 well trained teachers over
 the next six years.  But Republican leaders are trying to shut down debate
 on the Ed-Flex bill before this important amendment can be voted on by the
 Senate.

         Last October, Republicans joined us in promising the American people more
 teachers and smaller classes. Now, just four months later, Republican
 leaders in the Senate won't even allow a vote to reduce class size. This
 is the first big test of whether this Congress is willing to work together
 to get things done, and whether this Congress is serious about giving our
 children the education they need and deserve.

         The choice is simple: Are we going to give Americans smaller
 classes, or more partisanship? Are we going to put politics ahead of
 progress or put 100,000 teachers in our nationD,s classrooms? I call on
 the Senate to allow an up-or-down vote on the Murray-Kennedy class size
 amendment, and I urge every Senator to vote for it. Because when it comes
 to our childrenD,s future, politics must stop at the school house door.


          Thanks for listening.


