 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jose Cerda III   ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1999 11:03:43.00

 SUBJECT:   From Today's New Republic

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The Gatekeeper

 By Jason Zengerle

  Clinton and Gore's mentor on race.

 In April, the Government Printing Office, fresh from the success of its
widely read Starr referral, will
 publish another potential blockbuster: President Clinton's book about
race in America. A
 combination of personal reflections, social science data, and policy
prescriptions, the 100- to
 200-page book (whose working titles have included One America and Out of
Many, One) will be
 the capstone to the President's Initiative on Race. "I said to the
president," explains Christopher
 Edley, the Harvard Law professor who has served as a consultant to the
race initiative, "-I want to
 read Bill Clinton's book on race. '" So Edley--with the help of about 50
other people--is writing it
 for him.

 That Clinton has turned to Chris Edley to "draft" his race book is no
surprise. Not only is Edley a
 prominent black academic--he was the fourth African American in the
history of Harvard Law
 School to get tenure--but he is also a member in good standing of
Clinton's inner circle. In 1992
 Edley served on Clinton's economic policy transition team, and in 1993 he
took a leave from
 Harvard to work as an associate director in Clinton's Office of
Management and Budget. When I
 asked Edley for a list of people who could tell me about him, he sent
back the following names:
 George Stephanopoulos, Erskine Bowles, Leon Panetta, Alice Rivlin, Henry
Cisneros, James Lee
 Witt, Gene Sperling, Larry Summers, and Bob Rubin. The only person Edley
seemed to have left
 out was Clinton himself--although Stephanopoulos made sure to recommend
that I speak to the
 president for this piece. It is on race where Edley has been the most
influential with the Clinton
 crowd. Shortly after resigning from his OMB post in 1995, Edley was
pressed back into service by
 Stephanopoulos, who sought Edley's assistance in conducting the


administration's review of
 affirmative action programs. Edley's staunch support of preferences
helped shape the review's
 politically expedient conclusion: "Mend it, don't end it." After the
affirmative action review, Edley
 went to work on the president's race initiative, where his uncharitable
view of affirmative action
 opponents was reflected in the extreme reluctance of the race
initiative's advisory board to engage in
 a dialogue on the issue with conservatives. Now Edley's toiling away on
the president's book,
 lending his own perspective as a black man to what will ultimately be the
president's definitive
 statement about race in America.

 And Edley's influence won't end there. Along with the Kennedy School's
Elaine Kamarck, Edley is
 heading up the policy shop for Al Gore's 2000 campaign. Edley's work will
influence the campaign
 on many issues-- from Gore's livability agenda to his lifelong learning
proposal--but, again, it's on
 race where his fingerprints are already most visible. One of Edley's
first ·tasks for Gore was helping
 with the vice president's 1998 Martin Luther King Day speech at Atlanta's
Ebenezer Baptist
 Church, in which Gore railed against proponents of color-blindness,
lapsed into a preacher's
 cadence, and soaked up the congregation's approval. "He's good at
connecting," Edley says of
 Gore's interactions with black audiences. "One way you can tell is when
he loses the draft and he
 starts working off the energy and he's got a comfort level. And I've seen
Gore do that, so he's just
 fine. "

 But what's fine for Edley may not necessarily be fine for those who
contend that the Democratic
 Party needs to have a more open debate on affirmative action and related
issues. Indeed, while
 Clinton and Gore say that they want to think outside the box on issues of
race--questioning old
 assumptions and abandoning old dogmas--the man they have most frequently
turned to for help with
 this task represents the antithesis of this sensibility. with his close
ties to the mainstream civil rights
 community--Edley's father is a former president of the United Negro
College Fund, and Edley
 himself is a former board member of the Congressional Black Caucus
Foundation--Edley is that
 community's voice inside the administration, and he is largely
responsible for advancing its agenda.

 Although Edley pays lip service to finding common ground on issues of
race--or, as he charitably
 puts it, "searching for the kernel of truth" in his opponents'
arguments--he's unbending in his views
 and unsympathetic toward those with whom he disagrees. As Edley once
wrote in an online forum
 for The Atlantic Monthly, affirmative action opponents are not "soldiers
for justice" but instead are


 "counterrevolutionaries" whose "real goal is to protect the current
distribution of privilege and
 opportunity that has produced white-male elites in virtually every
sector."

 For Edley, such rhetoric is likely a hallmark of a career that has been
as political as it's been
 academic. While a student at Harvard Law School, he interrupted his
studies to run the situation
 room for Jimmy Carter's 1976 presidential campaign. And, after becoming
the law school's first
 secondgeneration black graduate (his father, Christopher Edley Sr., had
also gone there), Edley
 went to Washington to work in Carter's domestic policy office and then in
the Department of
 Health, Education, and Welfare.

 The Reagan era sent Edley fleeing into academia, but even then he needed
his political fix. So he
 accepted a position on The Washington Post's editorial board and commuted
back and forth
 between Cambridge and Washington for more than a year; in 1987 he took a
leave from the law
 school to serve as issues director for Michael Dukakis's ill-fated
presidential run. Although he's
 back teaching at Harvard today, Edley spends roughly four days a week in
Washington, finishing·up
 Clinton's race book and working on issues for Gore. "Chris is not an
intellectual," says Glenn C.
 Loury, the Boston University economist (and tnr contributing editor) who,
as a black conservative,
 has clashed with Edley on race issues. "He's an operative. He's the
Democrats' Bill Kristol or
 something."

 Except that, unlike Kristol, Edley has the ears of the president and the
vice president. Consider, for
 instance, the influence he wielded on the affirmative action review.
Edley was the most forceful
 proponent of race-conscious affirmative action programs. While some
Clinton aides felt that
 affirmative action should become class-based, Edley argued on behalf of
the continuing significance
 of race. When the final report was issued, race-conscious programs
received Clinton's
 endorsement. Similarly, Edley argued that affirmative action was
justified on forward-looking
 diversity grounds, instead of simply as a remedy to past discrimination.
This view has also become
 administration cant.

 Most important for a staunch affirmative action supporter like Edley, the
affirmative action
 review--although promulgating the ostensibly reformist line of "mend it,
don't end it"--ultimately
 produced a strong brief in favor of preferences, which, at the time of
the review, were under serious
 fire from Congress and the courts. Nearly four years after the review was
finished, the mending of
 government affirmative action programs has been largely cosmetic, and


 affirmative action opponents
  have been effectively neutralized. "What we managed to do was both
 establish a principled defense
  of programs and help transform affirmative action from a political loser
 into something of apolitical
  winner," boasts Stephanopoulos.

 On the race initiative, Edley argued successfully against the creation of
an independent, Kerner
 Commission-type advisory board. Instead, Edley wanted the White House to
"own" the advisory
 board; and it did, ultimately to the board's detriment. "I think we were
independent people," says
 Tom Kean, the former New Jersey governor who was one of the board's seven
members. "But,
 when we wanted to be independent, the White House would pull us back
because they didn't want
 us to do anything that would embarrass or trouble the president and the
vice president." In the end,
 the advisory board produced a timid, forgettable report.

 Edley also weighed in against engaging conservatives in the board's
deliberations. He urged the
 White House not to invite affirmative action opponent Abigail
Thernstrom--whose book America in
 Black and White he had actually called a "crime against humanity"--to an
Oval Office meeting
 between Clinton, Gore, members of the advisory board, and conservative
critics of the
 administration's policies. And, although he ended up losing that
battle--Thernstrom was
 invited--Edley won the war: save for that one meeting, conservatives were
essentially frozen out of
 the race initiative. "It was a good meeting," Kean recalls. "The problem
was there was no follow-up.
 The sad thing was everybody in that meeting pledged to work with the
president on the initiative,
 they asked to be kept in touch, and to the best of my knowledge none of
them was ever contacted
 again. "

 Of course, it's hardly surprising that Edley wouldn't seek their input.
Although Edley has little trouble
 articulating abstract criticisms of affirmative action--before he
ultimately shoots them down--he's
 reluctant to attribute those contrary arguments to actual people. So,
when I ask Edley if he can
 name one affirmative action critic who is arguing in good faith--i.e.,
one affirmative action critic who
 isn't seeking to do in black people--he rubs his eyes and falls silent.
After a long pause he mentions
 Richard Kahlenberg--a writer who has argued for class-based affirmative
action programs (in tnr,
 among other places) but who nonetheless wrote a favorable review in The
Washington Monthly of
 Edley's pro-race-based affirmative action tome, Not All Black and White.
After Kahlenberg,
 though, Edley can't name one. "There's lots of people out there whose
motives I think are suspect,"
 he says.



  Black critics of affirmative action fare no better. In Edley's
 estimation, they have cynically sold out
  their principles in exchange for publicity. "I could get an enormous
 amount of print from The Wall
  Street Journal or The New Republic if I decided to attack affirmative
 action and repudiate
  mainstream civil rights positions," he explains. "And I think there's no
 shortage of people who have
  been seduced by the glitter." Of course, given Edley's influence with
 Clinton and Gore, he's not
  exactly lacking in the glitter department himself.

  (Copyright 1999, The New Republic)


