  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1999 13:27:03.00

  SUBJECT:   vawa

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Jose Cerda III (    CN=~ose   Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  Court Nixes Gender-Based Law

                       By Jean Mcnair
                       Associated Press Writer
                       Friday, March 5, 1999; 1:10 p.m. EST

                       RICHMOND, Va.   (AP)   -- A federal law that gives civil
  rights protections
                    to victims of gender-motivated violence is
  unconstitutional, a divided federal
                    appeals court ruled today.

                   The 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals voted 7-4 to
 uphold a lower court's
                   ruling against the Violence Against Women Act, which
 allows women to
                   sue their sex attackers for damages in federal court for
 violating their civil
                   rights. It has been the target of several legal
 challenges since it became law
                   in 1994.

                       "Such a statute, we are constrained to conclude, simply
 cannot be
                   reconciled with the principles of limited federal
 government upon which this
                   nation is founded,"  said the ruling written by Judge J.
 Michael Luttig.

                   The act also included federal funding to help states
 curtail violence against
                   women.

                   The full court overruled its own three-judge panel that
 in 1997 had voted 2-1
                   to throw out the lower court's ruling in the case of a
 college student who
                   claimed her civil rights were violated by her school and
 two football players
                   accused of raping her.

                   Christy Brzonkala, a student at Virginia Tech, said the
 attack occurred in a
                   dormitory a few months after the federal law took
 effect.



                    She did not report the incident for several months and
 no criminal charges
                    were ever filed against the two players, Antonio
 Morrison and James
                    Crawford. She contends in her lawsuit that their acts
 violated her civil right
                    to be free from gender-motivated crimes of violence.

                      She contended that Virginia Tech mishandled the campus
  judicial
                      proceedings against the players and protected them
 because they were
                      athletes.

                   The appeals court ruled that Congress overstepped its
 bounds when it relied
                   on its power to regulate interstate commerce to enact
 the law.

                   Ms. Brzonkala, who has allowed her name to be made
 public, argued that
                   gender-motivated violence affects commerce by imposing
 medical and legal
                   costs on victims, inhibiting travel by those who fear
 violence and lessening
                   productivity. She was the first to sue under the law.

                     But the court described the law as   a sweeping
 intrusion"    into matters
                     traditionally handled by the states.

                      Ms. Brzonkala's case never got to trial.

                      The ruling means the federal law is no longer in effect
 in the 4th U.S.
                  Circuit, which includes Virginia, West Virginia,
 Maryland, North Carolina
                  and South Carolina.

                      Ms. Brzonkala's lawyer said the case would be appealed
 to the U.S.
                      Supreme Court.


