  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-MAR-1999 12:12:51.00

  SUBJECT:   The DPC philosophy at work

 TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

  TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Christopher C. Jennings    ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: mike cohen      mike cohen @ ed.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Not bad -- his recommended "compromise" is actually our position.


                                                            Monday, March 8,
  1999

               Washington Outlook
               Both Parties Take Similar Paths as Nation Travels Road to
               Innovation
                  Throughout his presidency, Clinton has pursued a
 consistent strategy of
               identifying policy innovations that have sprouted in a few
 communities and then
               providing financial incentives for other states and cities
 to replicate them.

  By RONALD BROWNSTEIN
                                              It's never been considered as
 newsworthy as thong underwear
                                 or the fluctuations in Monica S. Lewinsky's
 sense of
                                 self-worth. But history is likely to see what
 the scandal slaves
                            in the press have missed: that the late 1990s are
 a period of dynamic
                            policy innovation in cities and states.
                                 Ideas such as community policing, charter
 schools, smaller class
                            sizes in the early grades, an end to social
 promotion, insurance for
                            children without health care, the conversion of
 welfare to a work
                            program: All of these are advancing from coast to


coast.
                                And just as in the Progressive Era a century
ago, this modern
                           reform agenda is gaining ground in both parties
simultaneously. The
                           State of the State addresses of Republican
governors such as George
                           W. Bush in Texas largely echo the speeches of
California's Gray
                           Davis and other Democratic governors--and both of
them sound
                           much like President Clinton.
                                Where this consensus breaks down is on the
proper role of the
                           federal government in encouraging this wave of
innovation.
                           Increasingly, the national domestic policy debate
between the two
                           parties is revolving around that question--with
the dispute likely to
                           come to its sharpest point this year in the
legislative battle over
                           education.
                                On most domestic issues, Republicans posit an
inverse relationship
                           between national and local activism. They argue
that the best way to
                           encourage local innovation is to roll back federal
rules and to give the
                           states more control over the federal money they
receive. That was
                           the logic behind the GOP's successful push in 1996
to convert the
                           federal welfare program into block grants that
gave states enormous
                           freedom in allocating the money. Now the GOP wants
to do the
                           same on education.
                                Last year, Republicans advanced legislation
(which Clinton
                           blocked) to convert 31 federal education programs
into $2.75 billion in
                           block grants that states could spend as they
chose. This year, GOP
                           senators are poised to bundle even more education
programs into an
                           even larger block grant program.
                                "The true divide is over where does the most
intelligent, efficient
                          manager reside," said Sen. Paul Coverdell (R-Ga.),
a principal
                           architect of the GOP's education agenda. "The
president and his
                        colleagues feel that .     it is here in
Washington that you should
                        decide what the priorities should be. We have
concluded       that it is
                        governors and .   . boards of education that
should be making these
                        calls."


                             Clinton supporters reject that description of
their aim. And indeed
                        they have developed a more nuanced approach to
encouraging local
                        innovation that might be called flywheel
federalism because it uses
                        the vast mass of the federal government to
accelerate promising
                        trends already visible in the states.
                              Throughout his presidency, Clinton has
pursued a consistent
                        strategy of identifying policy innovations that
have sprouted in a few
                        communities and then providing financial
incentives for other states
                        and cities to replicate them. In a speech last
month, Clinton opened a
                        window to his thinking when he said: "Our
laboratories of democracy
                         [in the states] are great at inventing new ideas
and testing them out .
                             [but] we're not so good at spreading the best
of these ideas around
                        in a comprehensive and timely fashion."
                              In several areas, Clinton's flywheel
federalism has clearly
                        quickened the spread of good ideas. In the early
1990s, a few police
                        departments had experimented with community polic
ing. Now more
                        than 11,000 policing agencies have committed to
pursue the reform
                        through Clinton's program to hire 100,000 new
officers. Likewise,
                        after a handful of pathfinder states instituted
programs to cover
                        uninsured children, Clinton won approval of a
grant program to
                        encourage the rest to follow. Now all but two
states have
                        implemented plans to provide health care to the
children of the
                        working poor. Similar results are evident on
charter schools.
                              This same approach is apparent in Clinton's
current proposal to
                        help states reduce class sizes by hiring 100,000
new teachers. But his
                        principal education initiative this year moves in
a new direction.
                        Rather than offering carrots, he is brandishing
sticks by proposing
                        that states be docked some of their federal
education money unless
                        they undertake a series of "accountability"
reforms, including ending
                        social promotion, toughening teacher testing and
establishing policies
                        to intervene in failing schools.
                              Though they generally support these ideas,


Republicans have
                        reacted with outrage at the idea of Washington
mandating them. Yet,
                        coupled with their support for block grants, that
has left the GOP in
                        the position of arguing that Washington should
give states money
                        without setting any objective standards for
performance--an odd
                        place for fiscal conservatives to be.
                             Among House Republicans, the alternative that
is emerging is to
                        provide states financial incentives to undertake
these reforms without
                        mandating them. Clinton supporters say that will
not drive change fast
                        enough. But if the GOP coalesces around this plan,
it could leave the
                        White House in the odd position of arguing against
incentives after
                         they have relied on carrots to advance virtually
all of their other goals,
                         such as expanding community policing.
                              If both sides are interested, there is a
reasonable compromise:
                         using both penalties and bonuses to encourage
local governments to
                         institute these accountability reforms. That is
the model Republicans
                         applied in welfare reform. It could also be used
to leverage local
                        "reform in areas like transportation (where states
could be required to
                         demonstrate progress in reducing gridlock or else
lose some federal
                         highway funds) and public housing (where
Washington could tie
                         funding to safety and upkeep) .
                              As the partisan arguments escalate in the
months ahead, it will be
                         worth remembering the unspoken areas of common
ground. Both
                         parties are now largely pursuing the same educatio
nal ends, from
                         ending social promotion to stiffening standards
for students and
                         teachers. And both increasingly agree that local
governments should
                         take the lead on reform, not only in education but
also on the broad
                         array of domestic concerns. What is left is a
dispute over whether
                         Washington can help mostly by getting out of the
way--or by devising
                         national means to disseminate the most innovative
local ideas.


