RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-MAR-1999 17:52:39.00

SUBJECT:   holder

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Justice Dept. Eyes Racial Profiling

                      By Laurence Arnold
                      Associated Press Writer
                      Tuesday, March 9, 1999; 5:44 p.m. EST

                      WASHINGTON (AP)   -- The Justice Department's No.2
official assured
                      black and Hispanic leaders from New Jersey on Tuesday
that his agency is
                      serious about investigating whether state troopers stop
motorists on the
                      basis of skin color.

                      Emphasizing the importance he gives the issue, Deputy
Attorney. General
                  Eric Holder told the group he believes New Jersey
troopers stopped him
                  two decades ago because he is black.

                      New Jersey is one of several states where police have
been accused of
                  using "racial profiling"   to determine which cars to.
stop. Similar accusations
                  have popped up in Florida, Maryland, Connecticut and
elsewhere along the
                  Interstate 95 corridor.

                      Holder spent more than an hour behind closed doors with
members of the
                      New Jersey congressional delegation, the Black Ministers
Council of New
                  Jersey and the state Legislature's Black and Latino
Legislative Caucus.

                  The New Jersey officials praised Holder but said they
believe the Justice
                  Department is taking too long with its inquiry.

                      "The answers that we wanted are still somewhat begging,
because too
                      much time has elapsed, "   said Sen. Frank Lautenberg,
D-N.J.   "The first
                      time that the Department of Justice was aware of this,
definitely aware,


                     was way back in 1996. We are now in 1999 and we are
still waiting for
                     some action."

                  The Rev. Reginald Jackson, director of the Black
Ministers Council, said
                  Holder promised at least a preliminary response "in a
matter of months,
                  which is encouraging to us."

                  "These things take time, and we want to make sure that
we're being fair to
                  both sides, " Holder told reporters as he left the
meeting. "We go into this
                  with an open mind. We don't presume there is in fact a
problem. We're
                  going to look at the data we have, talk to people who
are involved in this,
                  and then try to come up with an appropriate course of
action. ' ,

                     In the private meeting, Holder told of being pulled over
by State Police in
                     New Jersey when he was a Columbia University student in
the 1970s,
                  traveling between New York and Atlantic City and
sporting an Afro hair
                  style.

                     Police stopped him, he told reporters, even though " r
didn't think I was
                     doing anything wrong. ' ,

                     Later, Democratic Rep. Donald Payne, New Jersey's only
black
                  congressman, said he too has encountered racial
profiling by his state's
                  troopers.

                     "r fit the profile -- driving a new car, coming up from
the South. r was
                     stopped, "   he said.

                  Racial profiling is part of a larger question of how
police treat minorities,
                  Payne said, adding that it has become "the number one
topic of discussion"
                  among Congressional Black Caucus members.

                  State Police officials and Gov. Christie Whitman insist
racial profiling is not
                  an acc"epted practice among New Jersey troopers.

                  Still, Whitman fired State Police Superintendent Carl
Williams on March 1
                  following published remarks in which he said minorities
were responsible for
                  most of the cocaine and marijuana traffic.

                     At a subcommittee hearing earlier Tuesday, Lautenberg


     urged Attorney
                         General Janet Reno to appoint a task force on racial
     profiling.

                         Reno said her department "is actively pursuing a review
     of the New Jersey
                       State Police and this issue . . . . We want to do a
     thorough review and
                       complete it as soon as possible. ' ,


