 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:I0-MAR-1999 15:26:08.00

 SUBJECT:   Draft of Native American chapter for the race book

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)    )
 READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Chris Edley asked if I could put together a section of the President's
race book on Native Americans. Attached is: (1) a short section for the
beginning of the book that sets forth a little background on tribal
sovereignty and (2) a longer piece that sets forth three policy proposals.

The policy proposals are:   (1) an educational mentoring program and
record-keeping system for Native American children; (2) a community-based
law enforcement initiative; and (3) a broad-based economic development
initiative that focuses on creating an entrepreneurial culture, providing
access to capital, encouraging homeowners hip , and investing in technology
infrastructure.

I given the draft to Tanya, Jose, and NEC to review their various
sections,   I expect to fill in a few statistics and do some minor editing
in the next day or so, but no major revisions.  I was going to give a
final to Edley on Friday unless you had a problem with it. Thanks,
Mary    ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D39)MAIL41296747E.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043741AOOOOOI0A020100000002050000009DE50000000200007CA60E9E753E2EE542147B
CB738C629AB98809579AA8BB191B3EF6C687DA3326BA8C7DOFD2B57AFB632E199530730872F38C
OC32D4318B9COB76A97F7D91C094A4FD26C764FB7846DF6FC22C793CFA990D74EF9C6CF8C26B2E
7711EID9FFI046BC9A74259FEE29BOF3A4755D27202B51B34B8256llA8F8A3D7497A3BA8B9FCFF
CD5A37D9CF5676CFCD87A2DD3A8B329A3FEB986FAED76EDF7FF56BDDD0409934F41911EA5147E4
3BFFC59E48C8FD9BB8FD2E23FAOIE6ACEIIC26E934BIE89AD3B3D720826DAD246EC6188DF7A337
1200A259DD9EE52933D0326A6B9789EDC6B519A7F28037E27BFD8BD6463EAC3FBB74734AB8B6B4
E8F256233184B9CDC88C41BBCF14E3C4A88EIAOEB7326FB6B48CAIDE3B6BD862A8965D6D520103
IB09AE6E533BD052783AA521645EE763B9D679CA373601F7BB87DD2FE8CC98842A7D403814B4BO
688373EBC4382100A44A878EFF4IDED3F5198A26094EBl1DAC3BF9C944F86BA4224FA83ED310BE
40876A3C6D95DB5B407624B8BIAF7FEOE3BAF16EFE4F7526B213DO9BOA98CBD3163E759AF2D8B4
C3DFIC39AAI067DF48F85568BC7C69A39DC86316DEAAE6B9D09FE69279AAA4ADB65186D36F56Bl
A68CB34C3AD25586FB3E9F264CD57E437834E25E504FD6E526161E4D835D487725F96D2ED6F50D
C65100AAF402003F00000000000000000000000823010000000BOI00007205000000550EOOOOOO
4E0000007D06000009250100000006000000CB0600000B300400000028000000DI060000087701
00000040000000F906000008340100000014000000390700000802010000000F0000004D070000
                           Hex-Dump Conversion

Draft 3-07-99
                         Part IV: The Opportunity We Deserve


                    6. Creating Opportunities for Native Americans

                                       INTRODUCTION

        In 1994, I held a historic meeting at the White House with American Indian and Alaska
Native tribal leaders from the over 500 federally recognized tribes. I was the first sitting
President to do so. I hope I will not be the last. Native Americans occupy a special place
spiritually, culturally, and historically in America. These people harvested the earth, swam in
the rivers, and enjoyed the bounty across this beautiful land we now call America. Our
ancestors oppressed and brutalized these people, deprived them of their lands, and denied them
opportunities. But they could not break their spirit. In 1998, I had the pleasure of hosting a
White House conference on economic development in Indian country. There I met a young
man named Dominic Ortiz from the Prairie Band Potawatomi Nation who attended one of the
tribal colleges and has his own business selling American Indian jewelry. Dominic embodies
the entrepreneurial spirit upon which this country was built. Just as Dominic created his own
future, we must embark on a new era where Native Americans determine their own future
through their own acts and decisions.

                                                *
         Before Europeans landed on America's shores, Indian nations were self-governing
societies with remarkable scientific, artistic, and cultural achievements. American Indians and
Alaska Natives are much more than colorful characters in our Nation's distant past, however.
The 554 federally-recognized tribal governments are a permanent part of the political structure of
our Nation. Since the founding of our nation, the United States has recognized many Indian
tribes as "domestic dependent nations" with sovereign powers over their members and territory
and has entered into numerous treaties with various tribes pledging protection and guaranteeing
tribal self-government. This is why American Indians are not simply another minority or racial
groupmg.

          In 1831, Chief Justice John Marshall stated that the "Federal Indian relationship is
characterized by peculiar and cardinal distinctions that exist no where else."i Marshall was
referring to the special trust relationship that has existed between the United States and Indian
tribes since the birth of our nation. It is manifested in treaties, agreements, court decisions,
statutes, executive orders, and in the overall course of dealings between the federal and
tribal governments. These Executive, Legislative, and Judicial actions charge the United
States Government with legal and moral obligations of the highest responsibility and trust
toward Indian Tribes. Under federal law, the United States has a legally enforceable
fiduciary responsibility to protect tribal lands, assets, resources, treaty rights as well as a

                                               . 1
                         Hex-Dump Conversion


general obligation to fulfill the mandates of federal laws with respect to American Indians
and Alaska Natives.

        Regrettably, our nation has not always lived up to these legal and moral ideals. Between
1778 and 1871, when the last treaty was signed, Indian tribes ceded almost one billion acres of
land to the United States. In return, Indians generally retained inalienable and tax-exempt lands
for themselves, and the Federal government pledged to provide such public services as law
enforcement, education, medical care, and technical and agricultural training. All too
frequently, these solemn promises made to the tribes have been broken. Our failure to invest
sufficient resources to meet these obligations has hindered the social and economic advancement
of Native Americans and has produced economic conditions on many reservations more
analogous to those of third-world nations than of communities in America's heartland.

        We are living in a time of great prosperity and hope. Our economy is the strongest in a
generation. For the first time in three decades, the budget is balanced. There are nearly 18
million new jobs, wages are rising at more than twice the rate of inflation, home ownership is at
its highest rate in history, and unemployment is at its lowest in almost thirty years. ii

        For many Native Americans, the picture is quite different. The stark beauty of the vast
plains of the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota contrasts with the harsh existence of the
people who live there. There is no poorer place in America. Housing is scarce, overcrowded,
and often lacking indoor plumbing, electricity, or telephones. There is no industry, no factories,
and no technology. Two of every three adults living on the reservation are out of work. iii The
average life expectancy for the Oglala Sioux men who live there is 56.5 years, and for women, it
is 66 years. iv Similar conditions exist on reservations across our nation where the lack of paved
roads, access to electrical power, telephone lines, and other physical infrastructure serve as major
barriers to economic development.

        We must bear in mind, however, that our nation often has pursued policies that have
undermined the capacity of tribal governments to advance the social, economic, and institutional
development of tribal communities. As well-intended as these policies may have been in the
minds of those promoting them, efforts to coerce the assimilation of Native Americans served
largely to weaken and destabilize the very institutions best-suited to serve the community -- tribal
governments. The time has come to break decisively with the past and stop trying to impose
conditions on tribes. As reflected in my executive order on tribal consultation, we must work
with tribes on a government-to-government basis, recognizing their ability to steer their own
course and set their own priorities.

       Economic and business. development is clearly a top priority in virtually every tribal
community. Even though economic conditions in Indian country have improved in recent
years, American Indian and Alaska Native communities continue to lag behind the rest of
the United States with respect to social, economic, and educational attainment levels.
Income levels of American Indians and Alaska Natives are substantially below those of all


                                                 2
                         Hex-Dump COllyersion

other Americans, and about 34 percent continue to live below the poverty level. In
comparison, the national poverty level is about 14 percenC Complicating factors such as
geographical isolation, under developed infrastructures, and demographics, add to the
challenges confronting tribes as they work toward a better standard of living and quality of
life for tribal peoples.

        As the new millennium dawns, there is reason to be hopeful, however. A small, but
significant number of tribes have succeeded in reducing poverty and unemployment through the
aggressive pursuit of new economic activities. Tribal gaming operations have produced the
most dramatic success stories. What began with a handful of tribal bingo halls in the early
1980s has grown into an estimated $6 billion a year for the one-third of the Nation's 554 tribes
that operate some form of gaming.vi The revenues from gaming have allowed some tribes to
pursue aggressive economic development strategies such as starting new business enterprises,
investing in infrastructure, and building concert halls, sports arenas, and golf courses. Gaming
tribes are viewing the revenues from gaming as the key to improving the lives of each of its
members as well as enriching the entire community.

        As lucrative as it has been for some tribes, gaming is not a panacea for every tribe.
Only _ tribes have established gaming, and of those, only _ tribes earn significant profits.
Revenues from the development of natural resources such as timber, minerals, and oil and gas
remain by far the largest source of income for tribal governments, and farming and ranching
continues as a way of life for many reservations residents. On the other hand, the mere fact that
numerous tribes have achieved a significant, sometimes dramatic, measure of success appears to
have stimulated a growing sense of optimism throughout Indian Country.

        Finally, while it is difficult for those in poor, minority communities to secure business
loans or mortgages, in Indian Country, it is virtually impossible. Conventional approaches to
resolving this situation are problematic on reservations and other Indian trust lands because of
the peculiar legal status of such lands, particularly in the case of mortgages. Reservation land is
owned by the federal government and held in trust on behalf of tribes. This trust status and legal
protection is extremely important from the perspective of Indian landowners, but there are
trade-offs. Banks are extremely reluctant to make loans without collateral or the ability to
foreclose on a property in the event of a default. To extend the availability of loans for homes
on Indian trust lands without breaching the trust doctrine, the Departments of Housing and Urban
Development, Agriculture, and Veteran's Affairs have authority to issue government-insured
loans. The process, however, is complex and time-consuming requiring coordination between at
least two separate federal agencies.

       I believe that every American should have the opportunity to own their own home.
That is why as part of the first-ever White House Conference, Building Economic
Self-Determination in Indian Communities," I announced that a One-Stop Mortgage
Center Initiative to streamline lending procedures and coordinate federal agencies involved
in providing mortgages on reservations.


                                                  3
                        Hex-Dump Conversion



                                                  *
        One of the keys to economic development is education. Education provides a solid
foundation for succeeding later in life. It is critically important that American Indian and Alaska
Native students receive the same educational opportunities that are available to other students as
these children are the future for their tribes and their communities. The Native American
population is young -- thirty-nine percent of the American Indian population was under 20 years
old in 1990, compared with 29 percent of the Nation's total population. vii We must ensure that
these future generations, descendants of the great warriors such as Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse,
are able to forge successful lives, whether on or off the reservation.

        Elementary and secondary education is normally thought of as the domain of state
govemments, but, out of this trust responsibility, the United States is responsible for two school
systems, one serving the children of military personnel and the other serving the children of tribal
communities. Of the 185 BIA-funded elementary and secondary schools on reservations today,
two-thirds of the buildings are over 30 years old, and more than a quarter are over 50 years old. viii
 I have made education one ofthe top priorities of my Administration. I have challenged the
public schools of this country to hire better teachers, to become more accountable, to fund school
construction to fix crumbling buildings, and to wire every classroom to the Internet. These
same challenges are even more apparent for the BIA-funded schools. With buildings
crumbling and decaying, it is nearly impossible to wire these classrooms to 21 st century
technology. It would be a grave injustice to fail these children to whom we have a special
obligation to prepare for the future. For this reason, I have proposed substantial increases in
funding for school construction and repair for these schools.

        Although we must work to improve the BIA-funded schools, we must also work to ensure
that the public school system serves American Indian children. Just as in the rest of the
population, almost 90 percent of American Indian children attend state public schools, while only
about 10 percent attend the BIA-funded schools.ix These children face unique challenges. Over
50 percent of American Indian fourth-graders scored below the basic level in reading and
mathematics:

        We cannot concentrate only on improving elementary and secondary education for Native
American students. We must make a college education a reality for each and every American
Indian child. Less than two-thirds of Native Americans are high school graduates compared
with 75 percent of the rest of the population, and less than 10 percent of Native Americans have
bachelor's degrees compared with 20 percent of the total population:i I have fully supported
this country's 31 check tribal colleges. These institutions, located directly in Indian
communities, provide the chance for a college education to students who do not have the funds to
attend more expensive private schools or the means to leave their families behind to attend
schools that are hours away. The American Indian Higher Education Consortium reports that of


                                                  4
                         Hcx-Dump COllversion

the 42 percent of tribal college graduates who transfer to a mainstream institution, 90 percent
obtain bachelor's degrees. Other studies show that only 30 percent of Native Americans who
enter mainstream institutions as freshman graduate: ii

        Finally, the cultures of American Indian tribes is a rich part of the heritage of this country.
 The maintaining of Native languages and cultures is critical. Yet, there is an alarming decline
in the use of Native languages indigenous to the United States. In 1969, there were 300 separate
languages still being spoken. In 1996, that number had dropped to 206. xiii


                                                  *
        Competing images of reservations usually come to mind: either the dusty roads and
ramshackle buildings which are home to the poverty- and disease-stricken people who live there
or the vast beauty of blue-sky country juxtaposed with snow-capped mountains, grassy plains, or
orange-hued canyons. Between these two extremes lies a more complicated reality. Just as the
blight is being tempered with signs of a burgeoning economic renaissance, the natural beauty of
many reservations camouflages an ever-worsening crime problem. Inner-city, minority
communities have gotten most of the media attention for their gun violence and murder rates.
While the population density fuels incidents of violence in inner cities, the very vastness and
remoteness of many reservations also facilitates crimes.

         Although violent crime has been declining nationally for several years, it has been on the
rise in Indian country. Recently, the Department of Justice, in its first comprehensive analysis of
Indians and crime, reported that American Indians are victims of violent crimes at more than
twice the rate of the rest of the country:iv In contrast to the rest of the country, where nine out
of every ten murders involve victims and offenders of the same race: v about seven in ten violent
victimizations of American Indians involved an offender who was of a different race. Use of
alcohol was a major factor in violent crimes involving American Indians. American Indian
victims reported a drinking offender in 46 percent of all violent victimizations, such as rape,
sexual assaults, robberies, and other assaults, about 70 percent of jailed American Indians
convicted for violence reported that they had been drinking at the time ofthe offense. xvi

        Gangs are no longer only the province of inner cities. Youth gangs are becoming more
prevalent in Indian country. While some of the conditions which lead to gangs elsewhere such
as extreme and pervasive poverty, lack of role models, and limited opportunities probably
overlap, we should explore why this disturbing condition is becoming more and more prevalent.

       Indian communities often have other unique law enforcement problems. While soaring
homicide rates have shortened life expectancy for black men in urban areas, the death toll on
reservations often results from motor vehicle accidents and suicides. Suicide is the ninth leading
cause of death of American Indians nationwide. xvii Car crashes are the third leading cause of
death on Indian reservations, and alcohol is often involved. xviii


                                                  5
                           Hex-Dump COllversion


         Part of the problem is clearly a lack of police officers and other law enforcement
resources. While there are 2.9 police officers per 1,000 citizens in non-Indian communities with
populations of less than 10,000, there are only 1.3 officers per 1,000 citizens' on Indian
reservations: ix There are only 1,600 BIA police and uniformed tribal officers patrolling 56
million acres of Indian lands in the lower 48 states, protecting more than 1.4 million residents.
By contrast, 3,600 police officers protect the 540,000 residents of our Nation's capital on __
acres. xx In addition, departments often are so woefully under funded that patrol cars are most
likely to be 10 years old, with the odometer showing more than the 60,000 miles that federal
regulations say should be the maximum. Most Indian police are armed with old six-shot
revolvers instead of the semiautomatic weapons that most other police departments have, and
most officers do not have bullet-proof vests.

         However, a large part of the problem is the geographic isolation and the vastness of the
area to be covered. Many officers must drive hundreds and hundreds of miles to assist other
officers. The Navajo Nation alone is 26,500 square miles. It is incomprehensible that a police
officer !l1ust venture alone, out manned and outgunned, into an immense wilderness, not knowing
whether this day of duty will be his last. Like many others in poor, minority communities, many
American Indians have lost faith in the criminal justice system. There is a perception that the
federal government has turned its back on helping to protect these communities.

        In order to make Indian people feel safe in their homes and in their communities and to
restore some trust and confidence in law enforcement, I have made law enforcement in Indian
country a priority. Since 1995, the Justice Department's Office of Community Oriented
Policing Services has awarded $67,787,443 through 395 grants to 187 Indian tribes and Alaska
Native villages. These grants have funded the salary and benefits for 906 police officers in
Indian Country. In 1997, I directed the Attorney General and the Secretary of the Interior to
collaborate on a plan for a new organizational structure for Indian law enforcement that
streamlines budgeting and identifies manpower needs. In addition, I asked Congress for a
significant increase in funding for law enforcement and public safety in Indian Country,
including funds for new tribal police, detention facilities, juvenile justice programs, and tribal
courts, as well as additional FBI agents and Bureau of Indian Affairs officers, so that we might
dramatically improve public safety in Indian Country.

       In this first year of the Interior and Justice Departments' joint law enforcement initiative,
we will significantly increase federal law enforcement resources in Indian Country, through
deployment of 30 additional FBI agents, 32 new BIA criminal investigators, and over 200 new
BIA police officers, detention officers, and radio dispatchers. In addition, through the COPS
program, we will give tribal government a flexible menu of options so that they can meet their
areas of greatest need by hiring new, fully trained and equipped community police officers or by
equipping and training the officers that they currently have. While significantly increasing the
number of law enforcement officials in Indian Country, we will also make certain that our focus
remains on saving tribal youth from becoming involved in the criminal justice system through


                                                 6
                       Hex-Dump Conversion

prevention programs, especially those that focus on alcohol and drugs.

        In the balance of this chapter, I offer a work plan which focuses on three important issues
for American Indians: education, economic development, and crime. I will first propose how
the federal government can provide leadership on each of these issues and then will outline how
the entire nation working together can make progress in each of these areas.


                                                  *
                         Centerpieces of the Federal Work plan:
              (1) Comprehensive Educational Mentoring and Record Tracking
                              for Native American Students

        For many years, the federal government has focused its efforts on Indian education
primarily in the areas of funding and operating the 185? BIA schools and providing Impact Aid
to school districts where a large portion of their tax based is comprised of trust land which is
tax-exempt. We have made some progress. In keeping with the stated policy of tribal
self-determination and self-governance, more than _ of the BIA-funded schools are now
owned or operated by Tribes. Check However, there is much work left to do.

        Education has been one of the touchstones of my Administration. I have fought to
improve the education of this Nation's children by improving their reading and math, lowering
class size, recruiting outstanding new teachers, ending social promotion, and providing
accountability for failing schools. In setting forth initiatives to accomplish each of these goals, I
have sought to ensure that Native American students benefit from these reforms. I fought to
help local school districts hire 100,000 well-prepared teachers in order to reduce class size in
grades 1-3 to a national average of 18, and make sure that every child gets a solid foundation in
the basics. Studies show that smaller classes help teachers provide more personal attention to
students helping students learn more and build a stronger foundation in basic skills. In these
studies, minority and disadvantaged students showed the largest achievement gains. To ensure
that American Indian children in the BIA-funded schools were able to reap the benefit of smaller
class sizes, there is a set-aside to target funds in order recruit, hire and train teachers in these
schools.

        Students cannot learn in buildings where there are crumbling walls, chipping paint, leaky
roofs, and inadequate heating systems. School buildings represent the nation's most pressing
infrastructure need: xi To address this critical need, I proposed federal tax credits as incentives
to help states and school districts to build and renovate public schools, with one-half of the
bonding authority allocated to the 100 school districts with the largest number oflow-income
children. This bonding authority is a powerful tool which permits the leveraging of local
resources to build new schools and make much needed repairs to older schools. Traditionally,
tribes have been denied this tool in order to repair and replace schools on the reservations. For


                                                  7
                     Hex-Dump Conversion

the first time, I have proposed bonding authority for tribes with a mechanism to ensure principal
repayment. This authority will empower the Tribes to make significant changes in their
communities.
         I also signed an executive order that is designed to improve the academic performance of
American Indian and Alaska Native students in grades K-12. This executive order
institutionalizes a process to ensure that there is strategic planning with respect to Native
American students. As one ofthe first activities that grew out of the strategic planning process,
I proposed to begin training and recruiting of 1000 new teachers for areas with high
concentrations of American Indian and Alaska Native students. This initiative provides financial
assistance to individual student, increases capacity building to create programs to train teachers,
and allows for continuing education to ensure that the quality of teachers remains high.

        While these proposals are a good start, we need to make sure that obtaining a college
education becomes a reality for every American Indian student. Only two-thirds of Native
American students successfully complete high school --far fewer than other students. xxii My
Comprehensive Educational Mentoring and Record Tracking for Native American Students
seeks to make the dream of a college education a reality for these students:

      There is a unique problem for many Native American students in that they shuttle
       between the BIA-funded schools and public schools near the reservation. This
       transferring of schools interrupts the educational process and causes students to keep
       from advancing at the rate at which they should. Teachers also are not able to adequately
       assess a particular child's skill levels because part of his or her record is in one school
       and the rest of it is in one or, in some cases, several other schools. Currently, we do not
       keep statistics on this phenomenon. I propose that we keep statistics on the number of
       American Indians students who interrupt their education by transferring between
       BIA-funded and public school systems. We should also conduct research on the
       consequences of this activity. Finally, we should seek to construct a system where a
       complete record of a student's progress is kept in a single location.

      We need to ensure community involvement in the education of American Indian students.
        An important part of achieving the goal of a college education is ensuring that these
       students and receive mentoring or tutoring on a regular basis. These tutors could be
       either older students, senior citizens, or other adults in the community. These students
       should have mentors that help them as they advance from grade to grade and ensure that
       they are on track of entering college. This new mentoring program should cooperate
       with Americorps and the National Senior Service Corps.

      We should seek to preserve Native American culture and language. Just as the tribal
       colleges construct themselves to reflect tribal culture, a part of this proposal is to create
       groups of students who are assigned to a tribal elder to help support their educational
       activities. Without recognizing and preserving their culture, these students often are
       disenfranchised because they do not have any role models. These elders will serve this

                                                  8
                     Hex-Dump Conversion

        function by providing guidance and a positive influence to students, as wel1 as teach them
        about tribal history, language, arts, and culture, on their road to a col1ege education.
        By keeping tracking of these American Indian students and by providing a two-tier
mentoring system, we can vastly improve the chances that these students wil1 be better equipped
to obtain a col1ege degree.


         (2) Model Community Initiative for Encouraging Economic Development

       There is simply no excuse that many communities in Indian country face conditions often
worse than many third-world countries. I propose a Model Community Initiative to Encourage
Economic Development in Indian Country. The Federal Government's efforts should support
and encourage efforts which help American Indians develop their economic infrastructure. This
proposal should focus on the fol1owing:

      Creating an Entrepreneurial Culture. On the dawn of the 21st century,
       entrepreneurship and smal1 businesses are playing a major role in the restructuring of the
       U.S. economy and in creating jobs. We must work with Indian country to find ways to
       capitalize on the strengths of smal1 and medium-sized businesses in order to diversify
       their economies. We should provide the tools and work with Tribes to nurture
       home-grown firms, encourage innovation and risk-taking, and enhance investment in new
       businesses.

      Providing Access to Capital. Finding the start-up money for new businesses and new
       building is a daunting task. I am proud that the Community Development Financial
       Institutions (CDFI) Fund, which works alongside mainstream institutions in expanding
       access to capital in low-income communities, has begun several successful activities in
       Indian Country. For instance, the Fund has invested in First American Credit Union,
       which provides basic financial services to 15,000 Native Americans throughout Arizona
       and parts of New Mexico and Utah, helping leverage capital to support small agricultural
       and Native American craft businesses. The CDFI Fund is also in the process of
       conducting a study on lending and investment practices on Indian reservations and other
       land held in trust by the United States. This study wil1 identify barriers to private
       financing on such lands and identify the impact of such barriers on access to capital and
       credit for Native American popUlations. As the result of this study, the Fund wil1
       develop an Action Plan to create new incentives for financing in Indian Country. In the
       meantime, I have made providing equity capital to new markets a priority with my "New
       Markets Initiative." This initiative wilJ help Indian Country with initiatives such as tax
       credits, Smal1 Business Investment Companies (SBICs), and BusinessLINC, which helps
       link larger businesses to smal1er firms. Final1y, with the Round II of the Empowerment
       Zones (EZs) and Enterprise Communities (ECs), Indian lands became eligible with the
       result that one reservation, Pine Ridge, was designated as an EZ and four were designated
       as Ecs. Under these programs, the federal government provides tax benefits for


                                                  9
                      Trex-Dump Conversion

       businesses, flexible grants to carry out comprehensive revitalization strategies, and the
       ability to apply for waivers from federal programs enabling local communities to better
       address their particular needs.

      Encourage Homeownership. We must all work together to ensure that the dream of
       owning of home becomes a reality in Indian Country. HUD, in close cooperation with
       tribal leaders across the country, is working to create a national housing model called
       "Shared Visions" to build and renovate affordable housing on tribal lands and to help
       more Native Americans become homeowners. This model strives to increase the
       number of affordable, quality homes and to make it easier for Native Americans to obtain
       mortgages by encouraging private sector partnerships, streamlining federal regulations,
       and improving coordination among federal agencies and tribes. As part of the project, a
       nonprofit will be established to provide financial help, low-cost financing, down payment
       assistance, and homeownership counseling.

      Invest in Technology Infrastructure. Many places on reservations do not have
       telephones, computers, or Internet access. The Department of Commerce is working on
       a study that will identify the infrastructure technology needs in Indian country and will set
       forth proposals to address these needs. The federal government, along with Tribes,
       states, and the private sector, must work together to ensure that reservations are hooked
       up to information technology and that the infrastructure to support this technology are put
       in place.

       By focusing federal resources on improving economic development in Indian Country
through creating an entrepreneurial culture, providing access to capital, encouraging
homeownership, and investing in technology infrastructure, we will help tribal governments
bring growth and opportunities to Indian Country.

                        (3) Tribal-Based Law Enforcement Initiative

       I have worked very hard to find new ways for the federal government to assist local
communities in addressing their needs in a comprehensive and effective way. The
importance of this effort is nowhere greater than in Indian Country, where the federal
government plays a special role due to its trust responsibility to tribal governments. We
need to develop federal-tribal-private partnerships that respect tribal sovereignty and
preserve traditional Native American culture, while at the same time ensuring that much
needed resources are used to improve the quality of life in Indian Country. Nowhere is
this need greater than in the area of law enforcement and public safety. A safe community
provides the base on which economic development can flourish for all Native Americans.

         Community policing has been the cornerstone of my Administration's law enforcement
initiatives. This model provides a community-based approach to law enforcement, by providing
flexibility in identifying problems, and creating a partnership between citizens and law


                                                   10
                      Hex-Dump COil version

enforcement. This model fits well with Indian country with each community having unique but
overlapping problems with other Indian communities.
        A broader vision, however, is necessary to address the needs of tribal communities more
comprehensively. I propose the Tribal-Based Law Enforcement Initiative that seeks to
implement the idea that comprehensive strategies and coordinated funding are the most effective
way for the federal government to assist communities in addressing local problems. There are
three primary objectives: (I) to obtain intensive experience in diverse communities about the
most effective ways to address their law enforcement problems; (2) to address community
problems in a comprehensive way through effective planning and appropriate funding; and (3) to
promote inter-tribal exchanges of ideas and experiences, as well to promote coordination among
tribes for more efficient use of resources. This initiative should have the following components:

      Through the use of technical assistance, the federal government will work with tribes, on
       a government-to-government basis, to help them identify the unique law enforcement and
       public safety problems in their community. Tribes will assess their communities' need
       and priorities and develop appropriate strategies to address them. Through this process,
       the communities will develop a comprehensive plan to address law enforcement and
       public safety concerns.

      The communities will use these plans to apply for law enforcement funds in a new,
       coordinated process with one application rather than on a piecemeal basis. This will
       ensure that the communities can maximize the use of federal funding in a coordinated,
       problem-solving manner. The goal of this project will be to help Indian communities
       develop comprehensive strategies for improving public safety.

      The project will have an evaluation component and tribes will be encouraged to set
       performance goals for reducing crime.

      This project should be expanded at successive phases to tie into other agencies besides
       the Department of Justice. Particularly in Indian communities, a largc portion of the
       crime problems are tied to alcohol and substance abuse. In order to address these
       problems in a comprehensive way, law enforcement should work in tandem with other
       federal programs to solve the underlying cause of many of the incidents of crime.

        This initiative will empower communities to solve their law enforcement problems at a
local level and in a comprehensive manner, and rebuild a sense of confidence in law enforcement
in Indian country.

                                               *
                            A WORKPLAN FOR THE NATION

       There are many opportunities to improve the lives of Native Americans in the areas of


                                               II
                      Hex-Dump Conversion

educationl'economic development, and law enforcement if we all work together to build One
America. The Nation's efforts should focus on the following goals:
      텲liminate disparities for American Indians in the public school system;

      Seek to preserve the culture of American Indians and Alaska Natives;

      Promote cooperation between the federal government, States, local governments, and the
       private sector to invest in economic development in Indian country;

      Invest in infrastructure in Indian country, both in technology and through transportation
       systems; and

      Build cooperation to ensure public safety in Indian communities and provide positive
       influences for Indian youth to stay out of crime.

                                                *
Eliminate disparities for American Indians in the public school system

        American Indian students attend schools operated by state, federal, and tribal
governments. As stated earlier, about 90 percent of American Indian students attend state public
schools. Because of this, there is a great opportunity for the states, localities, and tribal
governments to work together to ensure that Native American students have equal access to high
quality curricula, teachers, classrooms, and materials.

        In overcoming the gaps in educational opportunities, several unique factors affecting
American Indian students, such as high student mobility rates, high drop out rates, and high
teacher turnover rates should be taken into account. Studies have shown that changing schools
even once during a school year can have a negative impact on student achievement.xxiii
Furthermore, schools are often ill-prepared to meet the needs of transfer students because of slow
or inadequate student record transfer. These separate educational systems must improve the
transfer of records and the sharing of information by developing common databases and utilizing
technology. There are also opportunities for intergovernmental regulation of student transfers
and the development of memoranda of understanding about common educational issues and
concerns.

        As noted earlier, most schools are funded largely on local property taxes. Because of a
shrinking tax base, many minority communities are able to generate fewer and fewer resources to
fund their schools. This problem becomes exacerbated for local public school districts where a
large portion of the district is comprised of Indian reservation land that is held in trust by the
federal government and cannot be taxed by state or local governments. The Impact Aid program
seeks to remedy this problem by providing federal funding to redress the negative impact of the
loss of a taxable base. My Administration has fully supported the Impact Aid program, and we


                                               12
                      Hex-Dump Conversion

should continue to do so in order to ensure that public schools serving Native American students
stand on an equal footing with other public schools.
         While there are unique issues affecting American Indian and Alaska Native students, the
goals I laid out earlier apply equally to these students. Let me be clear: we must support Native
American families and early learning opportunities; overcome gaps in K -12 educational
opportunity; provide for high-quality teachers; ensure access to challenging courses; repair and
replace old and dilapidated schools; provide technology and training; end social promotion; and
hold all of our students to high expectations. If we do all this, we will have made tremendous
strides in ending the disparities that plague too many of this Nation's Native American students.


Seek to preserve the culture of American Indians and Alaska Natives

        American Indian children often do not come to school ready to learn. They have often
had to face serious health and safety issues. Often they do not have access to early childhood
education programs, which are linguistically, culturally, and developmentally appropriate. The
Bureau of Indian Affairs funds over 20 check Family and Child Education (FACE) projects,
which serves over 1,500 families. The FACE program provides early childhood opportunities
for Indian children by targ~ting preschool children ages 0-5 and their parents. All schools
systems must focus on early childhood and pre-school programs so that Indian children are given
greater assistance that meets their unique educational needs. These programs should promote
school readiness, enhance native language development, and increase the potential for learning
among young American Indian and Alaska Native children.

Promoting cooperation between the federal government, States, local governments, and the
private sector to invest in economic development in Indian country

        We must encourage more cooperation between state, local, and tribal governments.
Because of the sovereign status of tribes, states cannot directly tax tribal governments. Along
with this lack of ability to directly tax tribes, there is a misperception that Tribes do not
contribute to the local economy and that revenues flow from states to tribes, but not in the other
direction. One study shows that residents of Indian reservations (approximately 1.24 million
persons in over 330,000 households) make approximately $3.1 billion in annual personal
consumption expenditures off the reservation in the local, state, and national economies of which
reservations are a part. State governments in proximity to reservations expend approximately
$226 million annually on behalf of reservation residents, while the residents, tribal governments,
and businesses on reservations generate $246 million in annual state" tax revenue .xxiv From
these statistics, it is clear that state and local governments should work in partnerships in tribes to
develop economic strategies for entire regions.

Invest in infrastructure in Indian country, both in technology and through transportation
systems



                                                  13
                         Hex-Dump Conversion

          Because of their often remote locations, American Indian and Alaska Native communities
stand to benefit greatly from the Information Age, yet are in grave danger of being left behind.
A recent Department of Commerce study on Internet and computer usage in American shows
that, although many more Americans now own computers, minority and low-income households
are
still far less likely than white and more affluent households to have personal computers or access
to the Internet. Even more disturbing, this study reveals that this "digital divide" between
households of different races and income levels is growing. xxv States, local governments, tribes,
the federal government, and the private sector must all work together to ensure that Indian youth
have the access to the Information Age in their classrooms and that Indian communities have
access for economic development. [talk about transportation]

Build cooperation to ensure public safety in Indian communities and provide positive
influences for Indian youth to stay out of crime

        Tribal communities are among the youngest population groups in America, and
many tribal youth are at risk. The development of youth gangs has been a disturbing
trend in Indian Country, and many tribal youth lack for role models and opportunities. It
is thus critically important that we develop strategies for creating a more stable
environment for tribal youth in both the short and long term.

       Through the Department of Justice's "Volunteers for Tribal Youth (VTY)"
Program, we will build a federal-tribal partnership project designed to help American
Indian tribes enhance or create sustainable community-based volunteer programs aimed at
creating positive opportunities for youth and reducing youth and/or gang violence. The
Department, working in partnership with 18 federal and national non-profit organizations,
will work with tribal communities to identify opportunities for volunteers, including elders,
to serve as mentors, tutors, and positive adult role-models for American Indian youth. To
that end, this program intends to provide tribal communities with the financial resources,
training, technical assistance, organizational guidance, networking assistance, and other
resources necessary to create and sustain community-based volunteer programs.

                                               ***
                                           Conclusion

         Tribal communities stand at the threshold of a new era, one filled with the promise of
greater prosperity and a higher quality of life. These are crucial years for the future of American
Indians and Alaska Natives. This nation must commit itself to supporting tribal and individual
efforts to build the foundation for the success of American Indians and Alaska Natives in the
coming miIIenium.




                                                 14
                               Hex-Dump Conver~ICI~



1.


11.     From 1999 State of the Union, stock language he always uses

Ill.    Washington Post, December 16, 1997.


iv. Jon Jeter, Washington Post, December 16, 1997. Statistics from Harvard School of Public
Health, epidemiological study.

v. Census data or CPS data.

VI.     William Claiborne, Washington Post, August 14, 1998.

VII.     Census 1990

viii. BIA

ix. Where get this?

x. 1994 National Assessment of Education Progress (NAEP).

Xl.     1990 Census.

XII.     USA Today, April 13, 1998.

XIll.     1969 Senate Committee

xiv. "American Indians and Crime," Department ofJustice (February 1999).

XV.     CEA report

xvi. "American Indians and Crime," Department of Justice (February 1999).

xvii. Washington Post, December 16, 1997.

xviii. Washington Post, December 16, 1997.

xix. FBI's Uniform Crime Report.

XX.     Washington Post, February 15, 1999.

xxi. American Society of Civil Engineers (1998).

xxii. 1990 Census.

                                                    15
                              Hex-Dump Conversion


XXlll.   Any cite for this?

xxiv. Prepared statement of Robert F. Robinson, President of the Center for Applied Research,
Inc., submitted to the U.S. Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, Economic Development
Hearing, April, 1998.

xxv. Department of Commerce, 1998.




                                                   16
                               Hex-Dump Conversion

Draft 3/09/99

                   Part I - The America We See (American Indian insert)

         Before Europeans arrived on this Nation's shores, American Indians built great
civilizations with remarkable scientific, artistic, and cultural achievements. From aspirin, cocoa,
and quinine to architecture and government planning, the Indian nations and tribes have made
important contributions to our nation. Our Founding Fathers visited the Iroquois confederacy
to examine its system of separation of powers in developing our own system of checks and
balances.

         Although I was aware that my home State of Arkansas was home to a significant but very
small population of American Indians, I did not know much about tribal governments before my
first Presidential campaign in 1992. The opportunity to visit some of the reservations and
discuss issues with tribal leaders prompted me to learn more about the
government-to-government relationship that exists between the U.S. government and Indian
tribal governments, to seek a better understanding about social and economic conditions in
Indian communities, and to explore opportunities to enhance the standard ofliving for America's
tribal peoples. It is this government-to-government relationship and the sovereignty of tribes
which distinguishes Native Americans tribes as political groups and not simply racial or ethnic
classifications.

        I began to understand the importance of tribal self-determination to positive social and
economic growth and to formulate the policies that I believed would provide the greatest support
for tribal objectives. I believed that federal agencies should consult with tribes prior to taking
actions that affect tribal interests. I also felt strongly that the right of Native Americans to the
free exercise of religion must be secured. On April 29, 1994, I became the first President since
James Monroe, the fifth U.S. President, to invite the leaders of every tribe to a meeting at the
White House. That afternoon, I signed two Executive memoranda: one to facilitate the process
through which tribal members may gain access to eagle feathers for religious purposes and the
other directing federal agencies to consult with tribes prior to taking actions that affect tribal
rights and interests. In May 1998, I signed an executive order which strengthens the federal
government's commitment to consulting with tribes.

        The special political relationship between tribal governments and the United States arises
from Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution where the Framers of the Constitution crafted a legal
and political niche within which the internal autonomy and political authority of tribes would
continue to be recognized. In interpreting Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution, Chief Justice
Marshall noted that "the relationship of tribes to the United States is unlike that of any other
two people in existence marked by cardinal and peculiar distinctions." Marshall characterized
tribes as domestic dependent nations, at once possessing attributes of sovereignty and yet
dependent upon the protection of the United States. Justice Marshall also recognized that there
is a federal Indian trust responsibility under which the United States has assumed certain legal
and moral obligations in relation to American Indian and Alaska Native tribes.
                            Hex-Dump Conversion


       Treaties were used extensively by the European states as a means fostering peace,
formalizing diplomatic relations, and conducting transactions with the Tribes from first contact.
The Tribal Nations of the New World were a formidable political and military force, and treaties
of peace and friendship were powerful tools for fostering trade and commerce. The newly
formed U.S. continued to negotiate treaties with the Indian nations until 1871 when Congress
ended treaty making with Indian tribes. Sadly, we know that our nation has not always honored
our commitments to Native Americans. From 1887 to 1934, Indian tribes lost almost 100
million acres of reservation lands.

         Though deeply rooted in the Constitution, the right of tribal self-government has
frequently been challenged throughout our nation's history. From the earliest days of the
republic, there have been two competing views about Indian policy. At one extreme is the view
that tribal existence is inconsistent with fundamental American values. Proponents of this view
believe that Indian people should be assimilated into the larger society as quickly and thoroughly
as possible. At the other extreme is the view that tribal existence can be maintained only in
isolation from the larger society. What proponents of either view fail to recognize is that tribal
government is wholly compatible with, and is indeed a part of, our Constitutional framework.

         The existence of tribal governments is particularly suitable to the political structure and
underlying principles and values of our nation, balancing the distribution of governmental power
among separate sovereigns forming a single union. Such structure readily accommodates
inclusion of tribal governments both philosophically and practically. While distinctly different
from states in many respects, tribal governments possess the kinds of powers typically associated
with state governments. Such powers include the authority to make and enforce civil and
criminal laws; to levy taxes; to establish membership criteria; and to license and regulate
activities. Although tribes possess both the right and the power to regulate activities in their
territories independently from surrounding state governments, they frequently collaborate and
cooperate with states, on a government-to-government basis, through compacts or other
agreements.

        Although tribal governmental authorities have been recognized within federal
jurisprudence since the establishment of our nation, it has only been in recent years that tribal
governments have been provided mechanisms through which to exercise greater autonomy and
authority over the delivery of federal Indian programs and resources. In 1994, I signed into law
the Tribal Self-Governance Act. Under Self-Governance, tribal governments have
unprecedented authority over the design, allocation, and expenditure of resources as well as the
management of natural resources. Through this law, my Administration has continued the
process of transferring tribal government service delivery from the Bureau of Indian Affairs to
tribal governments

        Tribal government has come of age in the last quarter of the twentieth century. Nearly
wiped out first by the assimilation policies in the 1880's, then by the policy of terminating the
political status of tribes in the 1950's through 1973, tribal government has made a spectacular
                          Hex-Dump Conversion


come back, continuously growing in capacity, sophistication, and strength. As a new
millennium dawns, we must resolve to break decisively with old attitudes and ideas that divide
Americans and hinder our ability to achieve social justice and equality of opportunity for every
American.      America must rid itself of the notion that Indian tribes are tragically, but
inevitably, destined to vanish from the face of the Earth in the wake of the manifest destiny of
our nation. When the framers of our Constitution incorporated Indian nations into the political
and legal framework of this country, they forever joined the destiny of the tribal nations with that
of this great nation. The time now has come for our nation to embrace the principle that
American Indian and Alaska Native tribal governments are a permanent and integral part of the
social, political, and economic fabric of the United States.


