      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:11-MAR-1999 12:34:02.00

      SUBJECT:     Another AP Story on Ed-Flex

      TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      House Passes Education Bill

                               By ANJETTA McQUEEN
                               AP Education Writer

                               WASHINGTON (AP) A bill designed to give schools more
      flexibility in
                               spending federal money was approved by the House
      today. Unlike a
                               companion bill destined for Senate passage, the House
      measure does not
                          include any of President Clinton's education
      proposals, including federal
                          subsidies for hiring thousands of new teachers.

                               The House vote was 330-90.

                               On Wednesday, the Senate broke through six days of
      procedural
                               jousting and agreed to vote today on both the bill and
      amendments
                               demanded by Democrats.

                               Republicans and Democrats have battled over whether
      the "ed-flex"    bill,
                               which would loosen strings on certain federal dollars,
      should include
                               plans to spend $1.2 billion to hire 100,000 new teache
      rs nationwide to
                               reduce class sizes.

                               Late wednesday, Senate leaders had cut a deal to put
      the bill up for a
                               vote, along with a handful of amendments that include
      the new-teacher
                               plan. Republicans had opposed adding the plan to the ed
      -flex bill,
                               originally thought to be an easy, bipartisan favorite.

                               But the House passed the bill without compromises. The
      Republican
                               majority voted down two Democratic amendments, one


designed to
                       shield money for poor students from state waivers and
another that
                       would have tightened controls on the states. The
Democrats ran out of
                       time to offer other amendments, such as the class-size
proposal.

                       The Democratic proposal for new money for teachers to
reduce class
                    sizes would only add money without fixing those
problems, said Rep. Bill
                    Goodling, R-Pa., chairman of the House Education
Committee.

                       Under the ed-flex measure, states and school districts
could apply federal
                       money to programs that serve them best, Republicans
say. For example,
                       under state waivers, schools could use federal funds
meant for science
                    and math teachers to boost reading instruction if
that's what they prefer.

                       The ed-flex bill affects a portion of rules governing
the $15 billion in
                     education spending for kindergarten through high
school. Laws already
                    prohibit states from waiving rules regarding a school
's safety,
                     maintenance, assurance of student civil rights, and
instruction of special
                     education students. States often view these rules as
the most expensive
                     and time-consuming to follow.

                       Democrats in the House and Senate said they supported
ed-flex, even as
                    they point to government studies questioning states'
ability to account for
                    their waivers. The House passed two Republican am
endments designed
                    to require states to show better proof that they are
meeting students'
                    needs under their waivers.

                       Senate Democrats, who under Senate rules have more
rights and voting
                       weight than their House counterparts, have a better
chance of including
                       the class-size amendment in the Senate's ed-flex bill.
A final vote there
                      was slated for later today.

                      The class-size plan was started with last year's
spending bill when
                      Congress approved $1 billion for about 30,000 new
teachers. President
                      Clinton's plan calls for 100,000 new teachers costing
$11 billion.



                        (11 Mar 1999 11:46 EST)


