 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( CN=William R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1997 19:14:10.00

 SUBJECT:   Directive

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Christa- Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Below is the revised version of the President's directive.      Christa has
 taken this to Staff Secretary for clearance.

                                            March 6, 1997


 MEMORANDUM FOR THE:
         SECRETARY OF EDUCATION
         DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

 SUBJECT:  Preparing Students to Meet National Standards of Excellence in
 Eighth Grade Math       and Improving Math and Science Education

Since the early 1980' s, U. S. elementary and secondary school 'students have
begun taking tougher courses, and we are starting to see the results.
National Assessment of Educational Progress scores have improved in math
and science, with gains in mathematics equal to at least one grade level.
On the SAT, average math scores are at their highest in 25 years, even as
the number and diversity of test-takers have increased. However, the
eighth-grade results of the 41-Nation Third International Math and Science
Study (TIMSS), released this fall, show that the U.S. is below average in
math and just above average in science.    That isn't acceptable; in this
technology-rich information era, our students need to perform much better
in both subjects, but especially in math, if they are to excel at higher
level math and science courses that are the gateway to college and to
citizenship, productive employment, and lifelong learning.

The first step in raising achievement is lifting expectations and setting
high standards for what students should know and be able to do. TIMSS, our
National Assessment of Educational Progress, and the standards developed
by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics give us a solid
framework to build on.  Last month, to help parents and teachers learn who
needs help, what changes in teaching to make, and which schools need to
improve, I asked the Secretary of Education to develop a voluntary
national test for individual eighth-grade students based on
widely-accepted, challenging national standards in mathematics. The
national test will be available to states and local school districts to
give to their students in the spring of 1999, and will measure whether
students have reached a high level of mathematics proficiency.



  The primary responsibility for achieving high standards rests with
  students, teachers, parents, and schools in local communities across
  America.  However, it is imperative that we work to ensure that federal
  resources support student success as well. We must ensure that federal
  programs, research, and human resources are used as effectively as
  possible to help improve teaching and learning.

  Therefore, I direct the Department of Education and the National Science
  Foundation, together with other agencies identified in cooperation with
  the Office of Science and Technology Policy and the Domestic Policy
  Council, to develop an action strategy for using key federal resources to
  assist states and local school systems prepare students to meet
  challenging math standards in eighth grade, and for involving the
  mathematics, scientific, and technical communities in support of these
  efforts.

  The action strategy should include recommendations for the use of federal
  resources to help states, local school districts and schools to improve
  teaching, upgrade curriculum, integrate technology and high-quality
  instructional materials into the classroom, as well as motivate students
  and help them understand how math concepts are applied in the real world.
  The strategy should identify significant federal programs, activities, and
  partnerships available to improve teaching and learning, ensure that these
  resources are appropriately focused on helping students reach challenging
  math standards, and determine how these resources can best support state
  and local reforms. In developing this strategy, the inter-agency group
  should review the current status of improvements in math education, and
  identify and address critical areas of need, drawing on research and input
  from educators and professional organizations.

  Because teaching and learning in math and science are so integrally
  related, and because success in both subjects is vitally important in this
  information era, the working group should also review how federal
  resources and partnerships with other organizations can help improve
  student achievement in science.

  The working group should make its recommendations and submit its action
  strategy to me within 90 days.

                                                  WILLIAM J. CLINTON


  cc:     ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT FOR DOMESTIC POLICY
  ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF SCIENCE
          AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY


