RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 11-MAR-1999 15:53:21.00

SUBJECT:     Revised Radio

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OPD/EOP on
03/11/99 03:54 PM ---------------------------




Jordan Tamagni
03/11/99 03:41:48 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Michael Waldman/WHO/EOP, Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP, Leanne A.
Shimabukuro/OPD/EOP
cc:      Ann F. Lewis/WHO/EOP, Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
Subject:         Revised Radio

Draft 3/11/99 3:45pm

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
RADIO ADDRESS ON POLICE MISCONDUCT
TEXARKANSAS, ARKANSAS
March 12, 1999


         Good morning.  I am joined here at the White House today by Attorney
General Reno and representatives from the law enforcement and civil rights
groups to talk about what we must do to make our our streets safer than
ever by strengthening the bond of trust between police officers and the
communities they serve.

        For too long, violent crime seemed destined to rise in America.
Six years ago, I took office determined to change that. Working in
partnership with state and local law enforcement, we put in place a
comprehensive crime fighting strategy -- with more police, more
prosecutors, better prevention, and fewer illegal guns. Today, we know
our strategy is working beyond our expectations. Nationwide, crime is
down to its lowest levels in decades.  In communities across America,
families feel safe again.

        We know that community policing has been at the heart of our
success. By involving police in the lives of the people on their beats
and involving residents in law enforcement decisions that affect their
lives -- community policing has created a bond of respect and trust,
strong enough to turn back the rising tide of crime.

           Unfortunately, this bond has begun to fray in some communities


where residents complain that the cost of   falling crime rates is rising
police misconduct and abuse.  And several   recent incidents of such
misconduct -- from excessive use of force   to the demeaning and often
dangerous practice of racial profiling      have made us all acutely aware
that we must take action now.

        We know that the vast majority of our nationO,s police officers do
things by the book -- they put on their badges every day and put their
lives on the line for our safety. And we know that the vast majority --
fully 99% -- of people who have face-to-face encounters with the police
believe they were treated fairly.   But even one incident of police
misconduct -- especially when ·it is racially motivated -- is one too
many.

        That is why as part of my balanced budget for 2000, I have
proposed a $1.3 billion dollar 21st Century Policing initiative.   This new
initiative will help us put up to 50,000 more community police on our
streets and give them the high-tech tools they need to do their jobs.
Just as important, it includes new funding to prevent police misconduct
and engage the entire community in our fight against crime.

         It includes $20 million in new funding for police integrity and
ethics training ... another $20 million increase in funding to help police
officers to raise their level of education -- and raise their level of
understanding of the people they serve.   It will help establish more
citizen police academies that inform residents about police procedures and
teach them ways to make their communities safer.   It will help communities
build more diverse police forces by increasing funds for minority
recruiting.

        And make no mistake. When police officers do break the law, my
new initiative will also help bring them to justice. We will not let a
few bad cops undermine the progress that thousands of police officers have
worked so hard to achieve.

        These steps will help us strengthen the bond of trust between
police officers and the communities they serve.  So I calIon Congress to
pass my 21st Century Policing Initiative -- and make sure that our
criminal justice system serves all Americans.

         And I ask Attorney General Reno to continue this dialogue we have begun
here today, by convening a series of meetings and discussions with law
enforcement and community leaders, to see what else we can do -- working
together     to build stronger police forces, stronger communities, and a
stronger nation in the 21st Century.

        Thanks for listening.


