RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL) .

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 12-MAR-1999 18:22:21.00

SUBJECT:   Equal Pay Meeting Today

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
We did our meeting on collecting data today with EEOC, DOL, OMB, Commerce,
Treasury,   leg affairs, OPL, and CEA. Three proposals emerged, none of
which pleases everyone.   I will summarize them briefly without the eye
rolling, smirking, or disingenuous pledges of good faith.     (1) EEOC
described a proposal to support the original Daschle proposal with a
couple of changes: better confidentiality and only request data from 25%
of businesses a year. Treasury, Commerce and OMB objected strongly that
the collection is not nearly well enough targeted.   I was dissatisfied
with the suggestions for how to fix the Daschle proposal and gave a
deadline of Monday afternoon when I will sit down again with EEOC to add
more targeting ideas. (2) OMB distributed a three part proposal that
would: (a) let OFCCP collect more data from federal contractors v.ia their
affirmative action plan program; (b) collect more data through BLS; and
(c) institute the pay equity review of federal pay systems OPM talked
about in our last meeting.   Labor said they were terrified of opening up a
discussion of legislation that would give Republicans a chance to go
near affirmative action generally.   Caroline Fredrickson said she thought
Daschle would not think it was enough. But EEOC thought the groups would
think it was a big deal, the problem was OMB had described it as just a
pilot program.   (3) Commerce suggested a big academic study that could not
be used for enforcement and the civil rights folks said that would not
satisfy the advocates at all.

I think that the exec order on doing pay equity in the federal workforce
is a big idea and would actually buy us a lot with the groups.  I'm
surprised its not more controversial in our meetings.  I've asked Mark P.
what he thinks the reaction would be.  I think its worth giving a little
more time to finding a Daschle bill fix and will discuss a few more with
Ida on Monday (I asked CEA to propose a screen so that EEOC asks for data
only from industries where women have an unusually large pay equity
problem).    We will send over the plans themselves.


