RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-MAR-1999 21:08:10.00

SUBJECT:   revised, longer weekly report items

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Class size/ed flex votes. Thursday, the Senate approved an ed-flex bill
that did not include a class size amendment, but did include (with support
from every Republican and several Democrats) Jeffords-Lott amendments
permitting school districts to use FY99 class size funding for special
education. The Senate also rejected other Democratic amendments --
including a Boxer amendment on after-school programs and a Bingaman
amendment on drop-out prevention programs -- and then approved the entire
bill 98-1. With majorities in both parties, the House approved an ed-flex
bill that neither contained a class size amendment nor amendments
comparable to the Jeffords-Lott amendments in the Senate. After the
votes, we issued strong statements from you reiterating your long-standing
support for ed-flex but criticizing the Republican measures to undermine
your class size initiative. The statement also said that you would work
very hard to remove the class size amendment in conf·erence.

Since then, we have been working with Senate Democratic leadership to have
34 Senators sign a letter expressing support for sustaining a veto. Once
we have these commitments, we expect that you would issue a veto threat
over the Jeffords-Lott class size amendment. We also are trying to enlist
the support of Democratic Governors to persuade Republicans to drop the
amendment in the interest of signing a bipartisan ed-flex bill into law.
Meanwhile, we continue to be vulnerable to Republican efforts to recast
the education debate from whether to invest in class size/education to
whether to fully fund commitments to special education before funding new
initiatives like class size. We are actively exploring strategies to
invest in special education -- e.g. reserving nearly 40~ of tobacco funds
for special education in order to "fully fund" the federal share of
special education costs -- that could enable you to call for increased
investments in class size and special education, criticize the Republicans
for gutting the class size initiative unnecessarily, and ensure that the
message associated with your veto threat is about class size not special
education. Our intention is that all of these strategies would persuade
Republicans to drop the Jeffords amendment on class size, make possible a
bipartisan ed-flex bill signing ceremony, reduce our vulnerability to what
we expect will be continued Republican use of the special education
argument to broaden the appeal of the Republican message and attack your
education funding intitiatives, and increase pressure on Republicans to
support your class size initiative in the coming weeks and months.

Charter school conference. The Education Department's second national
charter school conference will take place next week.  Secretary Riley will
address the conference, and a videtape of your remarks will be played as
well. The Education Department will release non-binding guidance for
charter schools receiving federal start-up funds.  The guidance makes
clear that for-profit organizations directly holding charters may not
receive federal start-up funding (though non-profit charter school boards
contracting out management services to for-profit firms may receive this
funding); that charter schools receiving federal funds must use lotteries


when there are more applicants than spaces but under certain circumstances
might be able to use minimum eligibility requirements for the lottery as
long as they consistent with the statute governing the federal charter
school program, are "reasonably necessary" to achieve the educational
mission of the charter school; and consistent with civil rights laws;
exemptions from the lottery may include students who are enrolled at a
public school at the time it becomes a charter school, siblings of
students already attending the school, and a small number of children of
the charter school's founders.  The guidance also says that federal
start-up funding may not be given to private schools converted directly
into charter schools, though private schools may shut down entirely and
reopen as a new public charter school that would comply with applicable
federal and state laws regarding public schools and would open up their
student enrollment to a lottery without any preference for students who
had been enrolled in the private school. The Education Department also
hopes to release longer guidance on issues related to charter and
desegregation, and religion, in the coming weeks or months.


