 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL         (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:1S-MAR-1999 11:28:38.00

 SUBJECT:    at last, our rebuttal

 TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Study: Smoking, Adult Crime Linked

                       By Tammy Webber
                       Associated Press Writer
                       Sunday, March 14, 1999; 6:08 p.m. EST

                       CHICAGO (AP)    -- Babies whose mothers smoke during
 pregnancy
                       could be at a higher risk of growing up to be criminals,
 new research
                       suggests.

                   Researchers say a study published in this month's
 Archives of General
                   Psychiatry is the first to examine the relationship
 between mothers who
                   smoke and their children's adult behavior.

                       The researchers -- from Emory University in Atlanta, the
 University of
                   Southern California and the Institute of Preventive
 Medicine in Denmark
                   -- found that more a quarter of the men whose mothers
 had the highest
                   levels of smoking and delivery complications were
 arrested for a violent
                   crime as an adult.

                       "Our results support our hypothesis that maternal
 smoking during
                   pregnancy is related to increased rates of crime in
 adult offspring, " the
                   authors wrote, adding that the results "suggest an
 additional critical reason
                   to support public health efforts aimed at improving
 maternal health
                   behaviors during pregnancy. ' ,

                       However, David Fergusson, a psychiatric epidemiologis.t
 at the
                       Christchurch School of Medicine in New Zealand, said
 there is not
                       enough research to add prenatal smoking to the list of
 established risk
                       factor for adult crimes.



                     Fergusson, who wrote an editorial accompanying the
article, said the
                  study did not rule out the possibility that genetics
not smoking -- caused
                  behavior problems.

                     --Mothers who smoke during pregnancy are often young.
women who
                     have previous misconduct problems and there is quite an
inheritability of
                     misconduct problems, "    Fergusson said in a telephone
interview Sunday.

                     A spokeswoman for Patricia Brennan, the study's lead
author and a
                     researcher at Emory's Department of Psychology, did not
return a page
                     Sunday seeking comment.

                     The researchers based their findings on data for 4,169
males born in
                     Copenhagen between September 1959 and December 1961.

                     The number of cigarettes their mothers had smoked during
the third
                  trimester of pregnancy affected the men's arrests for
nonviolent and violent
                  crimes as adults, even after factoring out other
possible causes such as
                  alcohol use, divorce, income and horne environment,
researchers said in
                  the study, which was released Sunday.

                     Only one other risk factor -- delivery complications --
was found to be
                     significant.

                     While stopping short of saying that babies whose mothers
smoked while
                     pregnant will become criminals, researchers say their
findings are
                     significant.

                     Further study should be aimed at determining the effects
of smoking on the
                  brain of developing fetuses and to see if specific
agents in tobacco smoke
                  can be more directly linked to antisocial behavior, they
said.


