RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-MAR-1999 14:42:49.00

SUBJECT:   BNA

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I suspect HHS on the AP story.


No.   50
Tuesday March 16,   1999
ISSN 1523-567X
Regulation, Law & Economics

Food Safety
President's Council Calls for New Law
To Unify Federal Regulatory Programs
The United States needs a new law establishing a unified framework for all
federal food safety programs with one official overseeing the whole
system, the President's Council on Food Safety said March 15.
In a report to President Clinton, the council endorsed a proposal for a
unifying food safety law that the National Academy of Science made in an
August 1998 report.
The council also endorsed the four other recommendations in that NAS
report, Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption, which said the
current regulatory system for food safety in the United States is too
fragmented.
One of the NAS report recommendations was for a national a comprehensive
food safety plan. The council said it is developing such a plan.
The NAS report also said federal food safety statutes should be based on
scientifically supportable assessments of public health risks. The council
said it will review existing food safety laws to determine which might
need statutory changes.
Another recommendation in the NAS report was that the federal food safety
system should be based on science. The council's assessment gave examples
in the federal system where this is the case. It also cited "areas that
need to be strengthened," such as methods to minimize contamination of
food.
More Authority
The NAS report said federal agencies need the legal authority to work more
effectively with states, tribes, and local governments on food safety.
"Much needs to be done to better coordinate the federal government's
interactions with other levels of government," the council's assessment
said.
Just days after NAS released its report, President Clinton created the
food safety council through Executive Order 13100 . That presidential
directive gave the council six months to assess the NAS report.
The National Research Council and the Institute of Medicine, both of which
are arms of NAS, prepared the original report at the request of Congress.


Copyright. 1999 by The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., Washington D.C.


