RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Devorah R. Adler ( CN=Devorah R. Adler/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-MAR-1999 09:56:07.00

SUBJECT:     Re: guidance today

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Paul J. weinstein Jr.    ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Q:         When is the President going to unveil his plan?

A:      The President has made no decision on any final policy, nor has
he decided on a specific timetable for unveiling his proposal. However, he
will send it to Capitol Hill early enough to ensure that the Congress has
the opportunity to pass it this year.

Q:         What will be in this proposal?

A:      Consisten with the principles the President laid out earlier
this year, his proposal will include a provision to dedicate surplus
dollars to strengthen the financial status of the program and to prevent
excessive increases in out of pocket costs for beneficiaries or harmful
provider payment reducations.to strengthen the Medicare programD,s
financial state. In addition, it will no doubt include a meaningful
prescription drug benefit and a number of provisions that modernize the
program and make it more competitive. These provisions were highlighted as
important elements within the principles the President outlined earlier
this year. No further details are, or will be available, until the
President unveils his proposal.

Q:      YouD,ve indicated that the President wants to modernize the
program and make it more competitve. Does that mean that his proposal will
include a premium support mechanism?

A:      Not necessarily. That is one possible option, but the President
has made no final determination in this area. As he indicated yesterday,
he would want to make certain that such an approach would not impose
significant cost barriers to beneficiaries wishing to remain in the
traditional fee for service program.

Q:      Senator Kerrey, one of the few Democrats to vote for the
CommissionD,s recommendations, was particularly critical of the
PresidentD,s insistance on the use of the surplus. He also disagreed with
the PresidentD,s stated concerns about the CommissionD,s recommendation to
increase the age of eligibilty to 67. How do you respond?

A:      These are issues where we clearly disagree. Every independant
Medicare expert has recognized that the program needs an independant
infusion of financing to ensure the financial health of the program for
any length of time. We believe that using the surplus is a much better
course of action than a payroll tax increase. The alternatives to new


revenue are excessive cuts in provider reimbursement or benefits. The
President strongly believes that raising the eligibilty age to 67 without
a viable policy that insures the number of the uninsured does not increase
is unwarranted and ill-advised. There are already over 3 million,
uninsured people just under age 65, and this is the most rapidly growing
age group.of the uninsured. Without Medicare or some accessible,
affordable alternative, many of the 65 to 67 year olds who would have
Medicare would become -- or remain -- uninsured.

Q:      Last night, a number of the members of the Commission expressed
resentment that the President preempted the CommissionD,s vote in his
statement today by acting as though their work had been completed even
before the final vote had been taken. How do you respond?

A:      The President wanted to acknowledge the work of the Commission
on the day it was to make its final vote. He certainly explicitly
acknowledged in his statement that the vote had not taken place. In
addition, Senator Breaux and Congressman Thomas had made clear that the
recommendations of the Commission were likely to fall short of the votes
necessary to report to Congress. Moreover, the President was highly
complimentary of the work of the Commission and in fact, indicated that it
had made important contributions that he hoped could lead to eventual
consensus.


