 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 18-MAR-1999 09:05:29.00

 SUBJECT:   Data Collection Proposal

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below is a brief description of the approach which we have had some
success selling to the core relevant parties over the last 12 hours. We
haven't shown it in writing to anyone and it could blow up when/if we
circulate. Basically, it spells out the process by which Daschle's
provision would have to be implemented, requiring EEOC to conduct a
process considering what gaps in relevant data there is now, and
considering factors like burden on business, what is an appropriate
trigger for requesting data, and what is the best vehicle for collecting
data (perhaps EEO-1, perhaps not).   But it leaves discretion up to EEOC.
I need to do the next round of vetting with actual words in hand but so
far: Orszag (surprisingly) said he thought Commerce would go for it,
Caroline F. said she thought Daschle and probably the groups would, Ida
said "OK, check with Ellen Vargyas, " Ellen V. sounded a bit pessimistic
but said we should check with the groups, OMB I don't think will like it.
The argument I've made to people who think it leans towards too much data
collection is that we will have an internal OMB review to see if this is
the best way a rule could be fashioned when the time comes to collect
data-- an argument Orszag buys. The argument to supporters of the
original Daschle provision is that this just spells out the argument EEOC
would have to make to revise the EEO-1 form anyway -- prove they need the
data and this is the best method.

        My goal is to pin down support for this from Treasury/Commerce and
read it to Caroline F. and have her say she thinks Daschle would support.
Then have you or I talk to Greenburger/Nussbaum and say this is a good
deal.  Then move back to the other players. What do you think?

The legislation would:

1.      Create the Division of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics
within EEOC. Charged generally with using existing data and collecting
new data as necessary to aid in reducing the gender pay gap and enforcing
the EEO generally.

                    authorized with such funds as necessary to do the
                        following:
-- within one year evaluate the current knowledge and sources of data
available to federal government relating to the gender pay gap;
                -- identify gaps in the available data;
-- consult with relevant agencies including Departments of Labor,
Treasury, and   Commerce;
                -- incorporate existing ORIP office (already in EEOC) .
ARMS                                                                       Page 2 of 2


2.      Implementation
                within one year of passage report results of above
evaluation of what pay data is available;
                within 1 year and 6 months from passage of the
legislation identify the best method for collecting necessary data for
enforcing the Equal Pay Act and EEO considering factors including:

* Enforcing relevant laws;
* Imposition of burden on business to enforce law;
* Use of appropriate data collection vehicles and preliminary techniques
to identify business from which the data is most likely to be useful to
EEOC and/or OFCCP.


3.      Utilize pilot studies, sampling, and/or other means as
deemed necessary by EEOC in implementation period.


