RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Elisabeth Stock ( CN=Elisabeth Stock/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-MAR-1997 15:40:37.00

SUBJECT:    Favoring "WTW" firms when assesing federal contracts

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Lyn A. Hogan ( CN=Lyn A. Hogan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,

Spoke with Lyn Hogan a few days ago and she told me that you might be
interested in my pursuing my Welfare-to-Work idea further.  I would be
more than happy to do so, if you think it would be worthwhile.  I look
forward to hearing from you.

Below I have pasted the draft proposal I sent to Lyn.    Your comments are
welcome.

DRAFT

Proposal:

When assessing federal contract tenders and grant applications, favors
those that make specific provisions for hiring WTW participants.    This
can be achieved by creating a ranking system for selection that assigns
points to WTW employment creation.  Cabinet secretaries could implement
this agenda to the extent to which their discretion allows.  They would
have to restructure program information about the selection process to
clearly reflect this agenda.

Benefits:

WTW jobs will be created: Applicants for federal contracts and grants will
try to create employment for WTW participants in order to gain preference
in the selection process. Although these "employers" will likely pass the
cost back to the government in their tender or application, applicants
will need to be creative in creating WTW jobs to keep the costs of this
employment down and be competitive.
Although the government may have to pay an applicant or contractor more
for the same product or service, this initiative may prove to be less
expensive to government than simply giving tax credits to large-scale
employers for hiring WTW participants.
In addition, creating jobs through letting government contracts, allows
the government to retain more control; an applicant may be asked to
explain what types of jobs WTW participants will be given in the
application. Giving tax credits to employers for hiring WTW participants
does not allow the government to control what type of employment WTW
participants will be given.

Examination of Precedents:
There is already a precedent for this type of program in South Africa.
There tenders by large construction contractors were weighted based upon
estimates of how many low-skilled jobs would be created.



This proposal is not very different from affirmative action except that it
is not based on race or sex, and therefore, should not have constitutional
implications.


Examination of Incentives Created
The incentives created by this program need to be carefully examined. We
can do better setting up an incentive structure like the HUD provision,
Section III of Housing and Community Development Act of 1968 (12USC
17801U).  In the HUD provision, contractors implementing construction
projects had to, to the maximum extent feasible, hire residents to fill
construction jobs.   In this WTW proposal, in contrast, applicants that
propose to create jobs for WTW participants would be rewarded in the
selection process -- not be told to employ WTW participants to the maximum
extent feasible.   This incentive structure should encourage applicants to
utilize WTW participants creatively and efficiently which the HUD
provision does not.

What Remains to be Done:

Examine federal contracting / grant programs to find those that lend
themselves to creating jobs for WTW participants.  For those programs, the
points assigned for "WTW employment creation" during selection will be
greater than for those programs that do not easily lend themselves to "WTW
employment creation."


