RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Devorah R. Adler ( CN=Devorah R. Adler/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-MAR-1999 10:16:09.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
QUESTION FOR JOE:

Q:      Would the President veto the Patients Bill of Rights legislation
that passed out of the Senate Labor Committee last night? (or, O&What do
you think about the Patients Bill of Rights legislation that passed out of
the Senate Labor Committee last night?OS)

A:      The vote last night is the beginning of a process. We are
confident that this legislation will improve as it makes it way through
the Senate Finance Committee, Senate floor, the House, and the subsequent
joint conference. The President is not prepared to make any final
judgement until that process is completed. However, the bill as passed
last night is unacceptably flawed in that it leaves out over 120 million
Americans from these guaranteed protections, has an inadequate independant
appeals process that does not protect against arbitrary decisions made by
HMOs, and has weak enforcement mechanisms that are unable to assure that
patients are protected. In addition, the protections themselves are wholly
inadequate because they do not include, among other provisions, guarantees
for access to specialisists and emergency room services.


QUESTION FOR THE PRESIDENT:

Q:      Would you veto the Patients Bill of Rights legislation that
passed out of the Senate Labor Committee last night?

A:      The vote last night is the beginning of a process. I am
confident that this legislation will improve as it makes it way through
the Senate Finance Committee, Senate floor, the House, and the subsequent
joint conference. I am not prepared to make any final judgement until that
process is completed. However, the bill as passed last night is
unacceptably flawed in that it leaves out over 120 million Americans from
these guaranteed protections, has an inadequate independant appeals
process that does not protect against arbitrary decisions made by HMOs,
and has weak enforcement mechanisms that are unable to assure that
patients are protected. In addition, the protections themselves are wholly
inadequate because they do not include, among other provisions, guarantees
for access to specialisists and emergency room services.


