 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. ReedjOU=OPDjO=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATEjTIME:19-MAR-1999 13:47:21.00

 SUBJECT:   gop bill

 TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda IIIjOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD         1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena KaganjOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. ShimabukurojOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 You may want to call this reporter and explain to her that the GOP budget
 cuts COPS


                       $17.5B GOP Anti-Crime Bill Unveiled

                       By Laurie Kellman
                       Associated Press Writer
                       Friday, March 19, 1999; 1:36 p.m. EST

                       WASHINGTON (AP)   -- Senate -Republicans unveiled a $17.5
 billion
                       anti-crime agenda today that would protect programs the
 Clinton
                   administration wants to eliminate and impose harsher
 sentences on illegal
                   drug users.

                       " I t is based on what we know reduces crime, "    said Sen.
 Orrin Hatch,
                       R-Utah, chairman of the Judiciary Committee.

                       Hatch clashed with Attorney General Janet Reno last week
 on her
                   proposal to cut several anti-crime grants from her
 budget. Reno said crime
                   was down significantly nationwide, and she wanted to
 shift money to other
                   priorities.

                  But Hatch said today that crime in the United States is
 still "significantly
                  high by historical standards,"  and violent crime rates
 here remain the
                  highest of any industrialized nation.

                       Senate GOP leadership sources who demanded anonymity
 said the GOP
                   bill marks a new willingness among some senior
 Republicans to take on
                   legislative initiatives that approach the gun-control
 issue. Republicans,


                      many of whom have opposed such legislation in recent
years, feared they
                  would lose such a battle after nationally publicized
firearms tragedies at
                  schools and elsewhere.

                      Hatch's agenda, however, faces little risk of igniting a
gun battle, GOP
                      sources said. It would expand a Richmond, Va., program
 in which the
                  U.S. attorney prosecutes as many local gun-related
crimes in federal court
                   as possible and seeks federal mandatory minimum
sentences. Hatch said
                   homicides in Richmond dropped 50 percent in that city
after that program
                   took effect. It also includes a media campaign to spread
the message that
                     an illegal gun will get you five years in federal
prison. ' ,

                      Aides close to Hatch said they anticipate the bill
moving through the
                      committee this spring and to the Senate floor during the
summer.

                      Much of the bill's funding has already been set aside
for federal grants
                      Reno proposes cutting, but which Hatch would protect:

                      --A grant used for equipment and technology for state
and local law
                      enforcement crime-fighting.

                      --Federal assistance to states for prison-building and
incarceration of
                      violent and repeat offenders for at least 85 percent of
their sentences.

                   --Juvenile crime block grants for youth detention
centers, drug testing and
                  improved record-keeping.

                      Hatch and other Republican senators also are proposing
increasing
                      penalties for the most serious drugs,   including powder
cocaine and
                      methamphetamines.

                  The GOP senators also are calling for the ratification
of a constitutional
                  amendment that would improve restitution laws and steer
federal money
                  toward efforts to fight violence against women and
children.


