RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-MAR-1999 20:20:18.00

SUBJECT:    charter schools and deseg issues

TO: Elena Kagan        CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN .

TEXT:
I wanted to 1) give you a brief update on discussions at last week's
charter conference on the charter school/deseg issue, and 2) get direction
from you on a staff-level White House debate about whether a White House
letter should be sent to the Wall Street Journal responding to Clint
Bolick's editorial this morning attacking Bill Lann Lee for Justice
Department investigations into charter schools proposed in Lousiana.
Meanwhile, we are setting up a meeting for Friday to discuss next steps
on the civil rights guidance with Education, Justice, WH Counsel's
office, and us.

1) The charter school conference.   The civil rights guidance (as you
know) was NOT distributed, but we did have a 90 minute discussion on the
issue with conference participants that provided a helpful context for
moving forward on the guidance. Among those in the discussion, there were
very strong feelings, a wide array of opinions and experiences, and no
clear understanding about the applicability of desegregation orders to
charter schools. A few believed that charter schools should not be subject
to desegregation orders at all, and others were worried that the
application of desegregation orders could block the creation of
predominantly minority neighborhood charter schools in areas where
minority children are bused in order to comply with goals established in a
desegregation plan. A number of charter school founders expressed concern
about a "double standard" in the enforcement of desegregation plans --
i.e., establishing a rigorous review for charter schools when they believe
there isn't as much review for other public schools.   Some charter
schools had undergone a review for compliance by a court before opening,
and others (even some in areas with deseg orders in place) had never gone
through any review.   Clearly, there is a need for some well-developed
guidance with a decent roll-out strategy.

A number of the conservative groups are suggesting that enforcement of
civil rights laws is being used as a strategy to block charter schools,
and there is apparently some (but it is hard for me to tell how much)
interest among Republicans in introducing legislation to "defend" charter
schools against Justice Department interventions.    Some of the
middle-of-the -road charter school advocates      depending on how the
issue is framed -- could be inclined to support this.

2) Wall Street Journal editorial by Clint Bolick this morning and
discussions about a possible White House response. WH Counsel's office is
suggesting that the White House respond quickly to Bolick's editorial this
morning attacking Bill Lann Lee for Justice Department efforts to block or


question the creation of certain proposed charter schools in Louisiana.
WH Counsel staff would like a White House letter to specifically defend
Justice Department actions in these schools.   However, a number of us
would prefer not yet to send a letter.

Tracey Thornton (who is apparently shepherding Bill Lann Lee's
confirnation process) is wary of a White House response unless it is
needed to help secure the support of the LA Senators for his nomination.
Tracey is checking with the Senate offices, but her fairly strong initial
instinct is to ignore the op-ed and instead to continue to find more ways
to publish positive pieces urging Bill Lann Lee's confirmation. Moreover,
for the same reasons I was concerned about the guidance, I would be wary
of sending out a White House letter before we at least meet later this
week to discuss our policy, the likely reaction to this policy, and our
roll-out plan. Among other things, I am concerned that Republicans will
use this to question the president's commitment to charter schools, and
intentionally foster a polarized debate between minority parents and
leaders in the charter school movement and civil rights groups/Clinton
Administration on the other.

Do you have an opinion on whether a White House letter to the editor
should be sent? Again, my recommendation would be to NOT send a letter
unless Tracey unexpectedly gets info from the Senate indicating that it
would be helpful to maintain support for Bill Lann Lee's nomination.


