RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-MAR-1999 21:22:27.00

SUBJECT:   Flagging a few issues·re: the draft Title I

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP      OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/ou=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I wanted to flag a few issues for you to consider as you read Education's
Title I draft.   I haven't yet thought through how to fix these problems,
but I wanted to at least flag them tonight to see if you agreed with any
of them.  I also don't mean to be overly critical -- they have done a
great job. But here are some of my initial concerns.   Let me know if
there are any that you think are in particular need of addressing.

1) Corrective action in failing schools. The legislation's strategy for
intervening in failing schools may focus too much on loosely defined
school-level change strategies rather than pressuring failing school
districts that may be causing some of the problem in the first place. The
draft would direct funding to school districts with the highest
concentrations of failing schools and then empower those failing
districts to determine the appropriate corrective action needed in the
school. Moreover, the corrective actions relate mostly to decisions or
changes the school must make (some as vague as "redesigning" the school)--
rather than decisions the school district would need to take.   Finally,
the S-year trigger for correction action in schools is somewhat slow, AND
it wouldn't affect a perenially failing school district that has schools
move in and out of school improvement. Overall, this policy on corrective
actions wouldn't necessarily pressure a failing school district -- already
tolerating widespread failure or mediocrity -- to make serious change.
I'll give more thought to solutions if you agree this is a problem.

2) Teach for America and alternative certification. The requirements on
teacher qualifications would require Title I-funded teachers to be fully
certified or have a college degree and working to get certification within
two years.   This may well block Title I funding from being used for
"Teach for America" teachers -- many of whom only plan to teach for two
years and do not intend to get certified -- and other talented people who
enter alternative certification programs that take longer than two years.
While there are some legitimate disagreements about the value of
certification, this policy might impede talented teachers from entering
the classroom. Moreover, critics could highlight all of the talented,
young Teach-for-America teachers -- and others getting alternative
certifiction -- who couldn't be be hired with federal funds, and criticize
the Administration for a misplaced focus on certification over talent.

3) Absence of support for high-performing schools. The accountability fund
no longer seems to include support for high-performing schools. Was there
a decision to remove this focus? If there is any support for
high-performing schools, we could develop some creative ways to reward


those schools (e.g., not just bonuses, but increased flexibility, funding
to expand their programs, start-up new schools or assist other schools in
need) .

4) Requiring 10% for professional development without (yet) a clear
strategy for ensuring that these funds are well-spent. The Department may
well address this with a thougtful Title II, but I at least wanted to flag
this as an issue needing attention.

5) A potential perception that we aren't being "tough" on bilingual
education. I actually think the policy here is right, but I am worried
about how people will perceive our dual proposal to A) require
assessments to be given in spanish, and B) implement our three-year goal
simply through a requirement that students in u.s. schools for three years
take a reading assessment in English.  Critics could say that we are
actually encouraging more instruction in spanish through the
spanish-language assessments, and merely requiring reading tests in
English after 3 years is a long way from requiring schools to quickly
teach students English.
Again, the policy may be right here,    and in my VP capacity, I don't
object to this at all
but I wanted to be sure that you had at least considered how this may be
perceived and whether we can take any steps to define the message the way
we want it to be defined.

6) The proposal would create additional pressure for recruiting
high-quality teachers, but the proposal doesn't include a strong strategy
to recruit new people into teaching. This proposal is (appropriately)
raising the bar for entering and staying in the teaching profession, just
as we are reducing class size, facing growing student enrollments, an
aging teaching force, and a good economy that may be luring good teachers
into other professions. Together, these steps could exacerbate teacher
shortages, AND foster the public perception that we need to take steps to
address these shortages. Even if you don't think there's much we could do
substantively, I am worried that the absence of any specific teacher
recruitment initiatives creates a vaccuum that could be filled by
Republicans looking to broaden their appeal in education. Apparently,
Kennedy has been considering something in this area, and I also think an
aggressive teacher recruitment strategy could be a good VP issue. If you
are open to proposals on this point, I'll write something up.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 047 - FOLDER -007


[03/23/1999] [1]


