RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-MAR-1999 14:15:12.00

SUBJECT:   good welfare to work stories

TO: J. Eric Gould ( CN=J. Eric Gould/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here are 2 good stories that ran over the weekend - one in the Economist
magazine, one in Chicago Tribune - thanks to the Partnership.  Note plug
in the Economist for our budget initiatives and discussion of the
supplemental. (Cynthia, I've sent to agencies separately).
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D88]MAIL48194729L.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504342030000010A02010000000205000000BD4F00000002000025BA81A092F5724ADE3B58
8A2036F55C809FCDA2BE5ADEB51EC6EF1A10BB5DE253D6010FB238B2E929581C1E512F5564C142
7EEAE41D96791BFC6FB3017FB70615156731C7D282AC77A7EF1E2B5468C2CF049D98069C686030
A528179C94D1AF71DDBC24FB6FD6B7613808E81A03EE7813699016856924BBFA6777424C78088C
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

                 Copyright 1999 The Economist Newspaper Ltd.
                           All rights reserved
                               The Economist

                         March 20, 1999, U.S. Edition

SECTION: World Politics and Current Affairs; AMERICAN SURVEY; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1095 words

HEADLINE: The crunch comes for welfare reform

BODY:


    WASHINGTON, DC

    ACROSS the country they greet the guests at Marriott hotels or dispense
Burger King Whoppers; east of the Mississippi they ring the tills at CVS
pharmacies; in Washington, DC, they give manicures at the Just Nails with a
Gentleman's Touch salon. They, and several hundred thousand like them (president
Clinton's estimate is 1.5m), have left the welfare rolls over the past two years
and are the wage-earning proofthat welfare reform is working.

    But will it go on doing so? By July 1st, or earlier in many states, those
families who have been receiving welfare payments for two continuous years will
receive them no more. Nor will families who, over time, have had a total of five
years of payments. The pessimists, worried that America's long economic
expansion will finally run out of stearn, are already raising the alarm. The
newly hired will be the first to be fired, but this time there will be no
welfare cheque to soften the blow. Some mayors are predicting massive social
unrest.

    Perhaps they protest too much. After all, when Mr Clinton signed welfare
reform into law in August 1996, it was a bold stroke. For years there had been
attempts to wean families off welfare; but the rolls kept growing, to a peak of
5m families (14m individuals) in 1994. Under the terms ofMr Clinton's bill,
welfare ceased to be a federal entitlement; recipients ofwe1fare would have to
work for it. For their part, the states, in return for federal block grants and
the freedom to run their own welfare programmes, would have to remove 25% of
their families from the welfare rolls (or at least into "work activities" such
as training programmes) in the first year, rising to 50% by 2002.

  So far, so very good. Since 1994 the rolls have fallen to about 3m families,
                                                                                      Hex.Dump ConversIon
or fewer than 8m people (see chart). The private-sector Welfare to Work
Partnership, launched in May 1997 by United Airlines, UPS, Burger King, Sprint
and Monsanto, now has almost 10,000 member-companies committed to hiring from
the welfare rolls. Its latest estimate is that in the past two years they have
hired some 410,000 people. The Partnership's chief executive, Eli Segal, says:
"We're trying not to gloat ... Welfare was an income-production system; now
it's a work-preparation system."

    Maybe so. Even late converts to the cause, such as Hawaii, have managed to
meet the law's requirements. Some enthusiasts, such as Wisconsin (whose caseload
fell by 77% over two years), have done spectacularly well. But do the
                   figures, and the emphasis on cutting caseloads, flatter to deceive?

   Mr Segal argues that welfare recipients are not doomed to find only
"dead-end" minimum-wage jobs. Some 80% of Partnership companies claim to pay
well above the $ 5.50 an hour minimum wage (with an average of$ 7.20 an hour);
more than 70% offer medical benefits, and have promoted employees hired from
welfare. Moreover, the former welfare recipients appear to show above-average
loyalty and sticking power. Steve Wing, director of government programmes for
CVS, reckons that 55% of welfare hires over the past two years are still
employed by CVS, compared with an overall retention rate over that period of
25%; Giant Food, an east-coast supermarket chain, compares its 90-day retention
rate of 79% for ex-welfare recipients with a dismal company-wide average of 50%.

    Yet the truth is that such figures do not happen easily. A successful move
from welfare to work involves an investment by both states and the private
sector in training programmes, transport, remedial education and "mentoring" by
colleagues or outside advisers. For the moment, with the labour market at its
tightest since the 1960s, the private sector arguably has little choice but to
make the investment. As for the states, they can afford to be generous: the
economic expansion has given almost all of them healthy budget surpluses, and
until 2002 they are supposed to receive a federal block grant of some $ 16.8
billion a year. Add the president's 2000 budget proposals for welfare-to-work
tax credits, housing vouchers and transport, and perhaps the downturn in the
economic cycle will not be as damaging as the pessimists fear.

    But it cannot be entirely painless. As a recent study from the Brookings
Institution points out, the welfare rolls in America's biggest cities may be
falling, but they are doing so much more slowly than in the surrounding
counties. The implication, as some mayors argue, is that when the downturn comes
poverty will be still more concentrated in cities, which will become still less
attractive to investors.

  Moreover, for all Mr Segal's glad tidings, others tell a less happy story of
widening income disparities and families trapped in poverty even when they are
                                                                                 Hex·Dump Conversion
in work. Analysts at Washington's Centre on Budget and Policy Priorities, for
example, maintain that most welfare hires do not receive paid holiday or sick
leave, and that it takes a year of employment before they can be covered by the
Family and Medical Leave Act--a crucial factor when so many welfare hires are
single mothers.

   Still, welfare reform has worked better than anyone dared hope. How ironic,
then, that the experiment's future could be imperilled by its present success.
Because the welfare rolls have fallen so fast, the states have had to spend less
on welfare cheques--which means they have some $ 3 billion in federal block
grants left unspent. To Washington's politicians that money is an irresistible
temptation, which is why this week some Republicans in the Senate proposed
siphoning off $ 350m to provide disas.ter relief for Central America and why
other Republicans in the House want to let the states use their federal welfare
money for education programmes.

    Happily for the states, not all Republicans agree. As the House Ways and
Means chairman, Bill Archer, wrote to the Senate leader, Trent Lott: "We made a
deal. As state legislatures confront the toughest challenges of welfare reform,
Congress is proposing to pull the rug from under them." Indeed so, and as Mr
Archer points out, that would be a bad precedent to set when the RepUblicans
want to tum other areas--education, child protection, housing and so on--over
to the states in the form of block grants. After all,"welfare reform is an
experiment in a different sort of government provision for its citizens, and if
it keeps working there could surely be more.




GRAPHIC: chart

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

LOAD-DATE: March 22,1999
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

                   Copyright 1999 Chicago Tribune Company
                               Chicago Tribune



                March 21, 1999 Sunday, CHICAGOLAND FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1; ZONE: C

LENGTH: 1514 words

HEADLINE: WELFARE ROLLS TO PAYROLLS;
PROGRAM HAS MANY SUCCESSES, FORMIDABLE CHALLENGES

BYLINE: By Stephen Franklin, Tribune Staff Writer.

BODY:
   Roy Mendoza was in a bind, and didn't have time to waste. He was under
pressure to trim his company's turnover rate and to cut its overtime costs.

   He needed not just workers, but good ones--no easy task with the unemployment
rate skimming along at record lows.

   And so, Mendoza, regional recruitment manager for the Wyndham Hotels in the
Chicago area, last fall took a step that some businesses might consider a
headache-inducing gamble.

   He decided to look for new workers on the welfare rolls.

    "Usually in this industry you won't get results in a few months, but it has
been positive, very positive. I mean employees who come to work and do ajob.
It's hard to find that in today's job market," he said. "It's like, give me
more. I encourage anyone else to do the same."

  Some businesses can offer similar testimonials on the benefits of hiring
welfare recipients.

   Indeed, the Welfare to Work Partnership, a nationwide business-led group
formed at President Clinton's request, estimates that 410,000 welfare recipients
have found jobs since May 1997 from among its ranks.

   But since Clinton signed a revolutionary welfare overhaul in August 1996,
erasing a 60-year-old promise of financial support for poor people, the business
community's ability to provide work for the millions leaving the welfare rolls
has been a mixed bag of unexpected successes and persistent roadblocks.
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
   And no one knows what the future holds, as the most marketable job candidates
get off the welfare rolls, leaving behind more people with substance abuse
problems and minimum job skills and employment experience.

   Under the law, welfare recipients must work after two years of receiving
support, and they cannot stay on the welfare rolls for more than five years. By
2002, the states must have half of the adults who receive welfare working at
least 30 hours a week. If the states do not meet the government's deadlines,
they face the loss of federal welfare funds.

   As the states have shed welfare recipients from their rolls, businesses say
their major difficulty with welfare-to-work candidates has centered on child
care and transportation, particularly getting workers to suburban areas where
more jobs are.

   "The challenge for Chicago is that we do not have the transportation in
place," said Georgina Heard, a United Airlines official temporarily heading up
the Chicago land Business Partners, an organization that helps businesses hire
former welfare recipients.

   Although businesses commonly recognize the problems, very few seek assistance
from local agencies that might be able to help them. They are also reluctant to
resolve the problems on their own.

   Most businesses say they don't take the extra steps "because they don't
provide it for their other employees," said Maury Giles, a researcher for
Wirthlin Worldwide, a research and consulting firm in McLean, Va., that works
with the Welfare to Work Partnership.

   Small businesses add they cannot afford the extra personnel hassles or
greater paperwork that might come with employing former welfare recipients.

   As an enticement, the federal government offers a tax credit of up to $8,500
for two years for each former welfare recipient the company hires.

  California led the nation last year with nearly 20,000 workers certified
under the program, and Illinois ranked second, even though it had only 4,145
workers whose employers sought the tax credits, government figures show.

   A survey last year by the Welfare to Work Partnership showed that only 11
percent of its 10,000 member firms use the credit. Most firms said they either
did not know about the program or they did not want to get caught up in the red
tape, according to Giles.

   Since the new welfare policy took effect in 1996, about 4.2 million people
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
have left the welfare rolls, and of these about l.3 million are adults,
according to the government's most recent figures. About 60 percent of these
people have found jobs, say officials with the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.

   What kind of jobs have they landed?

   Government officials are unsure and say studies are under way. But a
nationwide survey of employers published last year by the Urban Institute, a
Washington-based think tank, showed that the jobs being offered to welfare
recipients were paying just slightly better than the $5.15 an hour minimum wage,
and came with limited benefits.

   But officials with the Welfare to Work Partnership are more upbeat, saying
their surveys indicate that the average pay for former welfare recipients making
an hourly wage at their member firms is $7.20 an hour.       .

   "We expected that we would tap into the more traditional businesses: retail
and fast-food operations. But we learned that high-tech and financial service
companies are also interested, and they are establishing solid relationships
with community-based groups," said Luis Vizcaino, an official with the
Washington-based Welfare to Work Partnership.

   The group's surveys of its members also show a steady increase in the number
of firms who say that the retention rate of former welfare recipients is the
same or higher than for their other workers. In its latest survey in February,
that figure grew to 65 percent of the firms surveyed, up from 48 percent a year
ago.

   Much of the success in getting businesses involved and drumming up public
support comes from the energy extended by the five large firms that launched the
Welfare to Work Partnership: United Parcel Service, Burger King, Sprint, St.
Louis-based Monsanto, and United Airlines of Elk Grove Township.

   In United's case, it has taken on 1,300 former welfare recipients so far and
set a goal of2,000 hires by the end of the year. The airline also has loaned
out company officials to help either with national or local welfare-to-work
efforts.

   Gerald Greenwald, the chairman and chief executive officer of United's
parent, UAL Corp., is the chairman of the board of the Welfare to Work
Partnership.

  As the business group preaches, some firms have, indeed, gone out of their
way.
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

   To help Rosetta Dunbar, 29, hold a job at the Jefferson facility on Chicago's
Near South Side, UPS officials put her on the late-night shift nearly three
years ago. That allowed her to use her regular baby-sitter.

   Before, Dunbar, who has been on and off welfare since she was 18, could not
hold a steady job because she did not have a reliable source of child care.

   The $10.25 an hour job at UPS has since changed her world. "I have bought a
car, and I moved out of the neighborhood," she said.

   Faced with no mass transit links to the massive 6,000-worker facility in
suburban Hodgkins, UPS officials also were able a year and a half ago to
persuade PACE officials to route some buses to the facility's front door.

    The result, UPS officials say, is that they have been able to hire more
fonner welfare recipients who commute. UPS hired 1,706 fonner welfare recipients
in the Chicago area last year.

   Yet Engineered Plastics Inc., a small, 70-worker manufacturing finn in
Menomonee Falls, Wis., which is about seven miles from Milwaukee, can't overcome
the commuting hurdle.

   "I could hire another 10 if we had the transportation," said Nancy
Schwochert, a company official. Her company has hired three workers through the
Milwaukee YWCA, which has set up a program to assist welfare recipients and
businesses.

   Jack Webster also would like to hire fonner welfare recipients, and he
enlisted four other small manufacturing finns in Chicago's northern and
                                          western suburbs in his quest.

  Nothing has happened, but Webster, chainnan of Webster Hoff Corp. in suburban
Glendale Heights, is hopeful.

    The problem is not only transportation, but finding the right people and then
training them, he said. His company hired several fonner welfare recipients, but
none could keep the job. Now he is working with a job-training agency in
Chicago, hoping it can set up a suburban branch.

   To the Wyndham Hotels' Roy Mendoza, making an extra effort has paid off.

   Mendoza has hired three fonner welfare recipients from Chicago for suburban
hotels. He has sought help from local agencies to screen and train applicants
and says he has gone out of the way to accommodate the workers.
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

   That has meant adjusting workers' hours to meet bus schedules or paying for
them to take a taxi to attend training classes at another suburban Wyndham
Hotel. It has meant allowing them to bring a child to work if their child-care
plans fall through.

   Rather than disciplining employees with job problems, hotel managers also
have relied on the agencies that placed the workers to resolve their problems.

  Mendoza's effort is a pilot venture that has already had a broader impact.
The company plans to hire dozens more former welfare recipients for its new
downtown Chicago hotel, which opens in April.

   And Mendoza is confident it will work out.

   "These workers' attendance is better than regular employees'," he said.
"Their performance is usually higher. And they have more of a buy-in. They feel
they were given an opportunity they wouldn't normally have gotten."

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS 2 GRAPHICPHOTO (color): Rosetta Dunbar had been on and off
welfare for more than a decade; at UPS, she now makes nearly twice the minimum
wage. Tribune photo by Terry Harris.; PHOTO: Roy Mendoza of Wyndham Hotels says
he has made accommodations for some employees formerly on welfare, and it has
paid off. Tribune photo by James Prisching.; GRAPHIC: The decline in welfare
caseloads; Source: Department of Health and Human Services.; Chicago Tribune; -
See microfilm for complete graphic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

LOAD-DATE: March 21,1999


