RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I       )

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-MAR-1999 14:46:42.00

SUBJECT:   Voucher bill passes in Florida House

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Bethany Little ( CN=Bethany Little/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I    )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
An article from the Miami Herald follows on Jeb Bush's "A-Plus" school
reform bill -- which passed the Florida House yesterday and calls for:
- annual testing in grades 3-10,
- a prohibition on social promotion, ratings for public schools,
- tougher standards for teacher certification and extra money for those
who score well,
- monetary rewards for excellent and improving schools,
- freedom from regulations for the top-rated schools,
- changes to fix failing schools, and
- allowing students attending failing schools to either attend a
better-rated public school or use a state voucher to attend a private
school (including religious schools)

It faces a bigger fight in the Florida Senate, but is expected to pass.
The bill would make Florida the first with a statewide offering of tuition
vouchers.


Miami Herald
3/24 9:32 pm

The question of
             state-paid tuition for private schools will be
             answered along party lines, the Republicans
             running the Legislature rallying around Gov.
             Jeb Bush's plan, while Democrats warn of the
             demise of public education.

             The public already has cast its vote, Republican sponsors
said on the House floor
             Wednesday: Floridians last year electing Bush, with his
campaign pledge to
             overhaul the schools. But Democrats, losing the voucher batt
le in the Legislature
             this spring, hope to hang it around the necks of Republicans
in elections ahead.

             For children in "failing"      public schools, Republican
lawmakers are ready to open


               doors to private schooling with state-paid tuition.

               In the' 'opportunity scholarships"  that the House stands
  ready to approve today --
               the Senate expected to follow soon -- supporters see a new
  source of competition
               and motivation for improving schools.

               "We are issuing a challenge to public education,"   said Rep.
  Alex Diaz de la
               Portilla, sponsor of a bill debated all-day in the House
  Wednesday, separating
               Republicans and Democrats like warring Revolutionary armies.

                "If you educate children, there will be no opportunity
  scholarships, " said Diaz de la
                Portilla, R-Miami. "If you do. not educate children, we will
  have to respond. It will
                be our moral obligation to give those children an alternative
  to the school in which
                they are failing."

               Opponents: Plan robs children

               Opponents say this will only rob children, and money, from
  the public schools that
               need the most help -- and enable' 'fly-by-night" private
  schools to open as
               state-funded magnets for families fleeing public schools.

               "This is really a sad day for the families of children in
  the public schools, " Rep.
               Lois Frankel, D-West Palm Beach, told the House. "It is the
  public schools that
               are the underpinning of democracy. When we take money from
  the public schools,
               we are undermining the democracy of this country. ' ,

               For Bush, who campaigned with a promise to pursue his
  "A-Plus"   plan for
               education, the Republican-run Legislature's response
  represents a promise fulfilled.
               Votes on controversial amendments wednesday were defeated
  almost strictly
               along party lines -- most Republicans upholding the bill,
  most Democrats fighting it.
               The Senate's Education committee approved its version this
  week by 6-4, also
               along party lines.

               Opponent Rep. Larcenia Bullard, D-South Dade, asked why
  lawmakers aren't
               seeking a statewide referendum on legislation so
  far-reaching. "It was on the
               ballot, " Diaz de la Portilla replied, "when now-Gov. Jeb
  Bush made it a
               cornerstone of his campaign. ' ,

               "This is something I have been advocating for a long time, ' ,
  said Bush, following


               the debate with pride on a television in his office. "It's
  kind of the full circle. You
               advocate, you fight for your beliefs, you try to draw support
  for it, and you see all
               these people implementing it . . . . It's exciting."

               A future albatross for GOP?

               Democrats, losing the vote, hope to saddle the Republican
  Party with vouchers in
               next year's elections. Like the impeachment of President
  Clinton, one leader
               hopes, vouchers could become an albatross for the GOP once
  people start to see
               the impact of the governor's plan.

               "They weren't listening during the impeachment process, and
  now they are not
               listening at the state level,"   Senate Democratic Leader
  Buddy Dyer, D-Orlando,
               told fel,low senators during a Democratic caucus Wednesday.

               The governor's plan proposes new measures of progress for all
  public schoolers
               and the schools they attend. With annual testing in grades 3
  through 10 -- sitting
               for a tough, new Florida Comprehensive Assessment test -- the
  state will start
               assigning grades to the schools themselves.

               The bill (CS for H 751) prohibits' 'social promotion"
  preventing advancement
               from one grade to the next for students who fall short of
  what is expected of them.
               It proposes tougher standards for teacher certification, and
  additional money -- 5
               percent more -- for teachers whose students score well.

               For schools A-graded and improving, the legislation offers
  additional money, $100
               for every student, to be spent as principals see fit. It
  frees the top-rated public
               schools from much regulation.

               For schools F-graded and slipping, it proposes changes -- new
  curriculum, new
               faculty, money for smaller classes, whatever it takes to
  boost the school's grades.
               And for children in these schools, it offers an option of
  attending a higher-scoring
               public school, or attending a private school with state-paid
  tuition -- the
                , 'opportunity scholarship. ' ,

               The state will offer a private school somewhat more than
  $4,000 in tuition for a
               typical student -- much more for kids with special needs,
  such as learning
           .   disabilities. The state will bar private schools from collect
  ing any additional tuitions,


                and p


