       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR:. Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

       CREATION DATE/TIME:26-MAR-1999 09:33:40.00

       SUBJECT:   Complete Weekly Report 3/26

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
       READ:UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
       ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

       TEXT:
       Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D91]MAIL416973799.036 to ASCII,
        The following is a HEX DUMP:

       FF575043480FOOOOOI0A020100000002050000001863000000020000E33B594F629077396BE78F
       F463CEFDFA5F904734E44602F4705FDBB7F6C71C6117B4D3AE9B654FFE477709BE0232DC77536E
       31D07808CE6ACIDE968BAC5E08FB71024C2AF174F7A669718AC98B07D388457B4DIDC5474E0600
       8A9453C8064BE5D0416AF998E7544D282594B7CC002622FD3456DF62EC42CE897BD25E262E5B20
       01F9C31F5CB54B953D4B04C13AB2B9BB88B5CA2C2DE601ECE951499OEB7C558E49ED69F4FACE8E
       C536B41BF5A8A2C004977496C52CODAA2C82FCB3C28FC41666A590E8C681109327148639CEC390
       A90821BF7EIBC62F4E324C7BOF4978CCC618876C5974CD9610577142B3615D73957FABB5CE3F24
       D5B6B7999D5222DF90E58E4859B2BE02960830591165A0427561E9B79F46A36379C2946988C7A7
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion



                                          March 27, 1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                      Bruce Reed .
                           Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:                   DPC Weekly Report

        Health Care -- Update on our organ donation effort:. We have just received a
report that there has been a significant but still inadequate increase in organ donation rates (a
six percent increase as opposed to one percent over the past two years) as a result of the
Administration's recently implemented regulation to increase organ donations. We believe
this success will be augmented as public attention to this increases, as the number of public
figures -- including retired NFL football star Walter Payton -- have developed conditions that
require organ transplants. There is great interest in the organ donation advocacy community
for you to highlight this problem sometime in the next three weeks. You could announce a
$5 million grant program and some major private sector commitments from AFL-CIO, the
VA W, Aetna Health Plans, and Kaiser Permanente at such an event to coincide with National
Organ and Tissue Donor Awareness Week.

         Health Care -- Actions to prevent the inappropriate use of physical restraints in
institutional settings: On Thursday, Senators Lieberman and Dodd announced their plan to
introduce the Freedom From Restraint Act of 1999, which prohibits hospitals and mental
health facilities participating in the Medicare and Medicaid program from imposing physical
restraints except upon the written order of a physician and only when necessary to ensure the
physical safety of the patient or of other patients. (In 1987, legislation was enacted to prevent
inappropriate physical and chemical restraints in nursing homes.) This legislation was
inspired by a series of cases in Connecticut during October of 1998 in which several mentally
ill children residing in psychiatric institutions died after being inappropriately restrained by
facility staff. However, we have received reports of similar abuses nationwide. In addition
to indicating your initial support for this legislative effort, we have directed HHS to expedite a
regulation that administratively extends these protections to acute care, psychiatric,
rehabilitation, long term care, and children's hospitals participating in the Medicare program,
program and intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded, and institutions of mental
disease participating in the Medicaid program. The only facilities we believe require explicit
new statutory authority are hospices and residential care facilities for children. If there is
interest, we may want to have you highlight this regulation when it becomes final later this
summer.
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                    2

        Health Care -- Update on Medicare: Despite the failure of Republicans to attract
any Democrats beyond Senators Breaux and Kerrey to their Medicare amendment (criticizing
your surplus policy and supporting the Breaux-Thomas proposal), it is clear that Senator
Daschle and the moderate Democrats need and strongly desire an alternative Medicare plan.
In contrast, the House Democrats have little or no appetite for a serious Medicare reform
proposal. Our meeting with the House Democratic leadership on Wednesday made it clear
that they view any policy that could be defined as reform with grave suspicion. The
challenge of developing a politically viable policy is to balance the need for credible reform
with the equally challenging need to not totally alienate our Democratic base. Interestingly,
both proponents and opponents of reform are increasingly wary of placing traditional provider
cuts on the table. As the Medicare trustees report will no doubt show when it is unveiled
next Tuesday, projected Medicare spending has significantly declined and incoming revenues
have significantly increased. These trends will no doubt significantly push out the solvency
date of the Medicare program and will also decrease any appetite for traditional provider
reductions as Congress will be responsive to provider complaints that they have already made
a major contribution to the health of the trust fund. The inability to attract much support for
provider savings will make it difficult to find offsetting savings to pay for a prescription drug
benefit, thus placing event greater pressure to look towards the surplus to make a significant
contribution towards the cost of any such benefit. Immediately following the release of the
trustees report, NEC / DPC will request the actuary to do a series of cost estimates for
Medicare policy reform options that we are contemplating for your review. We anticipate
that in the interim we will work with Senator Daschle and his moderate Democrats to
determine their definition of serious and acceptable reforms.

        Education -- Ed-Flex. Both the Senate and House have now appointed conferees to
work out differences in the two bills. This week, 205 members of the House --
overwhelmingly Democrats -- voted in favor of a motion to direct conferees to eliminate the
Jeffords-Lott class size provision that would allow local districts to spend already
appropriated class size funding for special education. The Senate Democrats have 31 of the
34 signatures they are seeking on a letter recommending a veto of the Ed-Flex bill if the
Jeffords-Lott provision is not dropped. OMB is preparing a letter from Jack Lew to the
conferees to convey that your senior advisors would recommend a veto if the class size
provision remains in the bill and to reiterate support for strengthened accountability to ensure
that waivers lead to increased student achievement. Secretary Riley will also send a letter to
the conferees echoing those concerns and providing additional detailed comments about the
House and Senate bills.

        Education -- Charter schools and desegregation: An op-ed by Clint Bolick in the
Wall Street Journal this week attacked Bill Lann Lee for "waging a war" against charter
schools through Justice Department civil rights investigations into a few proposed charter
schools in Louisiana communities under desegregation orders. The editorial criticized Justice
Department efforts to either block the creation of charter schools or require additional steps to
create diverse student populations, and suggested that pro-charter school Democrats shouldn't
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion      3

support Lee's nomination. The Justice Department has conducted a number of investigations
to ensure that charter schools comply with existing desegregation orders or consent decrees.

This week, we discussed and rejected sending an immediate White House response to Bolick's
op-ed -- mostly because of a belief that this could hurt rather than help Lee's confinnation, and
to some extent because we are still reviewing how to handle and communicate the
Administration's civil rights enforcement policy for charter schools. At an Education
Department conference last week, it became clear that there is some concern among the
charter school community that rigid enforcement of desegregation orders could block the
creation of charter schools in predominantly minority neighborhoods that might reverse
desegregation efforts by leading minority parents to take their children out of more integrated
schools. There are also concerns that desegregation orders could be used by recalcitrant
school districts to block the creation of charter schools. Meanwhile, the Justice Department
and Education Department Office of Civil Rights are concerned that some charter schools
could indeed reverse desegregation efforts, and the Education Department has developed draft
guidance to be disseminated nationally on these issues. DPC, WH Counsel's office, Justice
and Education Departments will meet next week to discuss this guidance, and the issues
raised in it.

        Tobacco -- Florida Teen. Smoking: Cigarette smoking in Florida declined in every
grade since the state began its anti-smoking campaign last year, according to a study released
this week. The state-sponsored survey found cigarette use declined 19 percent among middle
school students and 8 percent among high schoolers. Florida spent $71 million of its tobacco
settlement dollars on this campaign last year (about 13 percent of the total), a third on a
counteradvertising campaign and the rest on community and school based programs. Nine
out of ten youth surveyed were aware of the edgy advertising campaign, dubbed the "truth"
campaign by teens who helped develop it (the CDC has made many of these ads available to
other states who want to air them). There's currently a big fight in Tallahassee over the
program's funding levels for next year -- while the Governor's budget contained $61.5
million, the Republican House appropriated no funds and the Democratic Senate included $50
million.

        Workforce Investment Act Rule: In early April, the Department of Labor will
publish an interim final rule to implement the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) you signed
last August to refonn the nation's job training system. The rule provides guidance to states
and communities to help implement key provisions of the law including the development of a
network of comprehensive One-Stop Career Centers that provide a single point of entry to a
wide range of employment services for job seekers and employers. When the program is
fully implemented, DOL expects that there will be at least 2,500 such One-Stop centers.
Currently there are about 1,000 state and local variations of one-stops, but none of them are as
comprehensive as what is envisioned under WIA. The rule will also implement Individual
Training Accounts to provide individuals with access to quality job training of their choice.
Consistent with the goal of consolidating and streamlining job training programs, the new
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                     4

 regulation is approximately half the length of the old rule it replaces. DOL has coordinated
 with other federal agencies in developing this rule, and has consulted broadly with state and
 local government, key Congressional committees, and other stakeholders. While states have
 until July 2000 to fully implement the Act, a handful of states are expected to file their state
 plans shortly. We will work with DOL to identify any potential announcements.
         Welfare Reform -- Economist article: We thought you might like to see the
 attached Economist article highlighting the Welfare to Work Partnership'S success and
 chronicling how welfare reform "has worked better than anyone dared hope." The article
 notes that there are challenges ahead -- particularly in large cities where caseloads are falling
 more slowly -- and mentions some of your welfare to work budget initiatives.

 NOTE TO Elena: Unfortunately, the picture accompanying the actual Economist article is not
 as upbeat as the article (shows a woman and her kids who appear to be living in one small
 room). We can either send this, or use the Lexus version without the picture. We've
 provided both so you can choose.

         Welfare Reform -- Urban Caseloads: You sent us a note saying we should do more
 to strengthen welfare to work efforts in cities with slower caseload declines. We wanted to
 report on two efforts now underway. The Department of Labor just launched a two-year
 technical assistance initiative to help 10 large cities (Boston, Houston, Detroit, Philadelphia,
 Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, Seattle, New Orleans, and Minneapolis) develop strategies
 to move hard-to-employ welfare recipients into good jobs, with an emphasis on job retention
 and advancement and ensuring close coordination between the welfare and workforce
 systems. Teams from these cities are meeting together for the first time next week. The
 Welfare to Work Partnership has a targeted effort in 30 cities with high poverty rates and large
 concentrations of welfare recipients, including Atlanta, Baltimore, Chicago, Los Angeles,
 Miami, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. In August, the
 Partnership is holding a major convention in Chicago for delegations from these cities; this
 could be a good opportunity to mark the third anniversary of the welfare law and Eli Segal
 hopes you will participate.

          You also asked whether the slower rate of caseload decline in some cities is related to
  unemployment. In general, those cities with slower rates of caseload decline did have higher
. unemployment rates. For example, El Paso, Los Angeles, New York, and Philadelphia had
  the slowest caseload declines and three of the four had central city unemployment rates above
·7% in August 1998 when the caseload decline was measured (Philadelphia's rate of 5.9% was
  also well above the national average of 4.5%). However, Baltimore and Cleveland had high
  unemployment, but also had somewhat greater caseload declines.

         Welfare -- Food Assistance: You asked what we could do to ensure that families
 obtain food assistance, in light of reports that more working families are seeking help from
 private food banks. We are working to address these issues on two fronts: first to ensure
 states follow the food stamp law and provide assistance to all eligible individuals who seek
                                                                            Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                                                       5

assistance; and second, to develop and implement new initiatives to make the food stamp
program more accessible to working families.

        We have taken numerous steps in recent months to ensure states follow the food stamp
law. USDA has launched investigations of state and local practices, including an inquiry in
New York City which found local welfare offices were not allowing individuals to apply for
food stamps on their first visit to the office. (USDA has issued a formal warning and will
impose penalties if these practices are not changed. Meanwhile, a U.S. District Court judge
has issued an injunction and has required the city to provide a corrective action plan, which
remains sealed.) At the same time, USDA issued formal guidelines to every state reminding
them of their obligations to ensure that applicants are aware of their right to file an application
for food stamps, process applications in a timely manner, and continue food stamp benefits
when TANF benefits are denied or terminated.

       In addition to these enforcement actions, we are working with USDA and others to
develop and implement efforts to make food stamps more available to eligible families.
Historically, individuals with earned income who are eligible for food stamps have been about
half as likely to obtain them as individuals receiving cash assistance. There are several
possible reasons for this. First, individuals with earnings are eligible for far less in food
stamps and they may decide the amount is not worth it. For example, the monthly food
stamp allotment for a family of three with a $300 weekly income and $500 monthly rent is
$40. When the same family reaches weekly eamings of $342, the household is no longer
eligible. Second, families need to follow somewhat cumbersome procedures to report their
earnings to the food stamp office and it is often difficult for working families to get to this
office during open hours.

        We are currently working with USDA and OMB to devise administrative proposals to
help address these and other potential barriers and we will provide you with an analysis of our
options soon. While some of the options under consideration can be implemented through
regulation, they may cost several hundred million dollars. In order to ensure we maintain our
commitment to saving the surplus, we must enact other regulations saving a comparable
amount -- a requirement OMB imposes on an agency-by-agency basis (e.g., USDA savings
must pay for new USDA costs). These regulatory offsets could be difficult to obtain.

       In addition to possible administrative actions, we will be working to enact the
proposals in this year's budget to increase funds for food stamp outreach (the budget contains
$3.5 million to provide a 50 percent federal match for activities including media campaigns
and distributing informational materials at various community locations such as shelters,
senior centers, and churches) and to provide $60 million for eligibility for an additional
15,000 legal immigrants who become elderly after their pre-1996 arrival. (The Agricultural
Research Act restored benefits to those elderly as of 1996, as well as children, people with
disabilities, and refugees.)




                                                                               Aulomo!!ld Records Management System
                                                                                        HelC·Oump Conversion
                                                                                                        6

            Drunk Driving -- .08 BAC studies: The Department of Transportation is planning
    to release three studies next week on the effects of lowering the illegal blood alcohol
    concentration (BAC) from .10% to .08%. Two of the three studies show that .08 BAC laws
    have a deterrent effect on drinking and driving, particularly in conjunction with other drunk
    driving laws and programs such as administrative license revocation (where police
    immediately suspend the driver's license of a driver arrested for DWI). The third study which
    looked at .08 BAC in a single state (NC) found no statistically significant impact of the law in
    drunk driving crashes.

           (1) Nationwide study: This study looked at the effects of illegal per se BAC laws (.08
           BAC and .10 BAC) and administrative license revocation (ALR) laws in all 50 states
           over a I6-year period. The study estimated that .08 BAC laws resulted in 275 fewer
           fatalities in the 16 states with .08 BAC laws in effect in 1997, and estimates that an
           additional 590 lives could have been saved in 1997 if all 50 states had .08 laws.

           (2) Eleven-state study: This multi-state study analyzed the impact of .08 BAC and
           ALR laws and found that .08 BAC laws were associated with significant reductions in
           alcohol-related fatalities in five of the 11 states studied (VT, KS, NC, FL, NM). Two
           other states (V A, CA) registered reductions following the adoption of both .08 BAC
           and ALR laws. The remaining four states did not have statistically significant drops
           in their alcohol-related fatalities.

           (3) North Carolina study: This study found little separate effect of a .08 BAC law in
           North Carolina even though the state recorded a modest reduction alcohol-related
           deaths during the study period. North Carolina has an aggressive enforcement
           program, with the .08 law just one of the steps they have taken to help decrease in
           drunk driving deaths. The finding of this study conflicts with the II-state study cited
           above, which indicates a positive impact of the .08 BAC law in the state in reducing
           alcohol-related deaths.

            The three independent studies were commissioned by the National Highway
    Transportation Safety Administration (NHTSA). On a related note, the GAO is about to
    release a review of a number of .08 BAC studies, including the three listed here. The GAO
    review will criticize the methodologies used in earlier NHTSA studies, but confirm the
    soundness of the new studies. The GAO will conclude that .08 BAC laws can be effective in
    reducing alcohol-related deaths in combination with other laws, particularly ALR.
,
