RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Daniel W. Burkhardt ( CN=Daniel W. Burkhardt/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO I )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-MAR-1999 15:26:01.00

SUBJECT:   letter to faith leaders

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD I ) .
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert B. Johnson ( CN=Robert B. Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO I   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Ben/Elena: Maureen Shea and Debi Mohile would like to send out the
following letter early next week to leaders in their communities.  Can you
please get back to me with comments/clearance? Thanks.

"Dear Faith Community Leader:

I am pleased to send greetings to you and your community as you celebrate
this sacred season.   For Christians, Muslims, and Jews this is a special
time of year -- for some a season of renewal and new beginnings, for
others a time to atone for sins and to recognize that we are called to
forgiveness and love.

In keeping with the spirit of this season, I ask you to speak to your
community about hate crimes and ask your members to pray and work together
to bring an end to such crimes.  We all must recognize that, while murders
like those of James Byrd and Matthew Shepard are noteworthy because of
their particularly heinous nature, hate crimes are not unique. These
crimes cut across all racial, religious, ethnic, gender, sexual
orientation, and socioeconomic lines. And the seeds of hatred are sown
through every medium, including the Internet.   In fact, the Internet
contains more than 1,400 sites that promote racism, violence, hate music,
or neo-Nazis, or that are anti-Semitic, anti-gay, anti-Catholic, or
anti-Muslim.

As President, I have proposed legislation that would strengthen existing
federal hate crimes law by: (1) expanding the Department of JusticeO,s
jurisdiction to prosecute defendants for violent crimes based on race,
color, religion, or national origin; and (2) authorizing the DOJ to
prosecute individuals who commit violent crimes against others because of
the victimO,s sexual orientation, gender, or disability.  I will also
continue to speak out vigorously against these crimes.

As a faith leader, you playa unique role in the lives not only of the
followers of your faith but of the members of our larger community.  I ask
you to use your special place to help guide all Americans in understanding
their own hearts and actions as well as in learning what they can do to
bring communities together."
.'
