 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 26-MAR-1999 18:54:49.00

 SUBJECT:   the lurch I leave you in

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 This is my LAST CHANCE to leave you in the lurch by going on vacation, so
 I thought I'd do a quick inventory of loose ends before I go.  Hopefully,
 by the time I come back, your escape plan will be fully operational.

 On the race book, I leave it to your best judgment what to tell Todd on
 paper and what to convey in other ways.  I don't want to blow things up
 just for the fun of it (especially if I'm not going to be in town when the
 counterattack begins).  We don't have to pull our punches, but you can
 probably find a way to say most of what I said in a less incendiary way.
 Todd is obviously sympathetic and seems to want our help.  If you want me
 to look at something, I·can -- otherwise feel free to sign my name to what
 ever you think is appropriate.

 On profiling, Jose is pushing, and Eddie agrees with our approach, but
 Jose is running into some Edley-sown confusion at DOJ, OMB, and
 elsewhere. You may need to intervene with Eric and Jim again.   Maybe
 Kosovo and the NYC indictments relieve a little of the immediate time
 pressure (I haven't heard if Sharpton's march is still on for next
 Saturday. )

  [The crime bill seems pretty much on track. Jose has made progress with
 the CBC. He hasn't had time yet to do the gun memo.)

 On ed-flex, I talked. to Roemer's COS, Mark Brown, about our needing to
 send a views letter on ed-flex. He didn't seem troubled -- but I couldn't
 get hold of. Roemer himself.  You might check in again with Brown
 (225-3915) before we send the letter. I don't think we have any choice
 but to send one -- we just need Roemer to understand that we won't make it
 a press hit. The Senate Dems have 35 signatures on a letter, but they're
 going to save it until the conferees meet and only use it if they really
 need it.   (On the views letter itself, it's in Barbara's court to
 determine who signs -- Lew or Riley.   I think we'd prefer Lew, so it can
 be a sr advisers threat rather than just a secretarial one.)

 On tobacco, just hope the supp fades away. Matt is working on a recess
 strategy of editorials and targeted members. sound familiar?   (At DOJ,
 Ogden went on vacation this week. Perelli told me they were close to
 wrapping things up with Ciresi, but I didn't hear anything more.)

 On ESEA, Tanya is supposed to schedule a couple of meetings
 Hispanic/bilingual, NEA/AFT, and a general rollout strategy mtg.  I sent
 you Cecilia's memos on Texas.  I left her two messages, and when I didn't
 hear back, told her to call you next week. Mike said the La Raza proposal
 on independent assessments might work.  I'll call you early in the week to
 brainstorm some more on this one.  In the meantime, Tanya has told DoEd
 not to release the social promotions guide.
~-----------------------P6-«b-)(6-)----------------------~1                   [oolj




                                  P6/(b)(6)




 Thanks for bailing me out one last time!


