     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:30-MAR-1999 17:16:09.00

     SUBJECT:   Teacher Quality article in ED Week

     TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Bethany Little ( CN=Bethany Little/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     ED Week - 3/3/99

     Faced with a proposal requiring that schools notify parents if a child's
     class was
                      being taught by "an uncertified or inappropriately
     certified individual," the Texas
                      school board reacted decisively this month. It voted 12-0
     to reject the
                      measure, which the state's teacher-certification board
     had hoped would call
                      greater attention to the pervasiveness of so-called
     out-of-field teaching.

                      The resistance the plan ran into underscores just how
     tough it would be to
                      eliminate the long-running, albeit lamented, practice.
     Not only is the issue linked
                      inextricably to the market forces affecting the big
     demand for new teachers, . i t
                      also raises fundamental questions about what constitutes
     a qualified educator.

                      In debating the Texas measure, which elicited
                      three abstentions along with the 12 negative
                      votes, some state board members said the word
                      "inappropriately" sounded too vague. Others
                      feared maligning teachers who hadn't earned a
                      certificate but still knew their subject matter, like an
     aeronautical engineer
                      brought in to teach physics. And many asked why they
     should force districts to
                      make themselves look bad, when schools are just making
     the best of a difficult
                      situation.

                        "People who want this rule are trying to say that


superintendents are passing
                 over certified people to hire uncertified ones," board
member Grace Shore
                 said. "From what I hear, they're doing their best, but
they simply can't find
                 them. "

                 Out-of-field teaching, many national education experts
agree, is a problem that
                 defies simple solutions.

                  "We can't solve it just by telling people: 'Don't assign
teachers to subjects they
                  aren't prepared to teach,' " said willis D. Hawley, the
executive director of the
                  National Partnership for Excellence and Accountability in
Teaching, a federally
                  funded research initiative aimed at improving the quality
of teaching. "The
                  responsibility that we all have is to understand that
this is a complex problem,
                  and it has to be addressed on several different levels."

                 A Secret Exposed

                  Education groups have long called out-of-field teaching
the "dirty little secret" of
                  America's schools, but it's gained urgency with recent
forecasts that the country
                  must hire 2 million new teachers in the next decade.
Coupled with that
                  challenge are international comparisons showing u.S. high
school students
                  lagging behind their peers in many industrialized
countries, a connection u.S.
                  Secretary of Education Richard W. Riley made in his State
of American
                  Education Address last month.

                 "Foreign education ministers who visit me are just
stumped when I try to
                 explain this practice," he said. "Their translators
simply have no words to
                 describe it."

                 Some education experts go so far as to say it's   no
coincidence that the u.S.
                 rankings on the Third International Mathematics   and
Science Study drop after
                 the 4th grade. Generally considered an issue of   teachers'
knowledge of
                 academic content, out-of-field teaching doesn't   become a
major problem until
                 the middle grades, when schools departmentalize   subjects.

                 President Clinton lambasted the practice in his State of
the union Address this
                 year, declaring that "in too many schools, teachers don't
have college
                 majors--or even minors, in the subjects they teach."



                 Recent research does show the practice is rampant.
Richard M. Ingersoll, a
                 sociologist at the University of Georgia in Athens, has
analyzed U.S.
                 Department of Education data and found that in every
subject, large numbers of
                 teachers are leading classes for which they lack even the
equivalent of a college
                 minor.

                  Nationwide, for example, he found that about 28 percent
of high school
                 mathematics teachers have neither a major nor a minor in
math, and 18 percent
                 of all science teachers are similarly deficient in their
preparation. Previous
                 Education Department analyses indicated that the practice
was most prevalent
                 in poor and urban districts.

                  In most professions or services,   "that sort of behavior
would be called
                 consumer fraud," argues John Cole, the president of the
Texas Federation of
                 Teachers, an American Federation of Teachers affiliate.

                  By What Measure?

                 The state-level picture, however, is often painted in
ways that seem less
                 alarming. Some states, Mr. Ingersoll points out, allow
teachers to be assigned
                 out-of-field as long as it's not for the majority of the
day. Also, many states
                 define an out-of-field teacher as one who lacks state
certification, which
                 sometimes doesn't specify a college minor or major.

                 For example, while Georgia education officials report
that just 8 percent of the
                 state's high school science teachers don't hold a science
certificate, Mr.
                 Ingersoll's analysis shows that 18 percent of them lack a
science major or
                 minor--about the same as the nation as a whole.

                 The view gets even gloomier when Mr. Ingersoll examines
the types of science
                 majors and minors teachers have. In Georgia, he says,
only about 66 percent of
                 high school educators teaching a physical science
class--such as physics--have
                 at least the equivalent of a college minor in a physical
science.

                 Georgia is trying to improve the situation through the
work of its P-16 Council,
                 a task force of leaders from pre-K-12 and higher
education institutions. The


                   group includes Georgia's Professional Standards
Commission, which sets
                   teacher-certification rules, and the state university
sys tem' s board of regents. By
                   June, it plans to have drafted a long-range strategy for
ensuring that all Georgia
                   teachers are adequately prepared for the classes they
teach.

                 Margaret M. Torrey, the standards commission's executive
secretary, said she
                 hopes the focus isn't only on how many teachers majored
or minored in a
                 subject. In addition to content knowledge, she said, tea
chers need significant
                 training in how to instruct students.

                 "The public often thinks that content is enough," she
said. "But it isn't. So I hope
                 that in all this discussion about out-of-field teaching,
we don't go overboard."

                 Through the P-16 Council, the standards commission and
the state university
                 system expect to design new teacher education courses
specifically for middle
                 school educators who missed sufficient coursework in
either math or science.
                 Though inadequate to qualify for a major or a minor, the
courses would give
                 teachers additional knowledge of both content and
pedagogy to teach middle
                 school students.

                 And yet some experts have little faith in either college
coursework or states'
                 current certification requirements.

                  "Those pieces of paper that we pass out don't necessarily
ensure tha t everyone
                  who has them is the most qualified person," said C. Emily
Feistritzer, the
                  president of the Washington-based National Center for
Education Information,
                  a private research organization. "I think there are
better ways to ascertain
                  whether someone is qualified."

                    Ms. Feistritzer favors testing teachers for both their
knowledge    of content and
                    of pedagogy.

                 That sentiment is, in part, why the Texas Board for
Educator Certification is
                 drafting a plan to make the state's certification exams/
more rigorous.

                   "Our board is interested in certifying competent
indi vidual s, and how they
                   achieve the required knowledge and skills is not as


important to us as whether
                 they have them," said Stephanie Korcheck, the panel's
director of policy and
                 planning.

                 Meanwhile, Texas has made it somewhat more difficult for
districts to misassign
                 teachers. Although it rejected the parent-notification
measure, the state school
                 board did agree to limit to one year the amount of time
that educators may
                 teach subjects for which they have no certification. But
the new rule doesn't
                 apply to teachers on emergency permits, who have up to
three years to
                 become certified.

                    'No Man's Land'

                    At one level, though, there is broad consensus that a
dearth of content
                    knowledge is a major problem in teaching. A 1985 report
by the American
                 Federation of Teachers and the Council for Basic
Education called middle
                 school the "no man's land" of out-of-field teaching, and
recent surveys suggest
                 little has changed since then.

                 Based on a sampling of college transcripts of Georgia
middle school teachers, a
                 recent survey estimated that at least 37 percent of those
teaching math had less
                 than the equivalent of a college minor in the subject.
Among science teachers,
                 about 27 percent were similarly unprepared. A recent
study in Kentucky also
                 showed that fewer than 40 percent of middle school math
teachers there had at
                 least the equivalent of a math minor.

                 Some experts blame the limited amount of requisite
coursework on the way
                 states certify middle school teachers.

                   Georgia, for example, uses a "broad field" middle-grades
certificate. The
                  credential only requires teachers to have concentrated in
college in two of four
                  areas--English, math, social studies, or science--but it
permits them to teach
                  any of those subjects. Under the regulations, a social
studies major who
                  minored in English could be assigned to teach math.

                 Some states' certification rules also allow educators
prepared to teach in
                 elementary school to work in middle school. The Southern
Regional Education
                 Board in December reported that an estimated one-third of


the middle school
                    teachers in its 16 member states hold elementary teaching
licenses.

                 Georgia's university regents last summer proposed
eliminating broad-field
                 middle school certificates. They also called on Georgia's
schools to adopt
                 voluntarily "truth in advertising" policies by which, Ii
ke the rejected Texas
                 measure, they would notify parents of out-of-field
teaching. Neither Georgia
                 proposal has been enacted.

                 "We cannot realistically say to folks that, in a year,
you are not to have anyone
                 in math or science who has not concentrated in those
areas," Ms. Torrey said.
                 "The bodies just aren't there."

                    Making Do

                    But Mr. Ingersoll believes shortages don't explain the
whole problem.

                    An analysis he carried out for an article in this month's
Educational
                    Researcher shows widespread out-of-field teaching even in
disciplines
                    considered to have an abundance of candidates. Nearly 22
percent of high
                 school.English teachers did not have as much as a minor
in the subject. And
                 although 28 percent of the nation's high school math
teachers lack even a minor
                 in that subject, he found that only 16 percent of schools
report having difficulty
                 filling vacant math teaching positions.

                    His hypothesis: Convenience could playa significant role
in teacher
                    misassignment.

                    "It's a problem in how schools are managed and operated,"
Mr. Ingersoll
                    contends.   "The source of out-of-field teaching isn't so
much a lack of
                    coursework and training, but is a   lack of fit between
what teachers are
                    educated or trained in and what they are assigned to
teach. "

                 Many state officials counter that misassignment is rarely
the result of laziness. "I
                 have yet to find a principal, personnel director, or a
superintendent who
                 randomly puts people in classrooms and who doesn't want
what's best for
                 kids," Ms. Torrey said.


                 Instead, administrators often must make the best of it,
as did Principal Melton
                 Callahan at Colquitt County High School, located in
southern Georgia and
                 geographically isolated from the state's largest cities.

                 The administrator was in a bind this year when one of his
math teachers left
                 between semesters and no one certified in the subject
applied for the job. He
                 wound up hiring a teacher with social studies cert
ification. Though not an ideal
                 situation, Mr. Callahan trusted that the woman was a
competent educator
                 because she had done her student-teaching at the school.
He also assigned her
                 one of the school's lowest-level math courses, and she is
working toward the
                 proper certification.

                  "I don't feel these kids are being slighted at all," he
said.  "If we weren't able to
                  use a provisionally certified person, we'd have to use a
substi tute. "

                 Tinkering Not Enough

                 While conceding that many schools do encounter
difficulties hiring the right
                  teacher for every spot, Mr. Ingersoll doubts the problem
is simply that there
                 aren't enough qualified potential candidates. More
likely, he suggests, the
                  teaching jobs that are the toughest to fill just aren't
enticing enough to
                 attract--and keep--amply qualified people.

                 "The way to ensure that we have well-qualified people in
the classroom is to
                 improve the job," he said. "A good, well-paying job is
like a magnet. "

                 It would take a mighty powerful magnet to
                 draw only fully qualified teachers to a place
                 like Southland, a tiny town outside Lubbock
                 where the school system serves just 190
                 students. Its small size, remoteness, and low
                 salaries help explain why someone like Neal
                 wilcox--certified to teach high school
                 biology, physical education, and health--has
                 taught economics, geography, and
                 government there this year.

                 "Everybody out here has to do a lot of extra
                 things," said the 62 -year-old Mr. wilcox,
                 who also coaches basketball, track, and
                 football.

                 Making the best of the situation, he tries to
                 draw on his real-world experiences in


                        teaching social studies, such as his U.S.
                        Army service in the 1950s. and 1960s, when
                        he was stationed in 14 countries, and the
                        period when he ran his own construction
                        business.

                        "with my age and experience and with the materials you've
     got, you're not
                      likely to miss anything," he said. "I'd retire if I
     thought I wasn't being effective at
                      teaching students what I do."

                      Though Southland sounds like an extreme example, some
     experts say school
                      size is a major contributor to out-of-field teaching. Ms.
     Feistritzer says that
                      nearly one-third of American secondary schools enroll
     fewer than 300 students.
                      "So the chances of having only physics majors teaching
     physics in each of those
                      schools is not economically feasible," she said.

                      Technology may offer partial relief for small, isolated
     districts. The Southland
                      system is one of about 60 in the region gaining two-way
     teleconferencing labs,
                      worth $90,000 each, through a state initiative, said
     Southland Superintendent
                      Berhl Robertson. Once in place, the network of labs will
     allow multiple districts
                      to share fully qualified teachers, he said.

                        Ultimately, such creative approaches may go further than
     simply trying to
                      outlaw out-of-field teaching, says Terry K. Dozier, who
     serves as Secretary
                      Riley's special adviser on teaching.

                      "When I travel across the country, what is extremely
     frustrating to me is when
                      people say, 'It's impossible'; it is impossible under the
     current system, but it's
                      not impossible to do," she said. "You can't just tinker
     around the edges. We've
                      got to look at state and local policies, at how we
     license teachers, how we
                      support them, and how we compensate them."


