  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN;Nicole R. Rabner/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME:31-MAR-1999 11:07:20.00

  SUBJECT:   Dodd Amendment on Child Care

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ:UNKNOWN

  TO: Cynthia A. Rice   ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  CC: Neera Tanden ( CN;Neera Tanden/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
  READ:UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  We met yesterday with Jeanne Ireland from Dodd's office and leading child
  care advocates to discuss strategy around the successful Dodd child care
  amendment to the Senate budget resolution.

  Dodd's office reported on a recent meeting with the Dem Senate budget
  staff, who explained what is likely to happen next. The Conference Report
  will direct a certain level of total funding to the Committee of
  jurisdiction (presumably, but apparently not definitively, Finance) for
  all its programs, including mandatory child care dollars. The best case
  scenario is for the Conference Report to include language specifically
  designated additional funds for the child care block grant. But, Jeanne
  reported, the budget staff urged that even without this language, Dodd
  should declare victory on his amendment, because the total dollars
  directed to the Committee could include these additional child care
  dollars.  Either way, we would then collectively turn our attention to
  working the Committee.  Jeanne said that the bills are being conferenced
  on a staff level during recess, and the Conference Report will likely be
  announced the week of April 12th.

  We discussed strategy -- both visibility on the issue and
  behind-the-scenes work -- for the next many weeks.  Jeanne seemed very
  nervous about the White House being highly visible in the short term,
  suggesting that any indication that the R's who voted for the child care
  increase handed the President a victory will doom it to the sidelines.
  She did think it was helpful, however, to continue to raise the importance
  of the issue of child care generally, and even conceded that a carefully
  worded Presidential statement about the leadership of the Senate on a
  bipartisan basis on this issue would be okay, and perhaps advisable.

  I suggest we consider a few things:

  (1) Adding a few sentences as described above to the President's comments
  on the release of the TANF rule (reiterating his commitment to child care,
  lauding the Senate);

  (2) using upcoming appearances by the First Lady to reinforce the
  President's comments and highlight the issue; and

  (3) Developing a behind-the-scenes strategy both for the Conference of the

"
      budget resolution and beyond. Obviously, this will be sensitive due to
      our overall opposition to the budget resolution.  However, I think we
      should consider calls to key Budget House and Senate members (perhaps
      including any amenable Conferees, when they are appointed), as well as
      letters from our Principals urging attention to this issue.

      Perhaps we should call an internal legislative strategy meeting sometime
      next week to discuss further -- Bruce or Elena, do you want to chair?


