          RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL         (NOTES MAIL)

          CREATOR: Laura Emmett      ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]            )

          CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-APR-1999 10:30:35.00

          SUBJECT:    Weekly Report 4/2

          TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
          READ:UNKNOWN

          TEXT:
          ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
          ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

          TEXT:
          Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D9]MAIL48252250P.136 to ASCII,
           The following is a HEX DUMP:

          FF5750435AII00000I0A02010000000205000000F06D0000000200003CB87DD955D6E439471BFB
          2E9B468F0548C4F84D817C28F4017930F4E92ABAAF4C776B9DI04DODA89630D24F5D2A43E3A2CD
          41ACC724D3 52 OF63 2 7F2 7 8A2C6BA4EDBB741C8FO 5 6 91 7 8A67 OA13 7 82 77 5CIB5 2 4EBBD62E4,2 8995
          47F3CAOA2C1504E4B27ED3C9A274F59DC63CIEA6AC2467E7626809AIECBBCA7DE50B531C7ECD27
          055D983D36476AC75598D230B5010D2COD461E24DDCCBE83E945A248BDF3E7BD54CE5BD265ECAA
          FE2818BA7374490A9C9762EIACD04BB917E243D4E5AOA19451CA85BBEE98BODEFEAE3615CCBC97
          48DC79BF8DBA9365D8E7FB3FA848E73EDB9924178867AB79D2FA0762245508F7A5D3C07EDBD7DO
          40F96C473CIBB740F45D7D728E6B2CD4C49C3C83C6DE88D6F08FB59B4A737162358023929112Cl
          F441021AF223BC96995067CF282A74104E3947562A038407274AEIB343D9BCCC7EAC9A8EBIBCA2
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion




                                        March 27, 1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                     Bruce Reed
                          Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:                  DPC Weekly Report

        Health Care -- Democratic Patients' Bill of Rights Event in Philadelphia: Next
Friday, you are scheduled to participate in a multi-state, multi-state Congressional
Democratic event in Philadelphia to receive an Internet-based petition calling for the
Congress to pass a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights. In addition to announcing
this petition, which will already have thousands of participants and is intended to attract
over one million, you can announce the OPM "call letter" that will require all
participating FEHBP insurers to come into full compliance with the patients' bill of
rights. Among other provisions this action will ensure that every FEHBP plan will have
new continuity of care protections. This event, long requested by the Democrats,
provides you with another opportunity to call on the Congress to pass a strong patients'
bill of rights and to contrast it with the weak proposal which was passed out of the
Senate Labor Committee shortly before the recess.

       Health Care -- Response to your request for information on the Medicare annual
cap on patient services: The $1500 cap on Medicare outpatient physical therapy and
other rehabilitative services was included as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
We opposed this because of our concern about the potential adverse impact on
chronically ill beneficiaries. However, Congressman Thomas insisted that it be included
in the final package. Providers and advocates are now arguing that this cap is
problematic and a recent study shows that almost 13 percent of Medicare beneficiaries
exceed the cap each year and are left with significant out-of-pocket expenditures.
Senator Grassley has proposed legislation to allow Medicare beneficiaries to receive
services above the cap if they have an illness that will clearly require additional services.
 However, this proposal may prove to be quite costly. We are requesting that it be
scored and are reviewing alternatives.

       Health Care -- Nationwide Medicare Toll-Free Line: On Thursday, HHS went
nationwide on their new toll-free telephone line, 1-800 MEDICARE, designed to respond
to the numerous questions that beneficiaries have about their new options. Callers can
talk to a customer service representative in English or Spanish to get general
information about Medicare; get updated information about Medicare health plan
options in their community; get specific quality and satisfaction information or other
                                                                                     Hex-6~m~ ~;~~g~%~nt System
                                                                                                    2

complex questions about health care. The new toll-free line is part of the National
Medicare Education Program passed in the Balanced Budget Act, a comprehensive
effort to help Medicare beneficiaries better understand the new health care options that
are part of Medicare+Choice.

        Tobacco -- Next Steps on Medicaid Recoupment: We met this week with our
major public health allies to discuss ways to build support for our proposal to ensure a portion
of the tobacco settlement funds goes to prevent youth smoking. We plan to step up efforts to
generate regional press about the effectiveness of such programs and focus a spotlight on how
little of the tobacco settlement funds states are planning to spend on these efforts in the
absence of federal legislation requiring them to do so. As part of this effort, on Thursday we
drew attention to the CDC publication of the Florida study we described to you last week,
issuing a statement from you which ran in AP stories and The New York Times. We are now
examining more closely information about how states plan to spend tobacco settlement funds
to see which proposals we may want to highlight. For example, a proposal introduced in the
Oklahoma legislature would use the money to eliminate highway tolls, while Louisiana's
governor proposed paying off state debt and funding gene therapy research. Rhode Island's
governor proposed using the first installment of $63 million to balance the state's budget
rather than to combat smoking and improve public health, prompting a heated debate in the
state legislature. Moreover, many states planning to spend the tobacco funds on public health
or tobacco use prevention are only supplanting current spending, thus freeing up unrestricted
funds for other uses.

       Tobacco -- Oregon Verdict: This week, a jury in Oregon ordered Philip Morris
to pay $79.5 million in punitive damages to the family of a man who died of lung cancer
after smoking for 40 years. The jury award of $81 million is the largest liability verdict
ever against the tobacco industry and follows the $51.5 million verdict against the
company earlier this year in a California case. Shares of tobacco companies fell
sharply after the news of the Oregon verdict and continued to fall throughout the week.

         Political Reform--Campaign Finance Reform: There have been some positive signs,
albeit small, that some of the key opponents of campaign finance reform maybe willing to
entertain some possible compromises. Specifically, Mitch McConnell indicated recently that
a soft-money-hard-money trade-off is "worth discussing." Other Republicans have signaled
at least a willingness to consider alternatives. Norm Ornstein believes there maybe a small
window of opportunity to resurrect campaign finance reform if Democrats and Republicans
can reach agreement on raising the $1,000 contribution limit and indexing it for inflation.
Ornstein has proposed a five-point plan that would 1) raise the contribution limit to $3,000
and index it for inflation; 2) end soft money and increase limits on hard-money contributions
to parties; 3) bring greater disclosure to issue advocacy as proposed in the Senators Snowe and
Jeffords amendment which was passed in the Senate last year; 4) bring small donors back to
politics by providing a tax credit for contributions of $1 00 or $200 (the credit was repealed in
1986). In addition, candidates who raise over a threshold of amount of small contributions --
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                   3

like $25,000 in $100 contributions or less -- would become eligible for a voucher program for
broadcast time, half to be paid for by the broadcasters and half by the Federal government.
Under the Ornstein proposal, for every $1,000 in small contributions raised, a candidate would
receive a $500 broadcast voucher. Ornstein is planning to discuss this proposal with the
authors of last year's bipartisan finance reform bill, Senators McCain and Feingold and
Representatives Shays and Meehan. We will be having discussions with Ornstein as well and
will keep you apprised.

       Education -- ED-Flex Legislation: During the recess, Congressional staff are
meeting to attempt to agreement on the provisions of a final bill. Staff from DPC, Leg
Affairs and Education met with House Democratic staff that are seeking our support for a
number of accountability provisions. We will continue to support the accountability
measures that we supported during debate: i.e. provisions that prohibit waivers of the
rank-order targeting provisions of Title I, but we will not take a position in conference on
those that we did not address during debate. We have received indications that the
Republican House staff are in the main prepared for each of the accountability provisions to
accept the stronger of the House or Senate versions. We also understand that House
Republican staff will not take a position on the class size provision that we strongly oppose
(allowing class size funds to be spent on special education). OMB is circulating a letter from
Secretary Riley to the conferees expressing support for the strongest possible accountability
provisions and conveying his recommendation that you disapprove the bill if the class size
provision remains in the final bill.

        Education -- ESEA Social PromotionslLEP: We are continuing to outreach to
various constituency groups (Hispanic education groups, civil rights organizations, NEA,
AFT,) on the ESEA reauthorization and the no-social promotions policy. We are working
with OMB and Education on the applicability of the no-social-promotions policy for LEP
students. Our objective is to craft a policy that will hold schools accountable for the goal of
teaching students English in three years but will not result in holding students back who can
demonstrate academic competence in reading, math and other subject but are not yet
proficient in English. These students should be promoted and continue to receive the
necessary services to bring their English skills up to a proficient level. We are moderately
optimistic that this social promotions policy for LEP students is one that the Hispanic
education community can support.

       Welfare -- Child Support: Upon a review of HHS's policy on prior approval of
computer contracts, the agency discovered that conflicting policies existed within the
Administration and they are now diligently working to rectify those inconsistencies. HHS's
Administration for Children and Families (ACF) requires contracts for child support
enforcement and child welfare computer systems to receive prior federal approval in order to
receive federal reimbursement. States such as California, Hawaii, Kansas, Nevada, and
Pennsylvania have been denied federal match under this policy, and Arkansas and others are
under review. In comparison, HCFA provides for exceptions to this rule if the Medicaid
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                                                                   4

computer contract would have been approved if the request had been made in advance and
that the state institutes controls to ensure that prior approval requirements are made in the
future. USDA also allows retroactive prior approval in certain limited circumstances and
requires the request be made by the head of the state agency. HHS is currently conducting a
thorough legal and budgetary review, but is likely to soon redefine an agency-wide policy that
will be similar to HCFA's.

         Welfare -- GW Study on Diversion Policies: As you know, many states are
experimenting with a variety of strategies to divert families from cash assistance. Next week,
George Washington University will issue the second of its reports funded by HHS which
provides an inventory of state approaches and examines practices in five cities (Atlanta,
Annapolis, Kansas City, Missoula, and Cincinnati). The study finds that the most common
form of diversion requires applicants for welfare to participate in job search before they can
receive cash assistance. While nearly half the states also offer short-term diversion payments
to help families meet short-term financial needs in lieu of going on welfare, these are so far
being used on a very limited basis. The study notes that diversion has the potential to reduce
initial access to Medicaid, especially as families by-pass welfare entirely or go to work so
quickly that they may not qualify for Medicaid under most states' current eligibility criteria.
The study highlights the importance of our Medicaid outreach efforts and our initiatives to
encourage states to take advantage of the flexibility they have under current law to expand
Medicaid eligibility for low-income working families. As you know last month HHS issued
at our request new guidance which makes clear to states that individuals eligible for Medicaid
must be enrolled as soon as they seek assistance, whether or not they are eligible for TANF.
HHS also plans to award research funds to several states or large counties to track what
happens to families who are diverted from the case load, including the extent to which they
continue to participate in Medicaid and other programs to support working families.

        Workforce Investment Act Rule: In early April, the Department of Labor will
publish an interim final rule to implement the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) you signed
last August to reform the nation's job training system. The rule provides guidance to states
and communities to help implement key provisions of the law including the development of a
network of comprehensive One-Stop Career Centers that provide a single point of entry to a
wide range of employment services for job seekers and employers. When the program is
fully implemented, DOL expects that there will be at least 2,500 such One-Stop centers.
Currently there are about 1,000 state and local variations of one-stops, but none of them are as
comprehensive as what is envisioned under WIA. The rule will also implement Individual
Training Accounts to provide individuals with access to quality job training of their choice.
Consistent with the goal of consolidating and streamlining job training programs, the new
regulation is approximately half the length of the old rule it replaces. DOL has coordinated
with other federal agencies in developing this rule, and has consulted broadly with state and
local government, key Congressional committees, and other stakeholders. While states have
until July 2000 to fully implement the Act, a handful of states are expected to file their state
plans shortly. We will work with DOL to identify any potential announcements.

                                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                          5


            Welfare -- Food Assistance: You asked what we could do to ensure that families
    obtain food assistance, in light of reports that more working families are seeking help from
    private food banks. We are working to address these issues on two fronts: first to ensure
    states follow the food stamp law and provide assistance to all eligible individuals who seek
    assistance; and second, to develop and implement new initiatives to make the food stamp
    program more accessible to working families.
            We have taken numerous steps in recent months to ensure states follow the food stamp
    law. USDA has launched investigations of state and local practices, including an inquiry in
    New York City which found local welfare offices were not allowing individuals to apply for
    food stamps on their first visit to the office. (USDA has issued a formal warning and will
    impose penalties if these practices are not changed. Meanwhile, a U.S. District Court judge
    has issued an injunction and has required the city to provide a corrective action plan, which
    remains sealed.) At the same time, USDA issued formal guidelines to every state reminding
    them of their obligations to ensure that applicants are aware of their right to file an application
    for food stamps, process applications in a timely manner, and continue food stamp benefits
    when TANF benefits are denied or terminated.

            In addition to these enforcement actions, we are working with USDA and others to
    develop and implement efforts to make food stamps more available to eligible families.
    Historically, individuals with earned income who are eligible for food stamps have been about
    half as likely to obtain them as individuals receiving cash assistance. There are several
    possible reasons for this. First, individuals with earnings are eligible for far less in food
    stamps and they may decide the amount is not worth it. For example, the monthly food
    stamp allotment for a family of three with a $300 weekly income and $500 monthly rent is
    $40. When the same family reaches weekly earnings of $342, the household is no longer
    eligible. Second, families need to follow somewhat cumbersome procedures to report their
    earnings to the food stamp office and it is often difficult for working families to get to this
    office during open hours.

            We are currently working with USDA and OMB to devise administrative proposals to
    help address these and other potential barriers and we will provide you with an analysis of our
    options soon. While some of the options under consideration can be implemented through
    regulation, they may cost several hundred million dollars. In order to ensure we maintain our
    commitment to saving the surplus, we must enact other regulations saving a comparable
    amount -- a requirement OMB imposes on an agency-by-agency basis (e.g., USDA savings
    must pay for new USDA costs). These regulatory offsets could be difficult to obtain.

           In addition to possible administrative actions, we will be working to enact the
    proposals in this year's budget to increase funds for food stamp outreach (the budget contains
    $3.5 million to provide a 50 percent federal match for activities including media campaigns
    and distributing informational materials at various community locations such as shelters,
    senior centers, and churches) and to provide $60 million for eligibility for an additional

                                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                       6

    15,000 legal immigrants who become elderly after their pre-1996 arrival. (The Agricultural
    Research Act restored benefits to those elderly as of 1996, as well as children, people with
    disabilities, and refugees.)

           Drunk Driving -- .08 BAC studies: The Department of Transportation is planning
    to release three studies next week on the effects of lowering the illegal blood alcohol
    concentration (BAC) from .10% to .08%. Two of the three studies show that .08 BAC laws
    have a deterrent effect on drinking and driving, particularly in conjunction with other drunk
    driving laws and programs such as administrative license revocation (where police
    immediately suspend the driver's license of a driver arrested for DWI). The third study which
    looked at .08 BAC in a single state (NC) found no statistically significant impact of the law in
    drunk driving crashes.


           (1) Nationwide study: This study looked at the effects of illegal per se BAC laws (.08
           BAC and .10 BAC) and administrative license revocation (ALR) laws in all 50 states
           over a 16-year period. The study estimated that .08 BAC laws resulted in 275 fewer
           fatalities in the 16 states with .08 BAC laws in effect in 1997, and estimates that an
           additional 590 lives could have been saved in 1997 if all 50 states had .08 laws.

           (2) Eleven-state study: This multi-state study analyzed the impact of .08 BAC and
           ALR laws and found that .08 BAC laws were associated with significant reductions in
           alcohol-related fatalities in five of the II states studied (VT, KS, NC, FL, NM). Two
           other states (VA, CA) registered reductions following the adoption of both .08 BAC
           and ALR laws. The remaining four states (UT, OR, ME, NH) experienced slight
           decreases or increases in their alcohol-related fatalities that were not considered
           statistically significant.

           (3) North Carolina study: This study found little separate effect of a .08 BAC law in
           North Carolina even though the state recorded a modest reduction alcohol-related
           deaths during the study period. North Carolina has an aggressive enforcement
           program, with the .08 law just one of the steps they have taken to help decrease in
           drunk driving deaths. The finding ofthis study conflicts with the II-state study cited
           above, which indicates a positive impact of the .08 BAC law in the state in reducing
           alcohol-related deaths.

            The three independent studies were commissioned by the National Highway
    Transportation Safety Administration (NHTSA). On a related note, the GAO is preparing to
    release in June a review of a number of .08 BAC studies, including the three listed here. The
    GAO report was required under the omnibus transportation bill signed last year. The GAO
    review will criticize the methodologies used in earlier NHTSA studies, but generally confirm
    the soundness of the new studies. The GAO will conclude that .08 BAC laws can be
    effective in reducing alcohol-related deaths in combination with other laws, particularly ALR.
                                                                          . Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                                                                7

 However, the alcohol industry is likely to use the GAO report to discredit the previous DOT
studies on .08 and the need for a national .08 standard.
'.
