RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-APR-1999 10:30:03.00

SUBJECT:   Charter school report and Troops to Teachers

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Bruce and Elena --

Welcome back from your trip, Bruce.      Two things.

1) Charter school report.  The Education Department called Friday to say
they are planning to send a report to Congress tomorrow or Wednesday that
includes evaluation and other data from many ESEA programs      including
data and charts from their charter school report we have been planning
for the president to release. Mike's staff say he feel extremely strongly
about including the data on these reports and not holding it for a POTUS
announcements. They say POTUS could still release the entire report later
this month or early next month. I said that you (Bruce)   had wanted to
hold the report and might well "not want to release data publicly ahead of
the release and I would check with you.   They said that you would need to
call Mike directly if you didn't want the data included in the report.

2) Troops to Teachers/Transitions to Teaching. One piece of Title II
--the subject of today's ESEA mtg -- is the Department's proposed version
of "Troops to teachers: Transitions to Teaching". This includes a
continuat~on of Troops to Teachers as well as support to  recruit and
place other mid-career professionals (from business, peace corps, etc.)
into teaching.    Anyway, their proposal is a decent one, overall ,but my
recommendation is that we need to make sure that the focus on "Troops"
stays at least as large as the focus on other mid-career professionals. I
also have a few other relatively minor issues that I might raise during
or after the mtg -- such as their proposal to limit the focus to
shortage subject areas.   I would argue that a priority for shortage areas
is OK, but the proposal should also make possible some support for
talented troops and others who want to teach subject areas like english,
reading social studies, or civics.

When we agreed on Troops to teachers in January, Mike Smith and the
Department feel strongly about including a focus beyond Troops. Education
only "agreed" with Cohen and me on our initial troops proposal because of
an agreement to include at least a small piece beyond troops in our
proposal.
...

