        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: June Shih ( CN=June Shih/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

        CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-APR-1999 18:31:53.00

        SUBJECT:     equal pay draft

        TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ:UNKNOWN

        TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        CC: MITTLEBEEL E@Al@CD@VAXGTWY       MITTLEBEEL E@Al@CD@VAXGTWY @ VAXGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1 )
        READ:UNKNOWN

        CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TEXT:
        Draft 4/6/99 6:15 pm
        Shih

        PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
        OPENING STATEMENT EQUAL PAY ROUNDTABLE
        THE WHITE HOUSE
        APRIL 7, 1999

                Acknowledgments: The First Lady, who has worked so hard over the past 25
        years on behalf of AmericaD,s children and families.  Sec. Herman; Sen.
        Harkin and Del. Eleanor Holmes-Norton, who have been champions for equal
        pay in the Congress.

                As Americans, we believe that all people who work hard and play by
        the rules should be able to build better lives for themselves and their
        families.  And, for the past six years, I have worked to make this vision
        real for all Americans. Today, we are living in a time of unprecedented
        prosperity. We have more than 18 million new jobs.  The lowest
        unemployment in a generation.  The greatest real wage growth in more than
        20 years. Median family income up $3500.   Black poverty and Hispanic
        unemployment at record lows.  And, as the First Lady has said, we have
        made progress in closing the wage gap between men and women.

                But we all know we have much more to do.  Imagine working hard
        every day and taking home just three paychecks for every four collected by
        a male colleague in the same job. Unfortunately, thatO,s still the
        reality for too many women across America.

                Equal pay is much more than a womenD,s issue. Whenever we deny a
        woman equal pay for equal work, we arenD,t just shortchanging her bank
        account; we are shortchanging her family.  With more families relying on
        two paychecks to pay the mortgage or the rent, every man whose wife is
        underpaid is himself being taken advantage of! The wage gap can translate
        into fewer bags of groceries, fewer visits to the doctor; and over a
        lifetime, hundreds of thousands of dollars in smaller pensions and
        retirement savings.  The CEA estimates that, for a woman who began working
        in 1963, the wage gap has cost some $210,000 in lost earnings.

                   But this is more than just about paychecks.   It is about
!.<




      principle. When we deny a woman equal pay for equal work, whether in the
      halls of academia or on the factory floor, we are undermining the idea at
      the heart of the American Dream:  Equal opportunity for all.

              Today, in this time of abundance, we have a remarkable opportunity
      to end wage discrimination once and for all.  There will never be a better
      time to act.

              Earlier this year, I called on Congress to pass two measures to
      strengthen our wage discrimination laws and boost enforcement of existing
      ones. So, on the eve of Equal Pay Day, I renew my call.   I again ask
      Congress to support the $14 million Equal Pay Initiative in my balanced
      budget.< This initiative would help the EEOC identify and respond to wage
      discrimination, educate employers and workers about their rights and
      responsibilities, and help bring more women into better-paying jobs,
      especially non-traditional ones.
              And again, I ask Congress to pass the paycheck Fairness Act,
      sponsored by Sen. Daschle and Rep. DeLauro.  The Act would put employers
      on notice that wage discrimination against women is just as unacceptable
      as discrimination based on race and ethnicity. Under current law, victims
      of racial wage discrimination can seek compensatory and punitive damages
         this new law would give women the same right.  The law would protect
      employees who share salary information from retaliation. And it would
      expand training for EEOC workers, strengthen research and establish an
      award for exemplary employers.

              We can do even more.  Today, I am pleased to announce that we will
      strengthen this legislation by requiring the EEOC to determine what more
      information on worker salaries they need to improve enforcement of wage
      discrimination laws and to find a way to collect it. Under this new
      provision, we would calIon the EEOC to issue a new rule within 18 months
      to collect -- in the most effective and efficient way possible -- pay data
      from companies based on the race, sex and national origin of employees.

              Addressing wage discrimination takes courage, as our panelists can
      tell you.  It takes courage as an employee to speak out and to gather the
      evidence you need to make your case. And, it takes courage as an employer
      to recognize problems in pay equity and to take steps to remedy them.
      Just recently, we saw this courage among the administrators and women
      scientists at MIT, who together, looked at the cold hard facts -- about
      disparities in everything from lab space to annual salary -- and sought to
      make things right.  I commend them.  I hope their success can be
      replicated in workplaces across the country. I look forward to hearing
      their stories.

              LetO,s all get to work.  This is not a partisan issue.  It is
      about building the America we all want to live in -- and the America we
      want our daughters and sons to inherit -- an American that is fair, that
      is just, that truly provides equal opportunity for all.


