RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Seidman Ricki L <Ricki.L.Seidman@usdoj.gov> ( Seidman Ricki L <Ricki.L.Seid

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-APR-1999 18:46:13.00

SUBJECT:     FW: Draft' Executive Order on Data Collection for Fed Law Enforcement

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
-----Original Message-----
From: Katyal Neal K
Sent: Monday, April 05, 1999 3:08 PM
To: Gess Nicholas M; Stevens Karen L.; Simon Charles A; Scrivner, Ellen;
Castello James E; Morton John T; Scott-Finan Nancy; Jerome Richard;
Jackson Brian A; Seidman Ricki L; Hodgkiss Anita; Fernandes Julie; King
Loretta; Yeomans William R.
Cc: Rosenbaum Steven; Lee Bill Lann; Kayyem Juliette N.
Subject: RE: Draft Executive Order on Data Collection for Fed Law
Enforcement


Karen:

You might clarify the report in Sec 1, c.   Nothing in b or c says that the
AG will provide her own report, just that the AG shall transmit the data
from the agencies to POTUS. Instead, you need a sentence explaining that
the AG will need to write an annual report.

I think Nick's suggestion makes a good deal of sense, though its obviously
a WH calIon whether they would like to enumerate out the categories.
Assuming Brian Jackson agrees, perhaps it is worth preparing both versions
and seeing which one Elena and Jose like more.

-----Original Message-----
From: Gess Nicholas M
Sent: Monday, April 05, 1999 12:13 PM
To: Stevens Karen L.; Simon Charles A; Scrivner, Ellen; Castello James
E; Morton John T; Katyal Neal K; Scott-Finan Nancy; Jerome Richard;
Jackson Brian A; Seidman Ricki L; Hodgkiss Anita; Fernandes Julie; King
Loretta; Yeomans William R.
Cc: Rosenbaum Steven; Lee Bill Lann; Kayyem Juliette N.
Subject: RE: Draft Executive Order on Data Collection for Fed Law
Enforcement


Karen,

           My overall thoughts:

        1.      EO's are generally much less specific.   I would stay
away from the exact sorts of statistics to be collected.   If it turns out
that one or more of these can't be effectively collected, even though the
language is slightly broad, the President will be attacked for being
ineffective. The best way to be effective is to require the AG & Sec.
Treas. to report back within 60 days on the elements to be collected (in
addition to the 6-month report) .
"
                2.      I have forwarded to Therese McAuliffe for Budget
        review. We need to put an internal dollar tab on this and make sure that
        we are budgeting to do this.  Congress will watch this like a hawk and
        ding us if we don't appropriate funds.

        Nick

        -----Original Message-----
        From: Karen L. Stevens
        Sent: Monday, April 05, 1999 10:22 AM
        To: Simon Charles A; Scrivner, Ellen; Castello James E; Morton John T;
        Gess Nicholas M; Katyal Neal K; Scott-Finan Nancy; Jerome Richard;
        Jackson Brian A; Seidman Ricki L; Hodgkiss Anita; Fernandes Julie;
        Stevens Karen L.; King Loretta; Yeomans William R.
        Cc: Rosenbaum Steven; Lee Bill Lann; Kayyem Juliette N.
        Subject: Draft Executive Order on Data Collection for Fed Law
        Enforcement


         As discussed at our meeting on Wednesday, attached is a rough first
        cut for an executive order that would require federal law enforcement
        agencies to collect data on the use of race and national origin in covered
        law enforcement activities.  We would like to cir~ulate something to folks
        at Treasury late today, if possible, so please forward me your comments
        today so that they can be incorporated.   My fax number is 514-9962.
        Thanks.

        Karen Stevens
        353-8622


