RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Eric P. Goosby ( CN=Eric P. Goosby/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAR-1997 19:12:50.00

SUBJECT:        reo Vaccine Meeting



TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I attended a meeting today with Nancy-Ann Min and Kevin Thurm looking at
the possibilities in the area of vaccine development.

Participants:

Nancy-Ann Min
Kevin Thurm

Outside Participatns:

Harold Varmus, M.D. NIH Director
William Paul, M.D. , Director Office of AIDS Research
Jack Whitescarver, Phd., Deputy OAR
Tony Fauci, M.D., Director NIAID/NIH
David Baltimore, M.D., Coordinator of Vaccine Research, OAR

The discussion explored the potential for the development of an effective
vaccine, cost considerations and the potential role the President may take
in supporting this effort.


Key Issues Discussed:

*          possible advances in vaccine development:

           1.        Simian Immunodeficiency Virus Vaccines are protective in
monkeys
        2.           New attenuated vaccine developed in Australia may afford
an opportunity
                to develop an effective vaccine with low risk of
carcinogenicity
        3.      incorporation of the HIV viral genes into the host DNA
may be carcinogenic
                twenty years down the road, this precludes our ability to
move rapidly through
                human trials (too risky, must move very slowly to develop
an efficacious vaccine          with a high degree of safety)
        4.      DNA vaccines; discovered U of Wisconsin, when DNA is
injected into study             animals it can elicit a strong immune
response (irnmunogenicity). This wasn't
                thought to be possible 2 years ago.  This line of research
may prove productive
                in HIV vaccine research



*       The feeling among the scientists was that they cannot put an
accurate timeline on the
        success of the vaccine efforts.,

*        They emphasized the need to support the basic research component
of the equation
         in developing potential products that would be of interest to
Industry

*       Harold Varmus, and Kevin Thurm felt the President could promote
the area of HIV          Vaccine research both domestically and
internationally, as part of a long term plan of          events that in
aggregate brought attention and resources from both the private
and      public sectors.

*       The possibility of an initiative on Emerging Infections (Malaria,
Ebola Virus, HIV and TB)        was also discussed from an international
perspective


FOLLOW UP

Nancy-Ann asked that NIH come back with a plan that would focus on a long
term strategy for the President to consider.  They will include an
analysis of what type of resources may be needed to maximize our ability
to take advantage of all scientific opportunities highlighting potential
areas of collaboration with the pharmaceutical companies.  I was asked to
facilitate a more detailed description of the potential scientific
products that one might anticipate over a shorter time frame,   with added
efforts in this area.

Timeline: 5-7 days


