RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Constance J. Bowers ( CN=Constance J. Bowers/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1999 19:07:46.00

SUBJECT:   LRM CJB55 - - EDUCATION Draft Bill on Title X, Part H (Secondary School Re

TO: Janet R. Forsgren      CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP     OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kelley A. Lehman ( CN=Kelley A. Lehman/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Howard Dendurent ( CN=Howard Dendurent/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Daniel J. Chenok ( CN=Daniel J. Chenok/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert G. Damus    ( CN=Robert G. Damus/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB   1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: William H. White Jr.    ( cN=William H. White Jr./OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Broderick Johnson ( CN=Broderick Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ : UNKNOWN

TO: Bethany Little ( CN=Bethany Little/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD      1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Wei-Min C. Wang ( CN=Wei-Min C. Wang/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Wayne Upshaw ( CN=Wayne Upshaw/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: rademachpr ( rademachpr @ ssonwpob.us-state.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN       1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: tom.herlihy@ost.dot.gov@inet    ( tom.herlihy@ost.dot.gov@inet   [ UNKNOWN J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: James J. Jukes    ( CN=James J. Jukes/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Pamula L. Simms    ( CN=Pamula L. Simms/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Daniel I. Werfel    ( CN=Daniel I. Werfel/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rosalyn J. Rettman ( CN=Rosalyn J. Rettman/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )


READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Peter Rundlet ( CN=Peter Rundlet/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sandra Yamin ( CN=Sandra Yamin/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Janet Murguia ( CN=Janet Murguia/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leslie S. Mustain ( CN=Leslie S. Mustain/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Barry White ( CN=Barry White/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: justice.lrm ( justice.lrm @ usdoj.gov    @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )   (OA)
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Please provide comments by: 2:00 pm, Mon, April 12th

Note:  You have already received other parts of Title X (programs of
national significance).  This draft bill and sectional analysis language
will be placed the following website shortly:

http://tabula.ost.dot.gov/ed
Use the following identifying information:
username: LRM
password: text

---------------------- Forwarded by Constance J. Bowers/OMB/EOP on
04/08/99 07:03 PM ---------------------------
LRM ID: CJB55
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

Thursday, April 8, 1999

LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

TO:                       Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

FROM:           Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for Legislative
Reference
OMB CONTACT:    Constance J. Bowers
                                PHONE: (202) 395 -3803 FAX: (202) 395 -6148
SUBJECT:        EDUCATION Draft Bill on Title X, Part H (Secondary School
Reform) and Part I (Elementary School Foreign Language Program) of ESEA


Reauthorization

DEADLINE:               2:00 p.m.  Monday, April 12, 1999
In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
program of the President.  Please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

COMMENTS: Note: You have already received other parts of Title X
(programs of national significance). This draft bill and sectional
analysis language will be placed the following website shortly:

http://tabula.ost.dot.gov/ed
Use the following identifying information:
username: LRM
password: text

 [Note: The website has been established as a central point for reviewers
to access all of the many pieces of ED's draft bill to reauthorize the
ESEA. Because of the magnitude of this bill, review and clearance is
being handled in separate parts. Most of these parts have been sent to you
electronically as word processing files;  however, some reviewers have
experienced difficulty accessing the documents because of incompatible
word processing systems.  You may also access these documents
electronically. Thanks for your cooperation.]

DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:
61-JUSTICE - Dennis Burke - (202) 514-2141
114-STATE - Paul Rademacher - (202) 647-4463

EOP:
Barbara Chow
Barry White
Wayne Upshaw
Wei-Min C. Wang
Leslie S. Mustain
Bruce N. Reed
Elena Kagan
Jonathan H. Schnur
Tanya E. Martin
Bethany Little
Janet Murguia
Broderick Johnson
Sandra Yamin
William H. White Jr.
Peter Rundlet
Robert G. Damus
Rosalyn J. Rettman
Daniel J. Chenok
Daniel I. Werfel
Pamula L. Simms
Howard Dendurent
Kelley A·. Lehman
James J. Jukes
Janet R. Forsgren
LRM ID: CJB55     SUBJECT: EDUCATION Draft Bill on Title X, Part H
(Secondary School Reform) and Part I (Elementary School Foreign Language


Program} of ESEA Reauthorization
RESPONSE TO
LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
MEMORANDUM

If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's line) to leave a
message with a legislative assistant.

You may also respond by:
         (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
         (2) sending us a memo or letter
Please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


TO:             Constance J. Bowers Phone:   395-3803   Fax:  395-6148
                Office of Management and Budget
                Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant): 395-7362

FROM:                                                     (Date)

                                                          (Name)

                                                          (Agency)

                                                          (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:

        _ _ _ Concur

        _ _ _ No Objection

        _ _ _ No Comment

               See proposed edits on pages

        _ _ _ Other:

               FAX RETURN of ___ pages, attached to this response sheet

==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00 :.00 : 00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D93]MAIL410180313.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000005500000000000000001000005700000001000000FEFFFFFF000000005400
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
Hex-Dump Conversion




             X-J-l
                      Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 4/7/99

                         SECONDARY SCHOOL REFORM

     SEC. 1009.     Title X of the ESEA is further amended by

inserting after part G, as redesignated by section

1007 (8) (A), a new part H to read as follows:


               "PART H - SECONDARY SCHOOL REFORM

                                 "PURPOSES

     "SEC. 10851. The purposes of this part are-

          "(1) to support the planning and implementation

of effective educational reforms in high schools,

particularly in urban and rural high schools that educate

concentrations of students from low-income families; and

     "(2) to support the implementation of those reforms in

at least 5,000 American high schools by the year 2007.


            "GRANTS TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES

     "SEC. 10852.   (a) GRANTS AUTHORIZED.                   The Secretary may

make grants to local educational agencies, on a competitive

basis, for activities, consistent with this part, carried

out in their high schools.

     "(b) DURATION.      Each grant under this section shall be

for a period of up to three years.




                                   X-J-2
                  Hex-Dump Conversion

     "(c) NUMBER.      The Secretary shall not provide

assistance under this part to any high school under more

than one grant.


                              "APPLICATIONS

     "SEC. 10853.     (a) APPLICATIONS REQUIRED.         A local

educational agency that desires to receive a grant under

this part shall submit an application at such time,            in such

manner, and containing such information as the Secretary

may determine.

     "(b) CONTENTS.       Each such application shall, for each

high school for which assistance is sought-

          "(1) identify the school and describe its need

for assistance under this part;

          "(2) include a plan for grades above 8th grade in

the school that describes the educational reforms that will

take place, as well as the specific activities to be

carried out with grant funds; ,and

          "(3) demonstrate that a substantial percentage of

administrators and teachers at the school were involved in

developing that plan.




                                    X-J-3
               Hex-Dump Conversion

                         "SELECTION OF GRANTEES

      "SEC. 10854.      (a)   IN GENERAL.        The Secretary shall

select grantees, using a peer-review process, on the basis

of-

             "(1) the relative need of each high school for

which assistance is sought, considering such factors as the

percentage of students who are from low-income families,

student achievement data, dropout rates, and attendance

rates; and

             "(2)   the quality of applications, including the

likelihood that the proposed reforms will succeed.

      "(b) APPLICATIONS FOR MORE THAN ONE HIGH SCHOOL.                 In

the case of a meritorious application that requests

assistance for more than one high school, the Secretary may

approve the application for any number of those schools.

      "(c) SPECIAL RULES.          In approving applications under

this section, the Secretary shall-

             "(1) to the extent possible, assist an equal

number of high schools that participate in programs under

part A of title I of this Act and high schools that do not

participate in those programs; and

             "(2)   equitably distribute grants among the

geographic regions of the Nation and among urban and rural

local educational agencies.


                                     X-J-4
                   Hex-Dump Conversion
         "OUTCOMES AND COMPONENTS OF EDUCATIONAL REFORMS

     "SEC. 10855.     (a) OUTCOMES.          Each grantee under this

part shall ensure that the reforms it carries out under

this part are designed so that that each assisted high

school-

            "(1)   is a place where students receive individual

attention and support, through such strategies as creating

smaller learning environments, such as                   'schools within

schools' and career academies and providing students with

counselors and mentors;

            "(2) provides all students in the school with

challenging coursework, aligned with State content and

performance standards, through such strategies as the

establishment or expansion of advanced placement or

international baccalaureate programs and the use of

technology to enhance academic instruction;

            "(3) is a place where students are motivated to

learn,

through such strategies as applied learning and linking the

arts, music, and cultural opportunities with the school,

both during and after the normal school day;

            "(4) enables students to receive an education

that is continuous and integrated from kindergarten through

postsecondary education, through such strategies as


                                    X-J-5
                 Hex-Dump Conversion

partnerships with middle schools and institutions of higher

education;

             "(5) helps students achieve their educational and

career goals, through such strategies as integrated

academic and vocational instruction that connects students

with career opportunities; and

             "(6) functions as a center for the community,

through such strategies as increasing the involvement of

parents, employers, and others in the community.

     "(b) REQUIRED COMPONENTS.              In order to achieve the

outcomes described in subsection (a), each grantee under

this part shall use funds that are provided on behalf of a

high school to implement (and, if necessary, to use not

more than six months to complete the development of)

research-based educational reform strategies throughout the

entire school that-

             "(I) in the case of a school with a school wide

program under part A of title I, build on and improve the

schoolwide reform program;

             "(2) address the needs of students who are at

risk of failing to be promoted to the next grade or to

graduate, including-

                  "(A) covering material that students need to

master in order to pass State-mandated exit exams; and


                                     X-J-6
                    Hex-Dump Conversion

                   " (B) strengthening curriculum, instruction,

and assessments and by offering extended learning

opportunities such as after-school, weekend, and summer

programs;

            "(3) are implemented at the school level, but

include strong support and assistance from the local

educational agency, as documented in its application;

            "(4)   make full and effective use of the resources

that the school receives under other Federal programs;

            "(5) make use of outside experts in high-school

reform, unless the local educational agency demonstrates in

its application, to the Secretary's satisfaction, that the

school's reform strategy can be implemented effectively

without outside assistance;

            "(6)   include professional development of school

staff, including development of the skills needed to use

student achievement and other outcome data to refine and

improve the educational reform strategy; and

            "(7) provide for collecting data on, and

evaluating, the reforms and for reporting to the Secretary

on the results of those evaluations.




                                     X-J-7
                   Hex-Dump Conversion


                             "PRIVATE SCHOOLS

     "SEC. 10856.      (a)   PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT.        Each

grantee under section 10854 shall,               in accordance with

sections [11703]     through [11706]          [current 14503-14506]

provide for the equitable participation of private school

personnel in the professional development activities it

carries out with grant funds.

     "(b)   INFORMATION.        If a grantee uses grant funds to

develop curricular materials, it shall make information

about those materials.available to private schools at their

request.


                        "ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES

     "SEC. 10857.       From the amount available to carry out

this part for any fiscal year under section 10859, the

Secretary shall reserve the amount he finds appropriate to

carry out one or more of the following:

            "(I)   INCENTIVE AWARDS.-(A) (i) The Secretary shall

select a random sample of schools from each of the first

two years' cohorts of grantees to participate in an

incentive-based experiment, under which the Secretary makes

incentive payments to teachers and administrators in those

schools if, after three years of program participation,

their students demonstrate significant gains in student




                                     X-J-8
                    Hex-Dump Conversion

educational outcomes compared to the gains made in

comparable schools that are not in the sample.

                        "~Iii)   If those significant gains

continue, the Secretary may make further incentive payments

to those teachers and administrators for up to two

additional years.

                "(B) The Secretary shall base determinations

of student educational outcomes on multiple measures,

including scores on State assessments.

                "(C) The maximum amount of an incentive

award under this paragraph is $3,000 per teacher and

administrator per year, which may be used by those

individuals for any purpose.

          "(2) RECOGNITION, DISSEMINATION, NETWORKS, AND

PEER REVIEW.   The Secretary may-

                "(A) recognize high schools and high school

reforms that show outstanding results;

                "(B) disseminate information on those

schools and reforms;

                "(C) carry out other activities to encourage

the spread and adoption of successful high school reform

strategies;

                "(D)    facilitate the creation of networks

among participating schools and local educational agencies,


                                   X-J-9
             Hex-Dump Conversion

which may include schools and local educational agencies

interested in meeting the purpose of this parti and

               "(E) pay the costs of the peer review of

applications under this part.

          "(3) EVALUATION.          The Secretary may reserve

funds, consistent with section 11801 [current 14701], to

evaluate activities carried out under this part.


                               "DEFINITION

     "SEC. 10858.     For the purpose of this part, the term

'high school' means any school that serves students in 12th

grade.


              "AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS

     "SEC. 10859.     For the purpose of carrying out this

part, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as

may be necessary for fiscal year 2001 and each of the four

succeeding fiscal years.".




                                   X-J-10
                       Hex-Dump Conversion

       PART I -- ELEMENTARY SCHOOL FOREIGN LANGUAGE PROGRAM

                               "FINDINGS; PURPOSE

       "SEC. 10901. (a) FINDINGS. The Congress finds that:

               "(1) Increased fluency in languages other than English, is necessary if

United States' business interests are to compete effectively in a global economy.

               "(2) While research suggests that students more easily acquire foreign

languages when instruction begins in the early grades, fewer than one-third <if elementary

schools in the United States offer foreign language instruction.

               "(3) Of those elementary schools that do offer foreign language

instruction, most offer only an introductory exposure to the foreign language.

               "(4) Few elementary school foreign language programs are

coordinated with secondary school foreign language programs to promote transitions that

build on student knowledge of the foreign language.

               "(5) The next generation of advanced computers and

telecommunications technology has a tremendous potential for improving access to

foreign language instruction and the quality of that instruction at the elementary level.

               "(6) It is a national goal that 25 percent of all public elementary schools

offer high-quality, comprehensive foreign language programs by 2005, and that 50

percent offer such programs by 2010. Such programs should be designed to achieve

language proficiency, aligned with State foreign language standards, and available to all

students (including students with limited English proficiency and students with

disabilities), and should ensure effective coordination between elementary and secondary

school foreign language programs.




                                         X-J -11
                           Hex-Dump Conversion


        "(b) PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this part to dramatically expand, and enhance

the quality of, foreign language instruction at the elementary school level by--

               "(1) supporting high-quality, foreign language programs that are

aligned with State-approved foreign language standards and curriculum and that provide

for effective coordination (including the transition of students) between elementary and

secondary foreign language programs; and

               "(2) improving training for, and increasing the numbers of,

elementary teachers who are certified to teach one or more foreign languages to

elementary students; and

               "(3) increasing access to high-quality foreign language instruction

through the use of advanced technology and model programs that apply such technology.



        "AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; EVALUATIONS,

             TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, AND DISSEMINATION

        "SEC. 10902. (a) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS~ For the purpose

of carrying out this part, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be

necessary for fiscal year 2001 and for each of the four succeeding fiscal years.

        "(b) RESERVATION. For any fiscal year, the Secretary may reserve up to ten

percent of the amount under subsection (a) to--

               "(1) conduct independent evaluations ofthe activities assisted under

this part;

               "(2) provide technical assistance to recipients of awards under this

part; and



                                         X-J-12
                          Hex-Dump Conversion

               "(3) disseminate findings and methodologies from evaluations

required by, or funded under, this part and other information obtained from such

programs.



         "SUBPART 1 -- FOREIGN LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

[NOTE: TITLE VII-B IS TO BE MOVED HERE, WITH THE ADDITION OF
THE FOLLOWING AMENDMENT TO SECTION n03(c)(3) AND EXCEPT FOR
SECTION 7205 and 7206 WHICH WILL BE REPEALED. THE TITLE VII-B
PROVSIONS ARE CURRENTLY BEING REVIEWED WITH THE TITLE VII
CIRCULATION.


Section[7203(c)(3)] is amended to read as follows--

               "(3) SPECIAL RULE.--The Secretary may use funds appropriated under

section 10902(a) for any fiscal year may be used to expand foreign language learning in

secondary schools only if their foreign language programs provide for effective

coordination with elementary schools that have programs funded under this part,

including the effective transition of elementary school students in such programs. ")



      "SUBPART 2 -- IMPROVED FOREIGN LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION IN

                               ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS



                                        "PURPOSE

       "SEC. 10921. The purpose of this subpart is to improve the quality of, and

enhance access to, foreign language instruction at the elementary school level by

increasing the number of educational personnel certified to provide high-quality foreign

language instruction.



                                          X-J-13
                           Hex-Dump Conversion


               PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT GRANT PROGRAM

       "SEC. 10922.(a) AUTHORITY.--(l) From funds appropriated under section

10902, the Secretary is authorized to make grants to consortia of one or more institutions

of higher education and one or more local educational agencies for preservice

professional development programs that will train, and lead to the timely certification of,

prospective teachers and current teachers to teach one or more foreign languages at the

elementary school level.

               "(2) Each grant under this subpart shall be awarded for a period of

not more than five years.

       "(b) AUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES.--(l) A recipient shall use funds awarded

under this subpart to--

                          "(A) develop innovative courses of study, or improve

existing courses of study, including coursework and clinical experiences, that prepare

prospective teachers and current teachers to become certified to teach one or more

foreign languages in elementary schools;

                          "(B) align coursework, clinical experiences, and certification

preparation with State and local foreign language content standards; and

                          "(C) recruit individuals, especially individuals who are

multilingual, to become elementary teachers who are certified to teach one or more

foreign language in elementary schools.

               "(2) A recipient may use funds awarded under this subpart--

                          "(A) to develop certification programs, including alternative




                                            X-J-14
                      Hex-Dump Conversion

routes to full certification, for teachers desiring to teach one or more foreign language at

the elementary schools level;

                       "(B) to prepare prospective school, foreign language teachers in

the use of the most appropriate and effective technology for foreign language instruction

at the elementary school level;

                       "(C) to support foreign language student teacher training, and

induction programs for certified foreign language teachers, in elementary schools that

participate in programs under part A of title I of the Act;

                       "(D) to improve the skills and knowledge of faculty at

participating institutions of higher education related to the needs of prospective

elementary school, foreign language teachers; and

                       "(E) for other activities that are consistent with the purpose of

this section.

        "(c) APPLICATIONS.--(l) An eligible consortium desiring a grant under this

subpart shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form, and

containing such information as the Secretary may require.



                "(2) Such applications shall--

                       "(A) describe the project's goals and the benchmarks that will

be used for measuring progress in meeting those goals; and

                       "(B) describe how the project activities will increase the




                                          X-J-15
                      Hex-Dump Conversion
quality and number of elementary teachers certified to teach one or more foreign

languages in elementary schools within the local education agencies that are members of

the consortium that is applying for funds under this subpart; and

                         "(C) provide assurances that--

                                 "(i) grant activities, including coursework, clinical

experiences, and certification, are aligned with relevant State and local content standards

for foreign language instruction;

                                 "(ii) grant program activities are coordinated, as

appropriate, with other program activities under this Act and other Acts, including title II

of the Higher Education Act of 1965; and

                                 "(iii) grant activities support articulation for students

between elementary and secondary school foreign language programs.



                                      ANNUAL REPORT

       "SEC. 10923. (a) REPORT. Each recipient offunds under this subpart shall

provide the Secretary with an annual report, in the form prescribed by the Secretary, of

it's program.

       "(b) CONTENTS. Each report under subsection (a) shall include--

                "(1) the number of participants in professional development activities

under this subpart;

                "(2) the number of participants that receive certification as

elementary level foreign language teachers;

                "(3) the number of participants that take positions as elementary level




                                            X-J-16
                             Hex-Dump Conversion

foreign language teachers; and

                "(4) such other information as the Secretary may require.



         "SUBPART 3 -- FOREIGN LANGUAGE TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM

                                  "PURPOSE

        "SEC. 10931. It is the purpose of this part to--

               "(1) increase access to high-quality foreign language instruction at the

elementary school level through the development and use of advanced technology and

telecommunications applications; and

               "(2) develop, for wide-scale adoption by State educational agencies

and local educational agencies, high-quality innovative and effective applications of

technology, such as video, voice recognition devices, modeling, authoring, and

simulation software (particularly web-based software and intelligent tutoring), and virtual

reality and wireless technologies, to improve the quality of foreign language instruction

in schools and other settings that is aligned with challenging State standards for foreign

language acquisition.



                  "FOREIGN LANGUAGE TECHNOLOGY AWARDS

       "SEC. 10932. (a) AUTHORITY.--(I) From funds appropriated under section

10902, the Secretary is authorized to award grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements

to eligible applicants in order to carry out the purposes of this subpart.

               "(2) The Secretary may award grants, contracts, or cooperative

agreements under this subpart for a period of not more than five years.




                                          X-J-17
                           Hex-Dump Conversion

        "(b) ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS. Eligible applicants under this subpart are

consortia that include--

                "(1) at least one local educational agency; and

                "(2) one or more State educational agencies, local educational

agencies, institutions of higher education, businesses, museums, libraries, or other public

or private entities with a particular expertise that would assist in carrying out the purposes

of this part.

        "(c) AUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES.-- A recipient shall use funds awarded under

this subpart to develop or adapt, and test and evaluate, new applications of educational

technologies and telecommunications, or more effective applications of existing

educational technologies and telecommunications. to support foreign language instruction

in schools and other settings, including--

                "(1) developing related, high-quality, standards-based, electronic

content (including multimedia software, digital video, and web-based resources), such as

methods for linking classrooms in different countries to enhance two-way language

learning, electronic simulations, new tools for assessing student performance, software

and authorizing tools that enable educational materials to be quickly and easily developed

and support their modification and maintenance, and electronic tutoring applications; and

                "(2) using telecommunications, and other technologies, to make

foreign language programs at the elementary level accessible to all students, including

those with special needs (such as low-income students, students with disabilities, students

in remote areas, and students with limited English proficiency) through such activities as

using technology to deliver mentoring.




                                          X-J-18
                      Hex-Dump Conversion


                                "APPLICATIONS

         "SEC. 10933. (a) IN GENERAL. In order to receive an award under this subpart,

an eligible applicant shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, and

containing such information, as the Secretary may require.

         "(b) CONTENTS. Such application shall include--

                "(1) a description of the proposed project, including a description ofthe

technology and applications to be developed or adapted, and tested and evaluated, and

how it would carry out the purposes of this subpart; and

                "(2) a detailed plan for the independent evaluation of the project,

which shall include benchmarks to monitor progress toward specific project objectives.

         "(c) PRIORITIES. In making awards under this subpart, the Secretary may

establish one or more priorities consistent with the objectives of this part, including

priorities for projects--

                "(1) that develop innovative models for improving teachers' ability to

use technology to deliver effective foreign language instruction at the elementary school

level;

                "(2) that develop innovative models that serve traditionally

underserved populations, including low-income students, and students with disabilities;

and

                "(3) in which applicants or other entities contribute substantial

financial and other resources to achieve the goals of the project.".




                                           X-J-19
Hex-Dump Conversion




                     X-J-20
                      Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                                                       DRAFf
                                                                                  APRIL 8, 1999
                                                                                      5:45 PM

       Section 1009, secondary school refonn. Section 1009 of the bill would add a new Part
H, Secondary School Refonn, to Title X of the ESEA, as follows:

        ESEA, § 10851, purposes. Section 10851 would provide that the purposes of the new Part
J are: (1) to support the development and implementation of effective educational refonns in
high schools, particularly in urban and rural high schools that educate concentrations of students
from low-income families; and (2) to support the implementation of those refonns in at least half
of all American high schools by the year 2007.

       ESEA, §10852, grants to local educational agencies. Section 10852(a) would authorize
the Secretary to make competitive grants to LEAs to carry out the program's purposes in their
high schools. Subsection (b) would establish a maximum grant period of three years for each
grant. Subsection (c) would provide that a particular high school could not be assisted by more
than one grant. An LEA could thus serve one or more of its high schools with one grant and one
or more different high schools with a subsequent grant.

       ESEA, § 10853, applications. Section 10853 would require an LEA that wants a grant to
submit an application and describe the infonnation that must be included.

        ESEA, § 10854, selection of grantees. Section 10854 would establish certain procedures
and criteria the Secretary would use in selecting grantees.

        ESEA, §10855, components of educational refonns. Section 10855(a) would describe
certain outcomes that participating high schools are expected to achieve. Subsection (b) would
identify certain components of the educational refonns that would have to be carried out those
schools in order to attain those outcomes.

        ESEA, §10856, private schools. Section 10856(a) would provide for the equitable
participation of personnel from private schools in any professional development carried out with
Part H funds. Subsection (b) would require a grantee that uses Part H funds to develop curricular
materials to make infonnation about those materials available to private schools at their request.

        ESEA, § 10857, additional activities. Section 10857 would direct the Secretary to reserve
funds from each year's appropriation for Part H to carry out certain activities relating to the
program's purpose, including testing the effect of offering financial rewards to teachers and
administrators in high schools if their students demonstrate significant gains in educational
outcomes.

       ESEA, § 10858, definition. Section l0858 would define the tenn "high school" as used in
                                            X-J-l
                         Hex-Dump Conversion



Part H.

        ESEA, §10859, authorization of appropriations. Section 10859 would authorize the
appropriation of such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2001 through 2005 to carry out
Part H.




                                             X-J-2
                            Hex-Dump Conversion


              ELEMENTARY SCHOOL FOREIGN LANGUGAE PROGRAM
                              DRAFT 4/8/99

        Section lOXX. Section 10XX of the bill would add a new Part I, the "Elementary School
Foreign Language Program", to Title X of the Act. This new program would dramatically
expand, and enhance the quality of, foreign language instruction at the elementary level by: (1)
supporting high-quality foreign language programs that are aligned with State-approved foreign
language curriculum and that provide for effective coordination (including the transition of
students) transition between elementary and secondary foreign language programs; (2) improving
training for, and increasing the numbers of, elementary teachers who are certified to teach one or
more foreign languages to elementary students; and (3) increasing access to high-quality foreign
language instruction through the use of advanced technology and model programs that apply such
technology.

        New section 10901 ofthe Act would provide the findings and the purposes for the new
program. This would include a finding that it is a national goal that 25 percent of all public
elementary schools offer high-quality, comprehensive foreign language programs by 2005, and
that 50 percent offer such programs by 2010. Such programs should be designed to achieve
language proficiency, aligned with State foreign language standards, and available to all students
(including students with limited English proficiency and students with disabilities), and should
ensure effective coordination between elementary and secondary school foreign language
programs.

       New section 10902(a) of the Act would authorize such sums as may be necessary to be
appropriated for fiscal year 2001 and for each of the four succeeding fiscal years to carry out the
part. New section 10902(b) of the Act would authorize the Secretary, for any fiscal year, to
reserve up to ten percent of the amount authorized under subsection (a), to conduct independent
evaluations of the activities assisted under this part, to provide technical assistance to recipients
of awards under this part, and to disseminate findings and methodologies from evaluations
required by, or funded under, this part, or other information obtained from such programs.

        New subpart 1 of Part I would revise and relocate Part B of Title VII of the Act, the
"Foreign Language Assistance Program", to this part. [Note: The Title VII-B program, currently
being reviewed with the Title VII package, will be relocated here. Section n03(c)(3) would be
amended to provide that the Secretary may use funds appropriated under section 10902(a) in any
fiscal year to expand foreign language learning in secondary schools only if their foreign
language programs provide for effective coordination with elementary schools that have
programs funded under this part, including effective transition of elementary school students in
such programs. Sections 7105 and 7106 of the Act would be repealed.

       New section 10921 of the Act would set forth the purpose of new subpart 2, "Elementary
School Foreign Language Instruction Program", under new Part I. That purpose would be to

                                                X-J-3
                         Hex-Dump Conversion


improve the quality of, and enhance access to, foreign language instruction at the elementary
school level by increasing the number of educational personnel certified to provide high-quality
foreign language instruction.

        New section 10922 of the Act, "Professional Development Grant Program", would
authorize the Secretary, from funds appropriated under section 10902, to make grants to
consortia of one or more institutions of higher education and one or more local educational
agencies for preservice professional development programs that will train, and lead to the timely
certification of, prospective teachers and current teachers to teach one or more foreign languages
at the elementary school level. Each grant under subpart 2 would be awarded for a period of not
more that five years.

         New section 10922(b) ofthe Act would require a recipient to use funds awarded under
the subpart to: (1) develop innovative courses of study, or improve existing courses of study that
prepare prospective teachers and current teachers to become certified to teach one or more
foreign languages in elementary schools; (2) align coursework, clinical experiences, and
certification preparation with State and local foreign language content standards; and (3) recruit
individuals, especially individuals who are multilingual, to become elementary teachers who are
certified to teach one or more foreign language in elementary schools. A recipient would be
allowed to use funds awarded under this subpart: (1) to develop certification programs, including
alternative routes to full certification, for teachers desiring to teach one or more foreign language
at the elementary schools level; (2) to prepare prospective elementary school foreign language
teachers in the use of the most appropriate and effective technology for foreign language
instruction at the elementary school level; (3) to support foreign language student teacher, and
induction programs for certified foreign language teachers, in elementary schools that participate
in programs under part A of title I of the Act; (4) to improve the skills and knowledge offaculty
at participating institutions of higher education related to the needs of prospective elementary
school, foreign language teachers; and (5) for other activities that are consistent with the purpose
of this section.

         New section 10922(c) of the Act would require an eligible consortium desiring a grant
under this subpart to submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form, and
containing such information as the Secretary may require. Such applications would be required
to describe: (1) the projects goals and the benchmarks that will be used for measuring progress in
meeting those goals; and (2) how the project activities will increase the quality and number of
elementary teachers certified to teach one or more foreign languages in elementary schools
within the local education agencies that are members of the consortium that is applying for funds
under this subpart. Such applications would also be required to provide assurances that: (1) grant
activities are aligned with relevant State and local content standards for foreign language
instruction; (2) grant program activities are coordinated, as appropriate, with other program
activities under this Act and other Acts, including title II of the Higher Education Act of 1965;
and (3) grant activities support articulation for students between elementary and secondary

                                               X-J-4
                              Hex-Dump Conversion


school foreign language programs.

        New section 10923 of the Act would require each recipient of funds under this subpart to
provide the Secretary with an annual report, in the form prescribed by the Secretary, of such
recipient's program. Each report would be required to include: (1) the number of participants in
professional development activities under this subpart; (2) the number of participants that receive
certification as elementary level foreign language teachers; (3) the number of participants that
take positions as elementary level foreign language teachers; and (4) such other infonnation as
the Secretary may require.

        New section 10931 of the Act would set forth the purpose of new subpart 3, "Foreign
Language Technology Program", under new Part 1. That purpose would be to increase access to
high-quality foreign language instruction at the elementary school level through the development
and use of advanced technology and telecommunications applications, and to develop, for wide-
scale adoption by State educational agencies and local educational agencies, innovative and
effective applications of technology, to improve the quality of foreign language instruction in
schools and other settings that is aligned with challenging State standards for foreign language
acquisition.

        New section 10932 of the Act, "Foreign Language Technology Awards", would authorize
the Secretary, from funds appropriated under section 10902, to make grants, contracts, or
cooperative agreements to eligible applicants in order to carry out the purposes of subpart 3. The
Secretary would be authorized to make grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements under the
subpart for a period of not more than five years. Eligible applicants under this subpart would be
consortia that include at least one local educational agency, and one or more State educational
agencies, local educational agencies, institutions of higher education, for-profit businesses,
museums, libraries, or other public or private entities with a particular expertise that would assist
in carrying out the purposes of this part.

        New section 10932(c) of the Act would require a recipient to use funds awarded under
this subpart to develop or adapt, and test and or evaluate, new applications of educational
technologies and telecommunications, or more effective applications of existing educational
technologies and telecommunications, to support foreign language instruction in schools arid
other settings and to carry out other activities consistent with the purposes of the part.

        New section 10933 of the Act, "Applications", would require an eligible applicant, in
order to receive an award under this subpart, to submit an application to the Secretary at such
time, and containing such information, as the Secretary may require. Such application would be
required to include a description of the proposed project, including a description of the
technology and applications to be developed or adapted, and tested and evaluated, and how it
would carry out the purposes of this subpart, and a detailed plan for the independent evaluation
of the project, which shall include benchmarks to monitor progress toward specific project

                                               X-l-S
                             Hex-Dump Conversion


objectives.

         Under new section 10933(c) of the Act, the Secretary, making awards under the subpart,
would be authorized to establish one or more priorities consistent with the objectives of this part,
including priorities for projects: (1) that develop innovative models for improving teachers'
ability to use technology to deliver effective foreign language instruction at the elementary school
level; (2) that develop innovative models that serve traditionally underserved populations,
including low-income students, and students with disabilities; and (3) in which applicants or
other entities contribute substantial financial and other resources to achieve the goals of the
project.

                                               ###




                                              X-J-6
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 048 - FOLDER -010


[04/09/1999 - 0411211999]


