 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Melissa N. Benton ( CN=Melissa N. Benton/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 12-APR-1999 14:51:30.00

 SUBJECT:   LRM MNB44 - - LABOR Qs and As on S385 Safety Advancement for Employees        (SA

 TO: Janet R. Forsgren     CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Peter Rundlet    ( CN=Peter Rundlet/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP   [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Caroline R. Fredrickson ( CN=Caroline R.    Fredrickson/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO     1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Sandra Yamin ( CN=Sandra Yamin/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Cordelia W. Reimers    ( CN=Cordelia W. Reimers/OU=CEA/O=EOP@EOP [ CEA 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Lisa B. Fairhall ( CN=Lisa B. Fairhall/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Daniel J. Chenok ( CN=Daniel J. Chenok/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Larry R. Matlack ( CN=Larry R. Matlack/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Iratha H. Waters ( CN=Iratha H. Waters/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Courtney B. Timberlake ( CN=Courtney B. Timberlake/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Robert G. Damus ( CN=Robert G. Damus/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Richard J. Turman ( CN=Richard J. Turman/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Sarah Rosen ( CN=Sarah Rosen/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: John E. Thompson ( CN=John E. Thompson/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Stuart Shapiro ( CN=Stuart Shapiro/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Debra J. Bond ( CN=Debra J. Bond/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )


 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Barry White ( CN=Barry White/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP   [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 LRM JUSTICE ( LRM JUSTICE [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 LRM HHS ( LRM HHS    [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 LRM National Labor Relations Board ( LRM National Labor Relations Board [ UNKNOWN 1
 READ:UNKNOWN

 LRM COMMERCE ( LRM COMMERCE [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ :.UNKNOWN

 LRM Small Business Administration ( LRM Small Business Administration [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 LRM Office of Personnel Management ( LRM Office of Personnel Management [ UNKNOWN 1
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Note to EOP staff: you will not receive a hard copy of this LRM.

 The attachment is 11 pages long.
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Melissa N. Benton/OMB/EOP on 04/12/99
 02:45 PM ---------------------------
 LRM ID: MNB44
 EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
 OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
 Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

 Monday, April 12, 1999

 LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

 TO:                       Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

 FROM:           Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for Legislative
 Reference
 OMB CONTACT:    Melissa N. Benton
                                 PHONE: (202)395-7887 FAX: (202)395-6148
 SUBJECT:        LABOR Qs and As on S385 Safety Advancement for Employees
 (SAFE) Act of 1999

 DEADLINE:                11 a.m.  Wednesday, April 14, 1999
 In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
 agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
 program of the President .. Please advise us if this item will affect
 direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
 of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

 COMMENTS:

 DISTRIBUTION LIST



 AGENCIES:
 80-National Labor Relations Board - John E. Higgins Jr. - (202) 273-2910
 25-COMMERCE - Michael A. Levitt - (202) 482-3151
 61-JUSTICE - Dennis Burke - (202) 514-2141
 107-Small Business Administration - Mary Kristine Swedin - (202) 205-6700
 88-0ffice of Government Ethics - Jane Ley - (202) 208-8022
 92-0ffice of Personnel Management - Harry Wolf - (202) 606-1424
 52-HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES - Sondra S. Wallace - (202) 690-7760

 EOP:
 Barbara Chow
 Iratha Waters
 Barry White
 Larry R. Matlack
 Debra J. Bond
 Daniel J. Chenok
 Stuart Shapiro
 Lisa B. Fairhall
 John E. Thompson
 Karen Tramontano
 Sarah Rosen
 Cordelia W. Reimers
 Elena Kagan
 Sandra Yamin
 Richard J. Turman
 Caroline R. Fredrickson
 Robert G. Damus
 Peter Rundlet
 Courtney B. Timberlake
 Janet R. Forsgren
 LRM ID: MNB44    SUBJECT:  LABOR   Qs and As on S385 Safety Advancement for
 Employees (SAFE) Act of 1999
 RESPONSE TO
 LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
 MEMORANDUM

 If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
 comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
 response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
 call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's line) to leave a
 message with a legislative assistant.

 You may also respond by:
         (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
 connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
         (2) sending us a memo or letter
 Please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


 TO:             Melissa N. Benton Phone:   395-7887   Fax:  395-6148
                 Office of Management and Budget
                 Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant): 395-7362

 FROM:                                                     (Date)

                                                           (Name)

                                                           (Agency)


                                                          (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:

                Concur

                No Objection

                No Comment

                See proposed edits on pages

                Other:

               FAX RETURN of _____ pages, attached to this response sheet
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D73]MAIL41635061D.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043720FOOOOOI0A0201000000020500000036A5000000020000B4FC690C3AABB47BB677Al
596B3E52B74AD2B14A3B152AOA237926ABEB396B5DE5FBE92C696BC294D2FAED2DC12E250052B9
096746C71EDF45BA6Fl1E4BE2AC6BF2ECFBCFA4F4F4ECB734AC14CEID1531BC94DIBB7B3BIAF14
3EBD22C75976B7395DA5FC763CFB962FB30090FDABA505FC73461105626B3EF5FC23D17CD51ECB
D12579BFF402E5DBC2F3BBID21401B027EOD59270C3B6D07BDB21CF059BODC5FF40C49159EAEDD
03BIA7A03057F2D4BCFFA36B77303AD6BFDEB4BB2BC6272BFE0525BF07COE4BBB20Fl11492B52D
4AAB6CFEF3DF9219563B5E5BCE341CB172C2E5EA6DC6DCBOB32F32B33BDB67A04A65675FOCBC51
                              Hex-Dump Conversion




The Honorable Michael B. Enzi
Subcommittee on Employment, Safety and Training
Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions
United States Senate
Washington, DC 20510-3202

Dear Senator Enzi:

Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee regarding S.385, the SAFE
Act. OSHA is committed to working collaboratively with labor and industry to seek the most
effective ways to keep America's workplaces safe and healthy.

I enclose OSHA's responses to the questions posed by the Subcommittee members in your
March 24, 1999 letter. I hope that these responses will be helpful in clarifying OSHA's views.
I look forward to continuing our discussion about how best to improve workplace safety and
health.

                                    Sincerely,




                                    Charles N. Jeffress
                                    Assistant Secretary


Enclosure
                                Hex-Dump Conversion

Endosure

1.   Please explain your hearing tesdmony which strongly suggests that you believe that
government employees (e.g. OSHA compliance officers) have more integrity when it comes to
protecdng worker sarety and health than private consultants who are bound by the strict codes of
ethics of their proression. Evidence ofsuch a belie!is reflected in the foDowing statements of
your tesdmony:

       '7TJhe private sector is driven by the marke~ not a mandate to protect employee sarety
and health. )}
       'The consultant would reel pressured to seD penalty exempdons without rigorously
inspecdng workplaces in order to create business.  JJ




My testimony should not be interpreted to mean that I believe OSHA compliance officers have
more integrity than private consultants. We believe that private consultants, as a whole, provide
a valuable resource to employers and execute their responsibilities in a highly professional
manner. We encourage employers to use private sector consultants to help them improve the
safety and health conditions of their workplaces whenever possible.

The issue here is not one of integrity; it is an issue of neutrality and accountability. The issue is
the avoidance of conflicts of interest.

OSHA inspectors, as Federal employees, are governed by the Standards of Ethical Conduct for
Employees of the Executive Branch. These Standards, among other things, bar Federal
employees from engaging in activities that impair their ability to perform their official duties
impartially or result in conflicting financial relationships. Violations of the standards may result
in civil and criminal sanctions. A Federal employee who accepted money from an employer
whose facility he or she inspected would be guilty of violating the criminal conflict of interest
laws even if the inspection was conducted with the utmost of professionalism.

OSHA has similar concerns about the need to ensure the impartiality of consultants as the
Congress has for Federal employees. These private consultants, who are paid by an employer
and whose work under the legislation would result in penalty exemptions for that employer, may
not remain neutral and objectively perform their duties. The legislation would create an inherent
conflict of interest. For example, they risk alienation of future income if they issue strict
interpretations of compliance.

We encourage the use of professional safety and health consultants. However, even though
professionals may be covered by their professions' ethical codes, the rules applicable to Federal
employees are designed to ensure their neutrality and to hold them accountable if they do not
remain neutral. We are, therefore, opposed to the use of paid consultants whose services, as
envisioned by your legislation, may result in penalty exemptions because of the consultants'


                                                  1
                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

inherent conflicts of interest.
2. Your testimony states that OSHA can discipline OSHA inspectors who are not perfonning
 «to our standards, " yet cannot adequately discipline «unconsciendous consultants" who could
inflict harm on «thousands of worJdng Ameacans. " (P./) Please explain why a consultant
 would not be deterred trom such behawor by caminal penalties under Section 17(g) of the OSH
Act for maJdng «any /8lse statemen~ representation, or certification, " and would not be deterred
by the revocation ofa license by the proressional certifYing body fOr such behawor?             .

OSHA does not believe that the OSH Act's current provisions would effectively combat
fraudulent behavior by private consultants, because resource constraints, combined with high
burdens of proof and classification of the crime involved as a misdemeanor, make it extremely
unlikely that unconscientious consultants will be detected, prosecuted, and convicted.

First of all, the burden of proof is high. Section 17(g) states that a defendant's falsification must
be "knowing," presenting U.S. Attorneys with complex issues of proof regarding state of mind.
As Section 17(g) is a criminal provision, the defendant's state of mind must be proven beyond a
reasonable doubt. Second, even if a defendant is found guilty, a conviction under Section 17(g)
is only a misdemeanor and, thus, provides an insufficient deterrent. Finally, the percentage of
private consultants engaging in criminal activity would undoubtedly be small. Given the large
number of private consultants that would seek certification under this bill, however (OSHA
estimates the number of private consultants to be in the tens of thousands), it is unrealistic to
expect that OSHA would be able to detect a significant proportion of the violations.         In fact,
very few cases have been prosecuted under Section 17(g), precisely because the threat of criminal
prosecution is too remote to serve as an effective deterrent.

Nor do we believe that the license revocation provision in the bill serves as an adequate deterrent.
 OSHA retains a level of authority over its own inspectors because of the employer-employee
relationship. OSHA has implemented regular training and yearly evaluations of its inspectors,
and can terminate an inspector's employment or take other appropriate personnel action when the
inspector's work is subpar. Therefore, OSHA has the means to ensure that its inspectors are
fairly and conscientiously applying its standards. On the other hand, OSHA could not discipline
or dismiss consultants who have demonstrated a lack of ability in applying OSHA standards. As
explained above, OSHA would also be unable to hold private consultants to the ethical standards
addressed by the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch. Nor is it
reasonable to assume that OSHA could exert sufficient influence over a licensing body to
persuade it to initiate license revocation proceedings.

While undoubtedly only a few consultants might make false statements and certifications, it is far
more likely that consultants seeking to continue a cooperative consultant relationship will temper
their advice in accord with the employer's opinion. S. 385 does not address the impact that this
relationship between the employer and the private consultant will have over the consultant's
independent exercise of judgement.

                                                  2
                           Hex-Dump Conversion


Many standards promulgated pursuant to the OSH Act require OSHA inspectors to independently
assess an employer's compliance with a standard. Under OSHA's construction standard, for
example, an OSHA inspector is required to determine, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1926.20(b)
(Accident prevention responsibilities), whether an employer has instituted regular and frequent
inspections of a job site and, pursuant to § 1926.21 (b )(2) (Employer responsibilities), whether
employees have been instructed in the recognition and avoidance of unsafe hazards. OSHA
inspectors also assess whether an employer falls within an exception to a requirement. Pursuant
to § 1910.120(a)(I) (Hazardous waste operations and emergency response), for example, if an
OSHA inspector concludes that there is no reasonable possibility that the employer's operation
will expose employees to safety or health hazards resulting from, hazardous waste, the employer
will not be required to implement the provisions of the hazardous waste standard. Obviously, an
OSHA inspector's determination of such issues involves the exercise of professional judgment
(derived, in part, from institutional compliance knowledge) and potentially has a significant
effect on the employer's operations.

3. Please explain how the follOWing statement in your testimony could be considered accurate
given the following language taken expressly from S.385:
        Jeffress Testimony: " [UJnder the language of the legislation, it is entirely possible that
an employer and consultant would agree to an Action Plan in which the employer is not required
to come into full compliance with the OSH Act for many years. "
        S.385: "(4) Reinspection.-- At a time agreed to by the employer and the consultant, the
consultant may reinspect the workplace of the employer to verifY that the required elements in
the consultation report have been satisfied. If such requirements have been satisfied, the
employer shall be provided with a certificate of compliance for that workplace by the qualified
consultant. "

The language of the reinspection section ofS.385 allows the employer and consultant to agree to
conduct a reinspection at any time or not at all. This legislation sets no deadline regarding when
reinspection activity must be conducted. Under this provision, it would be possible for an
employer and a consultant to agree to reinspect in two weeks or in two years. Moreover, the
provision contains permissive, not mandatory, language. The bill states that the consultant may
reinspect, not that he or she must reinspect. OSHA is concerned that, in practice, this
permissive language would permit a consultant to determine that an employer has met the terms
ofthe Action Plan without reinspecting the worksite at all.

4. I agree that all employers should be encouraged to have safety and health programs in
place. But as a former small business owner, I am concerned that OSHA's draft safety and
health program rule that requires a program "appropriate" to conditions in the workplace, an
employer to evaluate the effectiveness of the program "as often as necessary, "and "where
appropriate, " to initiate corrective action. I am concerned that these requirements are over!v
broad, overly vague, and at their core, are totally unachievable.



                                                3
                         Hex-Dump Conversion

My feeling is that OSHA may do what it likes to an employer who intentionally shirks his safety
responsibility. But I have serious concerns when good faith employers- and particularly small
businesses- feel that OSHA is a foe rather than an ally in promoting safety.

 What guarantees can you give that enforcement of this rule would not be a kick in the teeth to
good faith employers? What guarantees are there tliat OSHA's enforcement would remain
flexible andfair?

OSHA has drafted the requirements in the present version of the proposed rule in very broad
language to provide employers with great flexibility to develop and implement safety and health
programs. OSHA, however, also was concerned that the program evaluation provisions in
earlier drafts of the proposed rule did not give employers sufficient notice of its requirements.
In its current draft of the proposed rule, therefore, OSHA sets forth specific parameters for
program evaluation, directing employers to evaluate the program's effectiveness at least once
within twelve months of the rule's compliance deadline, and thereafter (1) whenever the
employer has reason to believe that all or part of the program is ineffective, (2) whenever there is
a major change in the operations, and (3) at least once every three years. In addition to making
the rule more specific, OSHA plans to provide many forms ofnonmandatory compliance
assistance materials, such as model programs and decision logics, and to work with trade
associations and unions to help employers know what they have to do to comply with the rule.

Under the enforcement policy envisioned by OSHA in the current version of its draft policy
directive, it is difficult to see how good faith employers could be issued serious citations or
penalties for violating the proposed rule. A failure to comply with a requirement of the
proposed Safety and Health Program rule will be treated as an "other than serious violation," and
no penalty will be assessed as long as the employees are not exposed to a pattern of serious
hazards. An employer will be cited for a serious violation of the proposed rule and a penalty
will be assessed, if (1) the violation involves the failure to implement a safety and health program
or a core element of a program, and (2) as a result of that violation, his or her employees are
exposed to a pattern of serious hazards.           .

Finally, the Agency is also developing a comprehensive training program to assure that
compliance officers understand there are many ways for employers to implement safety and
health programs and that it would be improper to narrowly interpret the proposal's broad
language to transform it through the enforcement process into a specification rule. The Agency
will also publish a statement of its enforcement policy simultaneously with any final regulation to
guide employers and compliance officers alike.

5. I have additional concerns about the draft enforcement policy of this rule. which also
contains "performance-based" language similar to the draft rule. OSHA's draft enforcement
policy states that employers will be cited for a serious violation when employees are exposed to a
"pattern ofserious hazards." Please explain what you mean by the term "pattern of serious
hazards. " which is undefined anywhere in the draft rule or enforcement policy. Does it mean


                                                 4
                            Hex-Dump Conversion

two violations? Three violations? And what must the violations be?

Additionally, could you have a "pattern" just by having one substantive violation of an OSHA
rule or regulation? Could OSHA "piggyback" one citation of a substantive OSHA standard
onto another citation for not including that same substantive OSHA standard into the safety and
health program? For example, could an OSHA inspector issue a citation to an employer for a
particular violation of the lockoutltagout rule, and then issue another citation for not including
that same, particular section of the lockoutltagout rule in the safety and health program?

The current draft enforcement policy for this proposed rule follows the "New OSHA" policy of
distinguishing between employers who make a good faith effort to comply with the rule and
those who do not. Thus,

       A failure to comply with a requirement of the safety and health program rule will be
       treated as an "other than serious violation" and no penalty will be assessed as long as the
       employees are not exposed to a pattern of serious hazards.

       However, an employer will be cited for a serious violation and a penalty will be assessed
       if:

       (i)      the violation involves the failure to implement a safety and health program or a
                core element of a program, and
       ( ii )   as a result of that violation, his or her employees are exposed to a pattern of
                serious hazards.

OSHA's current working definition of a "pattern of serious hazards," for purposes of the draft
safety and health program rule, is: 1) A number of covered hazards of the same or similar type or
covered hazards resulting from the same or similar deficiencies in the safety and health program;
or 2) a variety of covered hazards resulting from various deficiencies in the program and
representing a general failure to control hazards. Thus, a violation of a particular OSHA
standard or the General Duty Clause does not automatically constitute a violation of the safety
and health program rule. A single violation of an OSHA standard would not constitute a
"pattern" and OSHA would not "piggyback" one citation for violation of a substantive standard
(e.g. the lockoutltagout rule) onto another citation for not including that same OSHA standard in
the safety and health program.


Questions from Senator Tim Hutchinson:

1. How many charges are brought by OSHA against employers in a typical year?

Please see chart below.



                                                 5
                                    HeX-Dump Conversion

2. Does OSHA categorize the investigation of these charges by size of employer?

For each inspection, OSHA identifies the number of employees in the establishment being
inspected, the total number of employees covered by the inspection and the total number of
employees who are employed by the employer. This last figure is especially important, because
it affects the amount of penalty reduction given to the employer if citations are proposed. An
employer with between I and 25 employees normally receives a 60 percent reduction in the
penalty; an employer with 26 to 100 employees receives a 40 percent reduction; and an
employer with 101 to 250 employees normally receives a 20 percent reduction. (There is no
reduction on account of size for employers with more than 250 employees, but all employers are
eligible for additional reductions of up to 35 percent for good faith and past history.)

3. How many of these charges are against employers with 100 or less employees?

Please see chart below.

4. How many of these charges are against employers with 50 or less employees?

Please see chart below.

5. How many of these charges are against employers with more than 50 but less than 100
employees?


                                                                                                          Total                  Total
                Establishment Size By Number of Employees                                              Inspections             Violations
                          Controlled Nationwide                                                        Conducted                 Cited
                                                                                                          FY98                   FY98

 Totals l   -   all Federal OSHA Inspections Nationwide
                                                                                                           34,443                76,980

 Employers With 100 or Fewer Employees Nationwide
                                                                                                           22,959                51,765

 Employers With 50 Or Fewer Employees Nationwide
                                                                                                           18,764                42,589

 Employers With Between 50 and 100 Employees
 Nationwide                                                                                                 4,195                 9,176

I Totals include numbers of inspections conducted and violations cited for all employers. including those employing more than 100 employees.




                                                                       6
                          Hex-Dump Conversion

6. How many of these charges are contested and then considered by the Occupational Safety
and Health Review Commission?

In 1998,2;061 Federal OSHA inspections resulting in citations were contested. Of the contested
cases, 1,081 involved employers with 100 or fewer employees nationwide, 815 involved
employers with 50 or fewer employees nationwide, and 266 involved employers with between 50
and 100 employees nationwide. Most cases are settled or withdrawn before the Review
Commission issues a final decision. Review Commission judges adjudicated 158 cases,
following a full hearing, during FY 1998.

7. How much injines did OSHA collect in 1998?

In FY 1998, OSHA collected $54,626,890 in penalties, which were deposited into the U.S.
Treasury.

8.   How much in fines did OSHA assess in 1998?

In FY 1998, OSHA assessed $61,281,264 in penalties.

9. Please state any and aU benefits that OSHA realizes when employers within the scope ofits
jurisdicdon employ third-party safety consultants.

In the abstract, apart from S. 385, if an employer successfully uses the knowledge gained from
the private consultant, everyone benefits: the company becomes a safer and healthier workplace
and can be more profitable as a result; the employees work in a safer environment; and OSHA
may deploy its resources to other, more hazardous workplaces. It is more difficult to gauge the
benefits OSHA as an agency might gain. Certainly, if an industry sector experiences measurable
improvement in illness and injury rates as a result of widespread use of consultants, OSHA
would eventually be able to redirect its compliance resources elsewhere.

Under the scheme provided in S.385, however, we believe any benefits to OSHA's worker
protection program would be far outweighed by the regulatory confusion which would be
created and by the significant resource drain which implementing the bill would entail.

10. In your testimony, you stated that you believed that collusion would result from the use of
third-party safety consultants by employers within the scope of OSHA's jurisdiction.
Accordingly, please state: (1) what percentage or likelihood do you suspect this would happen in
the workplace?; and (2) given that percentage and the fact that whatever system we employ to
govern workplace safety cannot possibly be perfect, don't you feel the advantages far outweigh
the disadvantages?

OSHA believes that the number of private consultants engaging in criminal activity would


                                               7
                             Hex-Dump Conversion

 undoubtedly be small. OSHA is concerned about the potential for a consultant's independent
 judgment to be undermined by his or her consideration of a future financial relationship with the
 employer being evaluated. OSHA also is concerned that the legislation would create an
 incentive for employers to "forum shop" to find a friendly consultant. Clearly, as indicated in
 the response to question 9, private consultants have a legitimate role to play in advancing safety
 and health, and many safety conscious employers are using them. However, tying a private
 consultation to a penalty exemption goes too far. In short, OSHA believes that the benefits
 would not outweigh the disadvantages of allowing private individuals to grant penalty
 exemptions.

 11. Please describe in detail the efforts, if any, made to recruit individuals who are experts in
 the industry in which they will inspect or regulate.

  The Department of Labor/OSHA is a competitive agency, which means that our vacancies are
  announced under open, competitive merit staffing procedures. Our vacancies are routinely listed
. on the Internet under the Office of Personnel Management's (OPM's) website and are listed
  under the Department of Labor's website. In addition, OSHA has developed a mailing list
  consisting of professional organizations, colleges and universities, and labor organizations/trade
  unions, to which many of our key vacancies are referred. We also advertise many of our key
  vacancies in professional magazines and publications. OSHA does not recruit individuals in
  specific industries. See our responses to questions 12 and 13 for additional information.

 12. How many years of education are required to become an OSHA inspector?

 OSHA vacancies are primarily comprise compliance officer (inspector) positions. The generic
 term "OSHA compliance officer" encompasses several job series, including industrial hygienists,
 safety engineers and safety and occupational health specialists. The minimum qualifications for
 these series of jobs are:

 Industrial Hygienist - Successful completion of a full four-year course of study in an accredited
 college or university creditable towards a bachelor's or higher degree in industrial hygiene, or a
 branch of engineering, physical science, or life science. This study must have included, or have
 been supplemented by twelve (12) semester hours of course work in chemistry, including organic
 chemistry, and eighteen (18) additional semester hours of courses in any combination of the
 following fields: chemistry, physics, engineering, health physics, environmental health, .
 biostatistics, biology, physiology, toxicology, epidemiology, or industrial hygiene.

 Safety Engineer - A degree in professional engineering from a school of engineering with at
 least one curriculum accredited by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology
 (ABET).

 Safety and Occupational Health Specialist - Successful completion of a full 4-year course
 above high school leading to a bachelor's degree in safety and occupational health fields (safety,


                                                  8
                            Hex-Dump Conversion

occupational health, industrial hygiene), or bachelor's or higher degree in other related fields that
included or was supplemented by at least 24 semester hours of study from among the foIlowing
disciplines: safety, occupational health, industrial hygiene, occupational medicine, toxicology,
public health, mathematics, physics, chemistry, biological sciences, engineering, and industrial
psychology.

13. Would you agree that experience in, understanding of, and familiarity with a particular
industry allows an inspector to better identify safety and health risks and potential violations?

OSHA agrees that familiarity with a particular industry aIlows inspectors to better identify health
and safety risks and potential violations, and many journeyman level OSHA inspectors are
experts in specific areas such as maritime and construction. However, all OSHA inspectors
have the necessary education and/or experience to conduct inspections and perform duties to
enforce Federal safety and health standards, and to provide technical assistance and consultation
to employers and employees to ensure the safety and health of the American worker.


Questions from Senator Chuck Hagel:

1.  Nebraska's employers have expressed consjderable concern about OSHA's proposal to
require ''employee participadon" as a core element ofa safety and health program. In particular,
employers are worried tha~ in complying with OSHA's requirement they may be forced to
violate the Nadonal Labor Reladons Act. What can you tell us that will ease or refute the/i'
concerns?

Employee participation in employer-sponsored health and safety programs is not inherently
unlawful under the NLRA. Many employers, in a variety of industries, have successfuIly
implemented safety and health programs with employee involvement, which indicates that
worker participation in employer-sponsored workplace safety and health programs can be
structured in ways which comply with the requirements of the NLRA.

In unionized workplaces, labor-management health and safety committees constituted under
coIlective bargaining agreements are, of course, lawful under the NLRA. Moreover, even in
nonunion workplaces, NLRB decisions make clear that an employer may communicate about
health or safety issues with individual employees, or groups of employees, or with all of its
employees, so long as no employee is put in the position of representing other workers, which
might bring the group within the NLRA definition of a labor organization. Communicating
individuaIly with employees or holding all-employee safety sessions would appear to bc a
practical means of compliance for smaIl employers, especiaIly those with 20 or fewer workers,
which constitute 85% of covered employers.

Delegating an employee the responsibility for monitoring a particular hazard or for implementing
certain precautions or safety procedures in the workplace, with no expectation the employee wiII


                                                  9
                         Hex-Dump Conversion

represent other workers, would appear to be an ordinary job assignment and not an unfair labor
practice. It is clear that "brainstonning" groups or infonnation gathering committees, whose job
is to assemble ideas or factual infonnation which will be forwarded to management for
decisionmaking, do not involve "dealing with" and are similarly lawful under the NLRA.
Periodic safety conferences at which employees discuss and develop suggestions to be submitted
to management or to a union-management safety committee have specifically been upheld by the
NLRB.

2. (A) What specific criteria do you expect employers and OSHA inspectors to use to measure
the "effectiveness" of their safety and health program? (B) the number of injuries? (C) the
number of accidents?

The effectiveness of the program will be detennined by each employer's ability to establish and
maintain a safety and health program to systematically achieve compliance with OSHA standards
and the General Duty Clause. The program must be appropriate to conditions in the workplace,
such as the hazards to which employees are exposed and the number of employees there. The
purpose of this rulemaking is to reduce the number of job-related fatalities, injuries and illnesses,
as well as a number of "near misses," by requiring employers to establish a workplace safety and
health program. The success of such a program may be judged in part by the extent of reduction
in the number and seriousness of workplace hazards. The proposed draft was devised broadly
and flexibly to allow employers in diverse situations to comply with its requirements as
appropriate to the hazards, size, and other conditions of their own workplaces. The proposed
draft simply requires employers to implement good consensus management practices on safety
and health. As an integral part of applying the rule, the Agency will provide checklists, model
programs, decision logics, and other materials to help employers detennine how to comply and
what constitutes compliance with its requirements.

3. OSHA acknowledges the low incidence rates by small businesses as indicated by the Bureau
ofLabor Statistics. OSHA's explanation for these low numbers rests on one study which found
that under-reporting as a reason for the low numbers. How did the study come to the
conclusion that under-reporting is indeed occurring at small businesses regarding injuries and
illnesses? Furthermore, how is this proposed rule going to prevent the injuries and illnesses of
these unreported cases?

BLS data show that establishments with 10 or fewer employees have less than half the average
illness and injury rate. Small businesses with 11 to 49 employees have 85 percent of the average
injury and illness rates, and small business with 50 to 249 employees have a higher injury and
illness rate than the average for all establishments. Thus the phenomenon of very low reported
injury and illness rates is limited to finns with fewer than 10 employees that OSHA does not
inspect unless there is a complaint.

In an effort to understand why smaller finns might have lower injury and illness incidence rates,
the authors of one study examined whether smaller firms differed from larger firms in workforce


                                                 10
                          Hex-Dump Conversion

composition, in working conditions for specific industries and occupations, in labor turnover
rates, and in access to preventive safety training and safety monitoring. The authors were unable
to attribute differences in reported injury and illness rates to differences in any of these factors by
employment size. Therefore, they concluded small employers as a group may routinely
underreport workplace injuries, perhaps because their recordkeeping systems are inadequate:

       With the rejection of alternative explanations, there is a strong likelihood of
       underreporting as the explanation, and we estimate that the annual [BLS] survey
       substantially undercounts injuries in small establishments (Oleinick et aI., "Establishment
       Size and Risk of Occupational Injury," Am. J. Ind. Med., 28(1): 2-3 (1995»

NIOSH reached an essentially identical position: "recent literature comparing Annual Survey
data and workers compensation data questions the validity of the estimated rates for small
employers obtained through the BLS Annual Survey" (NIOSH comments on OSHA's Proposed
Recordkeeping Rule, June 28, 1996, Docket ..... , Exh.15-407, p. 2).

The proposed rule seeks to reduce all non-minor illnesses and injuries, whether reported or
unreported, by requiring employers to conduct self inspections of their facilities. Such self
inspection can find hazards that accident investigations alone would not reveal.

4. In estimating the costs of creating and maintaining records of the results ofhazard
identification and assessmen~ OSHA used the average national wage rate of clerical personnel
Is this an accurate reflection for smaU businesses where almost all the work involved in setting up
a safety and health program will be perfonned by a manager whose time value is much more
than that ofan average clerical personnel?

The proposed safety and health program rule exempts employers with fewer than ten
employees--approximately 75% of all covered workplaces--from hazard identification,
assessment, and control documentation requirements. Therefore, nearly three quarters of all
workplaces do not have to create and maintain any records pursuant to the proposed rule. Of
those larger workplaces that are not included in the exemption, many have already implemented
similar hazard assessment programs. Furthennore, larger workplaces that do not have programs
in place are likely to have clerical staff available to create and maintain records pursuant to the
proposed rule, and will not have to use managerial hours in order to comply.




                                                  11


