RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-APR-1999 09:34:13.00

SUBJECT:   FW: AG press club speech

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI -- draft of AG's speech ... jc3
---------------------- Forwarded by Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP on 04/14/99
09:35 AM ---------------------------



        Ricki.L.Seidman @ intmail.~sdoj.gov
        04/13/99 09:37:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Jose Cerda III
cc:
Subject: FW: AG press club speech

Please review and comment, either to me or directly to Richard.

-----Original Message-----
From:    Jerome Richard
Sent:    Tuesday, April 13, 1999 9:35 PM
To:      Seidman Ricki L; Marlin Myron L; DiBartolo Christine; Jackson
Brian A; Tenorio Chris; Delia Bernie; Gess Nicholas M; Lee Bill Lann;
Jerkins Jayne; Fernandes Julie; King Loretta; Rosenbaum Steven; Posner
Mark; Moskowitz Albert; Burke Dennis K; Scot
t-Finan Nancy; Simon Charles A; Ochi Rose; Wong Byron; Henderson George;
'ellen.scrivner2@Usdoj.gov'; Ward Dick; Brann, Joe; McDonald Phyllis;
Kelly Candace; Harkins Ann; Perrelli Thomas J; Raymond Fisher; William R.
Yeomans
Subject:         AG press club speech

Attached is the latest draft of the AG's speech for Thursday.  Pelase
review it as early as possible and provide comments to me by 1:00 or 2:00
if possible. Thanks so much, and sorry for the short turnaround.    I may
also be sending you a revised version
 before the morning.



==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D62]MAIL412402812.136 to ASCII,


 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750432DIIOOOOOIOA02010000000205000000D9900000000200OOA47A9CA3A3788D83947ABC
A3A8349293120EOC8A913B44678CF3BB35D90B2C75CB7C8D87A04EAF7DOOB4CD8342152B8F50AO
CA053406E7DEC921F93FD8C69F4069FD218F2E91C161E61111953869987FB12362D27B8F280B42
8AOACAOEDB71BF7E04CF4C4E4EEEECOCF6224162AF599FFC9EFE91A700FDA921B67CC2B90E8BDF
EIED49D6B829F3F40DB8306B92380BBB75C4B8A48EF38B9C51943DD9F955E6F89AACF85BD42243.
644248DC78EB14B416D274942C827DBB6F41F5B78CD3C73714FA7563163743BDF70FE318D68570
8BA34B6D393C7F7A8691E9E88581EF18338BEAFOFF94B3468A4FlAE820A472573BF9D77BC7F224
AEED346BBIB8C1886801732F3E41EEOC4637300032B7B41C2964FE40799C17959A5A51F9B9EB36
E66852DB82EAAF5E87464CB19EB84AB80F667AE73246CF5C5969964AO51CIB67A43E9FDADFCA84
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
I. Defining the Problem

Good afternoon.

       Across the country, communities are considering the way in which police officers do their

jobs ... how they handle deadly confrontations ... and how they interact with the people they serve.

[I have worked in law enforcement for over - years, and I know that] the job of the police officer

is one of the most difficult jobs there is, and certainly one of the most noble. A police officer is

charged with protecting life and property, but he is also empowered to use force, and if

necessary, to take life, to carry out that mission. The police are there to protect us from crime,

but they must protect our rights at the same time. And to do their work effectively, the police

must have the trust and confidence of the communities in which they serve. They must develop

a partnership with the citizens they protect.

     _ Ever since I became Attorney General, I have tried my best to get all segments of our

society to work together in the fight against crime. State and local law enforcement working

together with federal law enforcement - identifying a problem and working together to solve it.

I have tried to get businesses, and clergy, schools and social agencies to come together at the

table, because crime is a problem that all of us can contribute to solving and no one of us can

solve alone.

       That's what we have been doing for the past six years ... and we have been succeeding.

For the past 6 years, crime has fallen. Every year, and in virtually every category.      That is

success.

       But despite all of our success, there are communities -- especially minority communities


                                                  1
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

-- where residents experience as much anxiety about police officers, as they experience fear of

crime.

Today, in too many communities, the trust that is so essential to effective policing has been

broken because of incidents of excessive force. Confidence in the police has been eroded

because residents believe they are being treated unfairly -- that law enforcement is

biased ... disrespectful ... or simply too aggressive.

         The gulf in how the criminal justice system is viewed by whites and minorities is

confirmed by recent polls. In a 1995 Gallup survey, 63% of whites said they have a great deal or

quite a lot of confidence in the police; only 26% of African Americans said the same. One in

three African Americans said they have little or no faith in the police. A 1998 survey by

Gallup, CNN and USA Today found that a majority of whites thought that police officers treat

blacks and whites equally, while only --% of African Americans believed the police acted fairly.

         Whether these feelings are based on individual experiences, or based on the stories and

perceptions of others, what matters is that those feelings are very real. And the tensions that

arise between the police and minority residents have serious consequences - both in terms of

effective policing and the danger of community unrest.

         When minority communities, in the wake of a shooting, immediately assume the police

         officer, not the suspect, is at fault -- we have a problem.

         When "Driving While Black" is a term so common that entire communities know it by

         its initials, we have a problem.

·        When even a U.S. Attorney who is African American, feels he has to instruct his son to

         be careful of the police when he drives out of the city and into the neighboring white


                                                     2
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
        suburb - we have a problem.

        We all know about the tragic shooting death of Amadou Diallo in the streets of New York

City two months ago. And, today, as I speak, thousands of people are taking to the streets of

New York to protest what they view as a case of police use of excessive force. But, the issue is

not just about one shooting. The issue is not just about one city. It is much larger than New

York. It is an issue that is national in scope.

       The Diallo case is now with the courts to decide. But no matter what the outcome of the

case, we have to face the tragic fact that Amadou Diallo will no longer be with us. And we must

take from this incident, from others like it, and from the attention that they have generated,

lessons about the proper role of the police in our diverse democracy.

       Over the past several weeks, I have been meeting with police chiefs and civil rights

leaders .. .listening to their concerns, their ideas and their plans. I have been finding out that both

law enforcement and the civil rights community understand that we are, and must be, in this

together. We have to work through these issues and "get them right." [There is probably no task

more important to create safe neighborhoods and address civil rights concerns than to improve

relations and build greater trust between minority communities and law enforcement. And every

police chiefthat I have talked to and every community leader I have met shares this

commitment.] [rework last 2 sentences?]

II. Good cops don't like bad cops

       Now some people -- especially those in the minority community -- are wondering whether

our success in reducing crime'has been due, in part, to overly aggressive cops who no longer care

about the civil liberties of Americans. Too many people are beginning to believe that you


                                                   3
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

cannot have falling crime rates, without increased reports of police abuse. Well...theyare

wrong.

         Effective policing does not mean abusive policing. It does not mean violating the civil

liberties of the very people police officers are sworn to protect.

         Effective policing means law enforcement living up to a contract with the communities

they serve. A contract of integrity and fairness. Americans agree to abide by the law, and, in

tum, law enforcement agrees to maintain the trust of the community and treat citizens with

respect and dignity.

         Across the country, there are nearly 700,000 law enforcement officers. And the

overwhelming majority are hard working public servants who do a dangerous job with honor,

fairness and skill. They put their lives on the line every day in the pursuit of justice. And they

do that because it is part of their job, part of that contract with the people they are committed to

serving. I support these dedicated officers.

         But I will not tolerate officers who cross the line and abuse their position by mistreating

law-abiding citizens, or who bring their own racial bias to their job of policing. No person

should be subject to unreasonable force, and no person should be targeted by law enforcement

based on the color of his or her skin. Equal justice under law must mean the same thing in

minority communities as it does in the larger community.

         In fact, police chiefs and rank and file officers alike agree. They tell me that if we want

to maintain the trust and confidence of the community, we must take decisive action against

those few officers who violate their oath.

         [should we cite as example of law enforcement agreement on this principle the IACP


                                                   4
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


report on traffic stops? They say that traffic enforcement "that is race or ethnic based is neither

legal, consistent with democratic ideals, values and principles of American policing, nor in any

way a legitimate and defensible public protection strategy. It is not, cannot, and will not be

tolerated by the police profession."]

Ill. Consequences of breakdown in trust

       The loss of confidence in the police by minority communities has damaging

consequences that affect the entire community. When citizens do not trust the cop on the street,

they are less willing to report crime and less willing to be witnesses in criminal cases. That is a

major problem because often this occurs in the very communities that are disproportionately

affected by crime. If law enforcement cannot apprehend and convict the criminals, then crime

increases, and the neighborhood deteriorates.

       But that's not all. When there is a breach of trust, it means that violent confrontations

are more likely to occur. It means citizens are more distrustful of the police, more tense when

there is an encounter, and perhaps less likely to cooperate. As a result, police officers are more

tense and more likely to react with more force than necessary.    Suddenly, an innocent encounter

can become a deadly clash.

       That is why we must act.     We must take the steps to repair the breach and ensure that

the problem of police integrity is addressed.

VI. What we can do -

       The first step in addressing this problem is to bring law enforcement and leaders of the

community together to discuss the problem, explore promising solutions and begin to

disseminate best practices. This dialogue has already begun around the country. Just last week,


                                                 5
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

the Police Executive Research Forum brought 20 police chiefs from around the country to

Washington. Each police chief was asked to bring with him one or two community leaders from

their city so they could discuss the issues surrounding police misconduct. I attended part of the

discussion and I believe it was an extremely constructive conversation. But it is only the start.

       In the next two months, I will be convening a conference of police leaders, civil rights

advocates, experts in police practices, to advance this dialogue and to add to the knowledge we

have of strategies that are working.

       Today, I would like to focus on five areas that I think will form the foundation of our

efforts to foster police integrity and eliminate police misconduct.

[They are: first, developing policing strategies, such as community policing, that emphasize

partnerships with the community; second, enhancing police accountability through effective

management and discipline; third, shaping our young officers so that we bring in police recruits

with sensitivity to the community, and properly train them to be prepared for their job; fourth,

vigilant civil rights enforcement; and last, improving our efforts to measure our success.]

A. Police Partnerships

       [Intro.] Partnership and dialogue is at the heart of community policing. For the past 5

years, we have been busy fulfilling the President's goal of putting 100,000 police officers on the

street. But, these are not just any police officers -- they are community police officers.

       As many of you know, community policing is a type of policing that seeks to establish

better relationships between police officers and the communities they serve. It means building a

sense of community and establishing stronger lines of communication, through such measures as

community meetings, neighborhood functions, and door-to-door visits. It also includes creating


                                                 6
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion'

partnerships between the police and institutions such as the schools and clergy. In cities across

this country, police departments are encouraging officers to organize and participate in

community activities, and encouraging the community to participate in police decision-making.

        By breaking down suspicions and building up trust, the neighborhood police officer can

once again become known as a peacemaker and problem solver, without relinquishing his or her

enforcement responsibilities.

        For instance, in Richmond, the police chiefis not just sending police officers into the

community, he is inviting the community into the police department. There, they help draft the

policies that the police officers live by. [Fill in]

        Just last week, I traveled to Winston Salem, North Carolina to see an initiative that brings

different segments of the community together to solve a particular law enforcement challenge.

The police department had established its basic law enforcement training program at a school for

at-risk youth. As part of that basic law enforcement training, these police officers were working

as mentors with young people in the school. It was fascinating to hear from one young man who

said, "I didn't like the police and I didn't trust them. I used to tum and walk the other way when

I saw them." And then he got into trouble. He said, "When they first started to talking to me I

didn't listen to them; I turned away from them. And then I started listening, and they h~d

something to say." It was one of the best experiences that I've had in several months in terms of

seeing police and young people relate together.            Improving relations is something which you

can accomplish overnight, but there are so many dedicated, wonderful police officers who are

building bridges just as those trainees were doing it in Winston-Salem, and it gives me great

encouragement.


                                                       7
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

         [In Baltimore, through a PAL program, police are working with young people in the

community and learning to relate to them and how to talk to them. So much is being done. And

what I said earlier was, we've got to identify what's working and exchange that with other police

agencies, and identify what doesn't work or what exacerbates the problem and dismiss that.]

[Add Clergy outreach; and Oregon agreement.]

        Last month, President Clinton announced that we will create citizen- police academies.

These centers will enable citizens to better understand the police and the challenges they face

every day.B. Police Accountability

        Second, we must encourage police accountability. This must start with the Police

Departments themselves, from the Chiefs on down. There is no substitute for police leadership

to make clear that misconduct is unacceptable. It is the police themselves who must guarantee a

culture of integrity, accountability and responsibility. They must be intolerant of misconduct by

fellow officers, and make it unacceptable to keep silent with respect to other officers'

misconduct. In addition, there are several aspects of a police department's operations that are

essential to fostering police accountability.

        Every police department should have a complaint process whereby citizens can file a

complaint without fear. If a citizen fears retaliation, then they won't file a complaint and the

department will never know that it has a problem on its hands. Some police departments have

accomplished this by moving their internal affairs unit to a separate building so that citizens do

not have to worry about coming face to face with the officer they are complaining about.        Other

departments have set up a phone-in or Internet reporting process. [Add Baltimore]

       Every police department should make sure it has in place a vigorous system for


                                                 8
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
investigating allegations of misconduct thoroughly and fairly. That means ensuring there is

sufficient funding and staffing to pursue each complaint so the citizen sees they have not been

ignored. [Add where?]

       Police departments must have the will to swiftly discipline officers against whom verified

complaints are lodged. If they do not do that, then police officers will think they can cross the

line with impunity.

       Police departments also should be prepared to account for every instance when an officer

uses force. That means getting officers to report such uses of force, and having police

supervisors determine whether the force was appropriate or not. [Add example]

       Police departments can also implement what are known as "early warning systems" to

identify potential problem officers. [explain early warning systems] If the complaints are

coming in at a higher rate, those officers can be given more training or reassigned if necessary.

[Add Pittsburgh]

       Finally, police departments need ways to get an independent view of their performance.

In Washington, D.C., the police chief asked the Justice Department to come on in and review its

record on excessive force. As a result of the Christopher Commission reforms, the LAPD

created an Inspector General for the Department. And the Pittsburgh police department has

hired an outside monitor, to whom complaints can be brought and evaluated.

       Many of these measures have come about as a result of some of the agreements we have

reached with police department over the years. And although each police department must

consider its own situation and how these measures might work.

C. Shaping Young Officers


                                                 9
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

        Third, we need to ensure that police departments recruit officers who reflect the

community they serve, with high moral standards and who are then properly trained to deal with

the stresses and dangers of police work.

        In years past, too many police departments had no blacks and no Hispanics.          But today,

that is improving. Now we have not just men in blue, but women in blue. Not just whites, but

people of all colors. That's so important. Police departments should, in many ways, reflect the

neighborhoods they serve. And when someone who grows up in the neighborhood, become an

officer there, they better understand the people and they know the languages spoken there. They

are men and women our youth can look up to as role models. Old stereotypes and prejudices are

not as likely to be passed on to the next generation of police departments if those departments

represent a diverse mix of society. I'm proud ofthis progress, and you should be too.

        We also need to emphasize integrity in our recruitment. As Tom Frazier, Chief of

Baltimore's Police Department puts it: "We must recruit those who come to policing in the

spirit of service, not in the spirit of adventure."

       Having recruited the right officer, we must then do a better job of training them.        They

must know when it is appropriate to use force and when other non-forceful means will do. That

is not always easy. The job of a police officer is very difficult; try to picture it from the polici.

officer's perspective:

         You've just received a call about a drug store that was robbed. The suspects are two

Hispanic teenagers. You happen to be in the area when you see two Hispanic youth walking

briskly down the street. You yell out to them. And, suddenly they start to run. You give

chase. They split up. You focus on one of the two, letting the other go. You follow him in to


                                                      10
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


an alley in a high crime neighborhood. All of a sudden, you realize he is trapped. You yell out

that you're a cop and order him to put his hands in the air. But instead, the panicked youth

suddenly swirls around, holding a shiny object that appears to be a gun. Equally panicked, you

pull our your gun, and without time to reflect, pull the trigger.

       Was it a gun? Why did the suspect run? Did you hit the youth? Was he in fact the

robber? Were you right to pursue him in the first place?

       Because this is just a tale ... we can't know the answers to these questions. The most

relevant question may be, however, whether you were trained for such an encounter and

whether you did everything you reasonably could to avoid the use of force.

       What is also important, is that residents understand that police officers are people too.

They must realize that police officers, in situations like that, can be fearful of their own lives. In

a recent speech, Washington D.C.'s police chief, Charles Ramsey, noted the importance of

dealing with officers' fears in trying to prevent excessive force incidents. He said that "they are

fearful of many of the same things the community is afraid of: the unpredictable nature of crime

and violence on the streets they patrol." They are fearful with good reason. Over the last

decade, 688 law enforcement officers were killed in the line of duty, 633 with firearms.     We

need to develop strategies to address these fears and deal with some of the stress of police work.

       What we cannot do is allow officers fears' to become exaggerated, and develop into

mistrust of the community and suspicions based on stereotypes. As Chief Ramsey noted, these

fears are brought on by a narrow view of the world.

       "For many police officers, especially those working in high crime areas, their lives have

       become a 'good guy vs. bad guy' drama played out in the communities they serve. And


                                                  11
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

       these officers see so many ofthe latter that they lose sight of the former -- the good,

        law-abiding people who make up the vast majority of residents even in the most

       crime-infested communities .... [This] fear, among both police officers and community

        members - tends to breed mistrust, which in tum fosters stereotypes, which in tum leads

       to an exaggerated sense of the differences between our two groups."

       Thus, our training must prepare officers for violent confrontations, but it also must deal

with non-deadly confrontations. Officers must know how to interact with citizens, how to use

alternatives to force, and how it is wrong to assume that the race or ethnicity of a person

determines on which side of the law that person falls.

       Last December, we assembled a group oflaw enforcement officers, community leaders

and scholars to discuss the best way to train officers on law enforcement stops. Police stops are

such an important component to effective policing, but only if it is done in a non-discriminatory

manner. As a result of that conference, a team of experts are meeting this week in our federal

training center in Georgia developing model training materials for local police departments on

issues such as racial profiling.

D. Civil Rights Enforcement

       The steps I have outlined so far are things we can do to prevent misconduct in the first

place. But, when it occurs, we must take swift and sure action, and that means prosecution when

appropriate.

       Most cases of police excessive use of force are prosecuted by the state and local

authorities, but the Justice Department also has a role to play. At any given time, the Civil

Rights Division and the FBI are investigating several hundred allegations of criminal police


                                                 12
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
misconduct around the country. Since 1993, the Justice Department has criminally prosecuted

more than 300 law enforcement officers who have engaged in misconduct -- resulting in over 200

convictions. [check numbers as to excessive force]

       During FY 1998, alone, a total of74law enforcement officers were charged with federal

criminal civil rights violations -   the most law enforcement defendants charged in a single year.

        We pursue these cases with great dispatch. But, we recognize that the law sets a very

high standard of proof. To prove a federal crime, we must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that

the officers had the specific intent to use more force than was reasonably necessary under the

circumstances, given their training, experience, and perceptions.

       It is a high standard that often means we are unable to bring a case to court. But, even

with this high standard of proof, when we do bring the case, we are very successful. Last year

we had a 89 percent conviction rate.

       Additionally, we also have the authority to pursue police departments when we believe

they are engaged in a pattern of misconduct. Under this authority, know as our "pattern and

practice" authority, we can go to a court to force the police department to change the way it does

business.

       Using this authority, we are currently investigating several law enforcement agencies

across the country.    For example, we have reached agreements with police departments in

Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and Steubenville, Ohio.       And many of the requirements of those

consent decrees are similar to the ones I previously outlined.

E. Getting a handle on the scope of the problem

       Fifth, and last, we must take steps to gather the data that will help define the scope of the


                                                  13
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

problem.     Right now we only have anecdotes and allegations. We need more.

       Today, there is little data collection or reporting by police agencies across the country.

So we have lots of questions, but few answers.

           How often are police officers accused of using excessive force?

           Are the allegations of wrongdoing any greater than they have been in years past?

           Are minorities being stopped by police because oftheir race as opposed to what they

may have done?

       For the past several years the Department of Justice has tried to develop ways of

measuring the level of excessive force incidents. Because police departments often don't keep

such records, and because they are not required to report to the federal government statistics on

use of force by their officers, we have had only limited success in developing this information.

       That is why the Department of Justice is trying a new way of keeping track of the

problem. Every year, the Justice Department issues a survey that goes to households across the

country. It is a survey that asks whether someone has been a victim of crime. Those of you

who cover the Department, know that this Crime Victimization Survey is perhaps one the most

accurate reflections of law enforcement trends.

       This year, we are going to update that survey to include questions on police misconduct.

Questions like: "Have you ever had an encounter with the police in which any force was used?"

[get specifics on questions from BJS]

       By doing this, we can get a better sense of the relationship citizens have with law

enforcement. And we will know whether the efforts police departments take are succeeding.

       It is also so very important that we address the feelings of Americans who feel that police


                                                  14
                                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


officers are stopping them on the highway, or harassing them in their neighborhoods because of

race. Let's address it, let's hit it head-on. Ifpolice officers say they are not, let's stand behind

them, but stand behind them with hard facts. And, where we see the problem, let's do something

about it.      I believe data coIlection in the area of police stops is very important.    By

keeping track by race of who is pulled over, and which motorists are subjected to searches, we

can see how real the perception actually is.    If the numbers show that there is not a problem,

then minority communities will have a better outlook on the law enforcement. And ifthe

numbers are in fact disproportionate, then police departments will be able to study the issue and

set out ways to reduce the discrepancy.

        Just last month I traveled to San Diego. There I met with a police chief who is

developing a program whereby an officer on the beat who stops someone is required to put that

stop into the computer which he has with him. I watched it in action and it's easily done. It

takes very little time and I don't think it's disruptive of the officer's day. They are not compiling

specific case information, they are compiling numbers to see if they are skewed in a way that

indicate an inappropriate reliance on a racial profile. I think that speaks volumes for what police

can do in other ways to identify the scope ofthe problem; and to take steps to correct it.

        VI. Conclusion! Dialogue needed

        In the past few weeks, I have met with police officers, and community leaders to discuss

the issue. We all acknowledge that there is a problem we must face. But we also know that

there so many examples of great policing in the field that can renew the level of trust in the

community.     Both sides must continue reaching out to each other; talking to each other.        And

we will solve this problem.


                                                  15
             Hex-Dump Conversion




16


