     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-APR-1999 19:43:18.00

     SUBJECT:   Eyent Ideas

     TO: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     BR/EK:

     As requested ... first cut on proposed events leading up to Y2 Crime Bill
     Intro on May 12th .... jc3

     Seniors and Crime -- For this Saturday's radio address (4/16), the
     President could unveil a ~eries of proposals to tackle senior crime.   The
     proposals, which will be transmitted to Congress this Mayas part of the
     President's 21st Century Crime Bill -- and which are referenced in the
     Democratic unity agenda -- include:

     (1) Cracking down on fraud against the elderly by authorizing the Attorney
     General, after petitioning a court, to block or terminate telephone
     service to parties involved in telemarketing fraud, and by boosting
     penalties for virtually all forms of fraud that result in death or serious
     injury.   [NB: DOJ also has language to block or terminate internet
     service to those engaged in fraud, but OVP and Commerce are currently
     opposed.)

      (2) Combating health care fraud by allowing the Attorney General to take
     immediate action to stop false claims and illegal kickback schemes
     involving federal health plans (injunctive authority); by granting federal
     prosecutors new tools to uncover, investigate and prosecute more health
     care fraud cases (new civil penalties of $25,000 to $50,000, sharing of
     grand jury information in criminal cases with civil prosecutors, and
     administrative subpoenas in civil cases); by increasing penalties for
     health care fraud cases, especially if they target the elderly (directive
     to Sentencing Commission); and by prohibiting persons who defraud the
     Medicare or Medicaid system from having their debts discharged through
     bankruptcy.

      (3) Creating new criminal and civil penalties for nursing home operators
     that repeatedly violate federal nursing home rules and harm nursing home
     residents.   [NB: HHS is still opposed to DOJ having civil enforcement
     authority, unless they can veto enforcement actions. DOJ, while willing
     to pre-agree to MOU on how to deal with referrals, insists that any
     provision to veto their enforcement authority is unprecedented.]

     (4) Protecting pension and retirement plans by establishing new criminal
..     ..
     and civil penalties for defrauding pension and retirement plans, and by
     increasing penalties for bribery and graft associated with the management
     of these plans (from 3 to 5 years) .


     Victims/Bioterrorism -- In next week's radio address (4/24), the
     President could highlight provisions in his crime bill to address the
     threat of bioterrorism, and provide additional assistance to victims of
     crime.  This would be a timely message that coincides with both Crime
     Victims' Rights Week which ends on 4/24, and the anniversary of the
     Oklahoma City bombing on 4/19. We could invite the victims rights
     awardees that the Attorney General is scheduled to honor at an event
     earlier that week.

     Bioterrorism.    The President's crime bill contains new tools for law
     enforcement to address the emerging threat of bioterrorism and prevent
     future bioterrorism catastrophes.   Specifically, the bill contains new
     criminal and civil penalties for:

     (1) Possession of harmful dangerous biological agents not justified for a
     peaceful purpose, in order to limit the availability of biological weapons
     to the general public;

     (2) Unregistered possession of certain biological agents to ensure that
     appropriate authorities can track who is handling the most deadly agents;

     (3) Reckless handing of harmful biological agents, similar to those
     already in place for radioactive materials and pharmaceutical products;
     and

     (4) Possession of selected biological agents by restricted individuals,
     such as felons,  fugitives, and the mentally unstable.    [NB: This
     provision is still under negotiation between HHS and DOJ.]

     Victims. The bill contains a number of provisions to support victims,
     including expanded federal assistance to the victims of non-federal crimes
     and additional compensation and assistance to victims of terrorism and
     mass violence.   The President could also renew his call for the Congress
     to pass a Constitutional Victims Rights amendment.


     New Firearms Proposals --During the week of May 5th, in a White House
     Ceremony with sympathetic Members of Congress, the President could unveil
     the new firearms proposals that will accompany the 21st Century Crime Bill
     he will introduce the following week on May 12th. Generally, these
     include:

     (1) Making permanent the Brady waiting period requirements that expired
     last November;

     (2) Closing the gun show loophole and providing for background checks at
     all gun shows;

     (3) Banning the importation of all large capacity ammunition clips
     (including those originally grandfathered by Assault weapons Ban);

     (4) Banning violent juveniles from owning guns for life;

     (5) Requiring federal gun dealers to sell child safety locks with every
     gun sold;



(6) Holding adults who allow children easy access to firearms criminally
responsible for their reckless actions;

(7) Limiting the purchase of handguns to one per month [NB: We have not
yet decided to include this provision]; and

(8) Enhancing certain gun penalties, providing for the forfeiture of guns
used to commit crimes, strengthening the federal firearms licensing system
and procedures, providing for Brady background checks to purchase
explosives, and more.

Also, we might be able to simultaneously release a new Justice Department
report detailing how many illegal gun sales were stopped through Brady
Background checks in 1998 and since the Brady Law's enactment (probably
well over 300,000).  However, we need to confirm this with Justice.


