RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michelle Peterson ( CN=Michelle Peterson/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-APR-1999 12:03:41.00

SUBJECT:    bioterrorism

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD j )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI -- as I mentioned.
---------------------- Forwarded by Michelle Peterson/WHO/EOP on 04/16/99
11:43 AM ---------------------------



           James Boden
           04/16/99 10:16:33 AM

Record Type: Record

To: Michelle Peterson/WHO/EOP
cc: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
Subject: Chem/Bio

Attached is a revised chem/bio memo that incorporates a proposed solution
and addresses the concerns raised in Chuck's e-mail. Michael Deich plans
to discuss the memo with Chuck this morning.




Message Copied
TO:~~--~~~--~----------------------------------------------
Michael Deich/OMB/EOP
Kenneth L. Schwartz/OMB/EOP
David J. Haun/OMB/EOP
Theodore Wartell/OMB/EOP
Sherron Duncan/OMB/EOP
Amandeep K. Matharu/OMB/EOP
Richard J. Turman/OMB/EOP
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D13jARMS23675532Z.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000001900000000000000001000001A00000001000000FEFFFFFF000000001800
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
ACTION

MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

FROM:                     SAMUEL BERGER
                          BRUCE REED
                          NEAL LANE
                          RON KLEIN
                          JACK LEW

SUBJECT:                  Proposed Biological Terrorism Provisions in the Omnibus Crime Bill

Purpose

To determine the Administration's position on the proposed biological terrorism provisions in
the Omnibus Crime Bill.

Background

There is consensus within the Administration that serious gaps exist in federal bioterrorism laws.
In contrast to chemical, nuclear or radiological weapons, there are currently few laws in place
designed to limit the availability of biological weapons to the general public. Current laws
punish perpetrators after they unleash biological warfare agents; they do not address
inappropriate possession or "bio-hoaxes." Accordingly, there is interagency agreement that the
proposed Omnibus Crime Bill should include new provisions controlling:

   Possession of biological agents not justified by a peaceful purpose. Justification would
    depend on the type, quantity, and purpose of the agent.

   Unregistered possession of selected biological agents. This provision, a logical extension of
    current CDC transfer regulations, recognizes that authorities should be aware of who is
    handling the most deadly biological agents. Although establishing an initial inventory may
    pose a challenge to the scientific community, any continuing reporting burden would be
    minimal for scientific facilities that already comply with CDC transfer regulations. The
    President would have 60 days after this legislation takes effect to designate the agency that
    would be responsible for the registration process.

   Knowingly perpetrating a hoax regarding the use of harmful biological agents. This
    provision is necessary given the recent spate of such hoaxes as the rash of anthrax scares in
    California.

   Reckless handling of biological agents. This captures handling of biological agents that
    creates an "unreasonable risk to public health and safety," e.g., handling biological agents in
    a manner that willfully creates a risk to public health and safety. (Indications are that this
    issue has been resolved but we have not yet seen compromise language)
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


There is disagreement between HHS and DOJ, however, about whether and how to restrict
certain individuals from handling biological agents:

   Possession of selected biological agents by a restricted individual. In language taken
    verbatim from the Brady Bill, this provision asserts that factors such as a felony record,
    country of permanent residence, or mental impairment raise important questions about a
    person's suitability to possess deadly biological agents. Exceptions are permitted in
    appropriate circumstances.

Justice Position

DOJ argues that bioterrorism is a growing concern in the Congress and that many on both sides
of the aisle will be looking to see if the Administration will produce a draft bill with a strong law
enforcement focus before introducing their own proposals. Justice believes that these provisions
taken together will provide law enforcement with critical tools to prevent a bioterrorism
catastrophe, while being minimally intrusive on legitimate research. With respect to the
"restricted individuals" provision, DOJ claims that all an employer would have to do is ask the
applicant a list of questions and get a yes/no response and is willing to make this self-reporting
mechanism explicit in bill language.

In other words, DOJ asserts the employer would not be required to conduct an extensive
background check and would not be held liable in the case of an incident. Further, DOJ has
indicated flexibility on the conditions which would restrict possession of select agents, arguing
that only felons, fugitives and those dishonorably discharged from the military be excluded. They
have offered to give HHS flexibility to determine what other restrictions should apply within a
specified timeframe, without requiring that the extensive list of Brady bill restrictions apply.
While Justice has indicated some flexibility on this issue, it is clear they want some type of check
in the bill.

UUS Position

HHS believes that the requirement for background checks for individuals handling or possessing
dangerous biological agents does not ensure that the investigation focuses on reasonable
indicators of irresponsible behavior or terrorist proclivities. For example, the provision covers
misdemeanor convictions, which could include domestic violence; addiction to controlled
substances, which could include prescription medications; or hospitalization for mental
conditions, which could include temporary depressions. Although the Justice provision allows
for exceptions, HHS believes that in practice, employers would not be willing to accept the risk
of waiving the requirement for certain employees, thus essentially excluding qualified scientists
with minor offenses from the profession.

HHS would instead set a Presidential deadline of 60 days for consultation with the scientific
community to draft a proposal to this issue, and would hold off on including this provision in the
Crime Bill at this time. The proposal would include: measures to address the training of
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

scientists; safe procedures for handling, storage and security ofbiocontaminants; civil fines and
penalties; and the question of what personal characteristics or events in an individual's history
could legitimately support exclusion from research on select agents. HHS believes that investing
the community in the subsequent drafting process would invest this extremely important
constituency in our policy.

Recommended Solution

Both agencies have had extensive policy-level discussion on this topic for the past 10 days and
have indicated some flexibility in their positions, but without agreement thus far. We are united
in our belief that some background check is necessary, which is a fundamental point for DO] that
HHS has been unwilling to concede. However, we believe that there are middle-ground options
that accomplish DOl's goal of keeping certain individuals away from these materials while
acknowledging HHS' concern that the list of conditions need not be as long or burdensome as the
original proposal. What follows is a series of steps that we believe should address both agencies'
concerns:

Restrict felons, fugitives and those with dishonorable military discharges from possession
This should address HHS' personal privacy concerns and reluctance to ask intrusive questions of
scientists, while accomplishing DOl's objective to limit access to these agents.

Make self-reporting mechanism explicit in language to limit need for background checks
for possession of select agents by a restricted individual. Change language to make it su fficient
for the employer to inquire on the job application form whether an individual has a prior felony
conviction, is a fugitive from justice, or has ever been dishonorably discharged from the military
in order to meet their responsibility.

Additionally, questions asked in connection with these provisions should be made subject to J 8
USC 1001, the False Statement Accountability Act of 1996, which would hold the applicant
liable for responding accurately. The impact would be to impose civil and/or criminal penalties
for making false statements on the individual, not the employer. Violators of 18 USC 100 I may
be fined or imprisoned for up to five years.

Make HHS responsible for issuing waivers
For individuals that have felony convictions or would otherwise be restricted from handling
selected agents, employers would be allowed to apply to HHS for waivers. HHS would
promulgate regulations that outline procedures for granting waivers including requiring that a
background investigation be completed by a law enforcement agency. HHS would then
determine the suitability of the individual to handle restricted agents. This would rely on the
established background check and limit employer liability.

Consult with scientific community as we prepare to send the Crime Bill to Congress
As internal negotiations proceed on the Crime Bill language, allow HHS to begin the process of
consulting the scientific community to seek their technical input and support for these provisions.
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


If you concur with this package of alternatives, we will work with DOJ and HHS to develop
legislative language for them and have it reflected in the Crime Bill


