           RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

           CREATOR: Paul D. Glastris       ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO             1 )

           CREATION DATE/TIME: J.6-APR-1999 14:47:39.00

           SUBJECT:     draft of   Monday I s teacher speech- -comments back ASAP please

           TO: Michael Waldman       ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP     @   EOP [ WHO 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP              @   EOP [ OPD 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Bethany Little       (CN=Bethany Little/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD           1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Cathy R. Mays       ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP       [ OPD 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Joshua S. Gottheimer ( CN=Joshua S. Gottheimer/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO                   1 )
           READ : UNKNOWN

           TO: Tanya E. Martin       ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP     @   EOP [ OPD    1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP        @   EOP   [ OPD   1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Bruce N. Reed       ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP       [ OPD 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TEXT:
           Draft   4/16/99 2: 40 p.m.
           Paul Glastris
           PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
           REMARKS AT TEACHER OF THE YEAR AWARD
           THE WHITE HOUSE, ROSE GARDEN
           WASHINGTON, DC
           April 19, 1999

                      Acknowledgments: TBD


                   In 1952, President Harry S Truman presented the very first Teacher
           off the Year Award, right here in the Rose Garden.  The recipient was Mrs.
           Geraldine Jones, who taught first grade at a school in Santa Barbara, CA
           whose name I rather like: the Hope School.

                   Every year since, Presidents or members of their family have
           personally handed out this award, to recognize outstanding teachers, and
           honor all teachers.  Eight hours a day, five days a week, nine months a
           year, teachers literally have the future of our nation in their hands.
           They teach our children to read, write, calculate, sing, paint, listen,
           question, work with others, and think for themselves.  They excite our
           childrenD,s intellects, lift their aspirations, open their hearts,
           strengthen their values, and shape their memories.   Everyone of us can
           probably recall not only the names of our old teachers, but their faces,
           their voices, their favorite admonitions, the way their hands gripped the
           chalk as they wrote on the blackboard, the pride we felt when they praised


us, and the chill that ran through us when they caught us doing something
wrong.  Under their watch, we became who we are, and their influence over
us lingers.

        The role of teachers is hard to exaggerate, yet easy to
overlook.    Teachers do their difficult jobs quietly, behind four walls,
largely isolated from other adults.   Their work is seldom glorified by
Hollywood, and insufficiently rewarded by society.      And yet their role
is more important than perhaps at any time in history now that we have
entered the information age, in which the success of the nation rides on
the knowledge and creativity of its citizens.    Recent research confirms
what most of us know from our own school experiences--that what most
determines whether students learn is not their family backgrounds or the
dollars spent per pupil, but the talents and abilities of their
teachers.   Everyone rightly honors the men and women serving in and
around the Balkans today as patriots.   I believe we as a nation must learn
to honor teachers as patriots, too.

        Andy Baumgartner is a patriot in both senses. He spent two years
in the U.s. Marines, and the inner confidence, self-motivation and sheer
physical stamina he gained at Paris Island and Camp LeJune have been
surprisingly useful in the classroom. Colleagues marvel at the way he
rivets the attention of his kindergarten students by keeping himself in
constant creative motion.   One minute he is using popcorn and M&Ms to
teach counting. The next he is conducting a sing-along to ~&This Land is
Your Land.oS A few minutes later he is marching the class up the hill
behind school to conduct a solemn funeral for a departed pet tarantula
named Legs.
        The father of a son with a learning disability, Andy knows first
hand the struggle many parents go through to get the individual attention
their children need, and he works hard to give that kind of attention to
all of his students. When not teaching, Andy can be found directing 4th
and 5th graders in the school play, teaching other educators, writing
guidebooks for parents, working in community theater, and participating
actively in his church. Andy is an example of the kind of vital, active
American citizen Tocqueville marveled at.

        If Tocqueville were alive today, I think he would agree that
America desperately needs more people like Andy Baumgartner in the
classroom.   There are 53 million children in our public schools---the
greatest number ever--and they come from more diverse backgrounds than at
any time since the turn of the century. With enrollments growing and a
wave of teacher retirements about to hit, Americao,s schools will have to
hire 2 million more teachers over the next decade.  At the same time, we
are trying to bring down class sizes, and that requires more teachers.
And those new teachers must be better trained. A quarter of all secondary
school teachers today do not have college majors--or even minors--in the
subjects they are teaching, and this deficit is worse in low-income
neighborhood schools where the need is greatest.

        These are enormous challenges. But I believe we can meet them if
we act now, while our nation is strong, our economy prosperous, and our
people confident.

        We must begin by fighting the snobbery that too often surrounds
popular attitudes toward teaching.  When young people with college degrees
would rather take unpaid internships at advertising agencies than even
consider paid jobs as public school teachers, we know we have work to do.

        That said, we must also raise teachers salaries.   An MBA graduate


can expect twice the starting salary as someone with a masters degree in
teaching. That is wrong.

        President cannot control teachers salaries.  That is up to
governors and local school boards.   But the federal government does have
a role to play in addressing our need for more and better teachers, and my
education agenda does that in four ways.

        First, the balanced budget I submitted earlier this year calls for
finishing the job Congress started last year, of hiring 100,000 new,
highly-trained teachers to reduce class sizes in the early grades.   Tk tk
on ed flex

         Second, my balanced budget would redouble our efforts to attract
our best and brightest Americans into the teaching profession.     It calls
for investing $35 million to provide 7000 thousand college scholarships
for our brightest young people who commit to teaching where they can do
the most good: in our poorest inner city and rural schools. That is over
five times the investment Congress made for these kinds of scholarships
last year.   It also calls on Congress to invest $10 million to train 1000
Native Americans to teach on Indian reservations and in other public
schools with large Native American enrollments.   And it calls for
investing $18 million to recruit and train retired members of the u.S.
military to become teachers, through our Troops for Teachers program.
AmericaD,s 25 million veterans represent a vast pool of potential teachers,
and Andy Baumgartner is proof positive that soldiers make great teachers.
LetD,s make it easier for those who have been heros abroad to be heros here
at home.

        Third, I believe the best way to recruit more people into teaching
is to make schools into places where more people want to work.   There are
thousands and thousands of idealistic Americans, young and not so young,
who would be willing to teach in the public schools--if they thought they
could make a difference.   But they donD,t want to waste their lives in a
system they believe is deadeningly bureaucratic, with low expectations,
little discipline, and no accountability.

        To paraphrase the movie Field of Dreams,  D&Fix it, and they will
come.DB If we take solid steps to fix our schools, more of the best will
want to teach there, and a positive cycle of reform will soon take over.
That is why my Educational Accountability Act, which I will soon be
sending to Congress, is so important.   Under this Act, all states and
school districts receiving federal funds must end social promotion; must
adopt and enforce strict discipline codes; must give parents report cards
on their children's' schools; and must turn around their worst-performing
schools-or shut them down.

        Finally, all states and school districts will be held accountable
for the quality of their teachers.  That means that all new teachers must
be required to pass performance exams, and all teachers should know the
subjects they're teaching.

        If we take these steps, we can bring more people like Andy
Baumgartner into our schools.   That will make the job of picking Teacher
of the Year even harder than it is now, but it will be worth it.

        When President Truman presented this award the first time back in
1952, he noted that "next to a child's mother, the greatest influence on
his growth into a good citizen is his teacher."  In his plain-spoken
Missouri way, the President was repeating the observation of Henry Adams,
~..    :...



      who said that "a teacher affects eternity; he can never tell where his
      influence--or her influence--stops."   Andy, today America honors you, and
      all teachers, for your immeasurable influence.

      ###


