  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP   [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-APR-1999 18:37:28.00

  SUBJECT:    decent piece on ESEA

  TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ:UNKNOWN

  TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ:UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  from last week's US News:


                   School daze, budget frays
                   A knockdown battle over a pot of
                   education dollars

                    BY BEN WILDAVSKY

                   How much say should Washington have in how
                   America's kids are educated? That question will be
                   at the center of a political fight looming on Capitol
                   Hill over a mammoth piece of legislation that covers
                   two thirds of all federal spending for kindergarten
                   through 12th-grade education.

                    The skirmishing begins next week when the White
                    House is expected to release its proposal to
                    reauthorize the Elementary and Secondary
                    Education Act. The $15 billion bill includes more
                    than 60 programs, the largest of which directs
                    nearly $8 billion a year at improving education for
                    poor kids.

                    This year, in what the White House calls a "sea
                    change in national education policy," President
                    Clinton's battle cry is accountability. The
                    administration wants states to close failing schools,
                    improve teacher training, and stop automatic
                    promotion of failing students. If states don't play
                    ball, they risk losing a portion of their federal
                    fundsD)a rare occurrence in the past.

                   Republicans say they agree with the substance of
                   many of Clinton's ideas and point out that he is
                   touting reforms long championed by GOP
                   lawmakers in Washington and the states. "He's
                   finally come around to Republican ideas," says
                   Pennsylvania Rep. Bill Goodling, chairman of the
                   House Committee on Education and the Workforce.
                   But Republicans pan Clinton's plan to withhold
                   federal funds from states that don't follow the new
ии   /.'4




                rules. They say plenty of innovation is already
                taking place locally. Besides, they add, more
                flexibilityO)not more regulationO)is what is needed.
                "Most of their programs end up being directives,"
                says GOP Sen. Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, a
                member of the Senate Health and Education
                Committee. Education Secretary Richard Riley
                insists states would remain in the driver's seat. But,
                he says, it's "not good public policy.     . to have the
                national government involved in sending lots of
                money into a nonperforming school year after year."

                Red tape. On average, federal dollars make up
                about 6 percent of total K-through-12 spending. But
                many GOP governors complain that state education
                departments spend too much time administering
                federal programs. Lisa Graham Keegan, Arizona's
                conservative superintendent of public instruction,
                estimates that about 165 of her employees, or 45
                percent, run federal programs that account for only
                a fraction of the state's education spending. Gripes
                Michigan Gov. John Engler: "We think [Clinton]
                ought to win the war in Yugoslavia and let local
                school issues be decided by local school boards."

                Still, the centrist, "new Democrat" themes of the
                White House education plan present Republicans
                with a political dilemma. "Clinton's got .them in a
                box, because in the past it's Republicans who've
                been demanding accountability, and now Clinton's
                saying 'OK, we'll have accountability,' " says John
                Jennings, a former Democratic aide on Capitol Hill
                who now heads the Center on Education Policy in
                Washington. Republicans are well aware that
                education is the No.1 issue among voters. And
                that elections could be won and lost on how
                candidates come across on school matters. A
                recent CBS News/New York Times poll found that
                53 percent of those surveyed believed Democrats
                were more likely than Republicans to improve
                education. Just 30 percent h?d more confidence in
                the GOP. "Historically, when people have thought
                about the Republican Party and education at the
                national level, they've thought either we wanted to
                get rid of the Department of Education or that the
                only other thing we were interested in is vouchers,"
                says Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge. "If, in the
                political debate, we just argue states' rights or local
                control, we lose."

                One GOP proposalO)dubbed Super Ed-FlexO)would
                allow states to spend federal money however they
                wished in exchange for meeting well-defined
                achievement goals for students. But critics fear
                states might be tempted to divert dollars intended
                for.disadvantaged children to other uses.
                Lawmakers don't expect congress to pass the
                measure until next yearO) smack in the middle of
                election seas
   ,.

