RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: "Cohen, Mike" <Mike_Cohen@ed.gov> ( "Cohen, Mike" <Mike_Cohen@ed.gov> [ UNK

CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-APR-1999 16:49:52.00

SUBJECT:   Draft social promotion memo to POTUS

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: "'Elena_Kagan@opod.eop.gov'" <Elena Kagan@opod.eop.gov>       "'Elena Kagan@opod.eop
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays   ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]   )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 «options2.doc»

I believe this draft basically reflects 9ur recent discussions on this
topic.  I'm sure you'll want to make some changes, but this should get you
pretty far down the road.

 - options2. doc==========.========== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:     0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D24]ARMS299632423.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000004B00000000000000001000004E0000000100OOOOFEFFFFFF000000004COO
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

     DRAFT

                                                    April 16, 1999

     MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

     FROM:

     SUBJECT:                            Update on Requirement for Ending Social Promotion in ESEA


               A central feature of the Education Accountability Act you announced in the State of the Union is a
     requirement that schools end social promotion. In our draft ESEA proposal, this has been operationalized
     as a requirement that states and school district receiving ESEA funds phase in promotion standards, at key
     transition points at the elementary, middle and high school level, over four years from the enactment of
     ESEA.

               We have encountered stiff opposition from the civil rights community to this proposal. Both DPC
     and Secretary Riley have had a series of meetings over the past few weeks with Wade Henderson and others
     in the Leadership Conference for Civil Rights, Hugh ~rice, and Marion Wright Edelman. While there are
     some nuanced differences in their views, in general they unanimously oppose a requirement to end social
     promotion on four grounds. First, they believe it will lead to an increase in retention rates among
     disadvantaged students, resulting in increased drop out rates and lower achievement. Second, they believe
     it is unfair to hold students accountable for their performance, until school systems provide greater
     opportunities to learn for the most disadvantaged students, an objective many s'chool systems will not fully
     reach within four years. Third, they distrust that we will be able to enforce other provisions in ESEA that
     must be in place in order for a promotion policy to work, such as requirements that states and districts
     provide qualified teachers, early intervention and extra help to students who need it. As a result, they fear
     this policy will encourage and speed the implementation of promotion policies without the necessary
     supports. Finally, they argue that if states and local communities in fact do provide students with the
     necessary support, students would meet state academic standards and the practice of social promotion
     would effectively be ended, thereby obviating the need for a policy to end it.

               The civil rights community otherwise strongly supports our ESEA proposal, but is prepared to
     launch a major attack on our social promotion requirement. They are very likely to gain strong support
     from the majority of the Congressional Black and Hispanic Caucuses, and could easily recreate the left-right
     political coalition that successfully opposed our national test proposal. If we transmit a proposal that is
     strongly opposed by the civil rights groups, we will make it very difficult for Rep. Clay and Senator
     Kennedy to introduce our proposal. This dynamic will make it impossible to unite Democrats behind our
     overall ESEA proposal and, as a result, this Congress may be less likely to pass a version of ESEA that
     reflects our priorities, or even to pass one at all.

               We have been working to find a compromise proposal that would respond to the legitimate
     concerns of the civil rights groups while remaining true to the intent of your State of the Union
     announcement. Our objective is to find a solution that will reduce the objections of the civil rights groups
     and convince Kennedy and Clay that we have made reasonable compromises that merit their support, even
     if the civil rights groups do not support it.

              At Secretary Riley's request, Senator Kennedy is working over the next several days to help us find
     a middle ground with the civil rights groups. We are working with his staff to pursue the options described
     below as possible grounds for a compromise proposal:

     Option 1:        Focus Promotion Requirement on Reading in the Early Grades
     This approach focuses only one of the three transition points, and emphasizes the implementation of a
     comprehensive approach to preparing students to meet promotion standards.
                                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


Fourth Grade Promotion Standard: States and school districts would be required to ensure that students are
proficient in reading at a key point in elementary school, most likely before being promoted to 4th grade.
As in our original policy, this option would require States to put in place promotion policies aligned to State
standards, use multiple measures to determine promotion, and require school districts to put supports in
place such as early intervention, smaller class-sizes, qualified teachers, and extended learning time.
Districts would be required to establish a policy to end social promotion in elementary school and fully
implement the support strategies and policy within four years.

Strengthened Accountability for Schools: We would also strengthen the school accountability requirements
by requiring school report cards to include data on student retention rates in addition to student
achievement. We would need to figure out a way to determine social promotion rates (since no state or
district would admit to the practice), most likely by looking at the percent of students at a grade level
performing below a basic standard of proficiency and assuming that these students have been promoted
without meeting standards. Those schools with high retention rates and/or social promotion rates (if we
can overcome the measurement challenges) would be subject to State intervention.

Development of Alternatives to Retention: Further, we would incorporate a new demonstration program,
which would begin in the first year after enactment, to help high poverty districts develop and demonstrate
effective alternatives to both retention and social promotion. For example, Boston is creating a transition
program for students who have not met the 4th grade promotion requirements, through an 18 month
program that involves summer school, intensive help during the next school year to help students catch up
and begin 5th grade work, additional summer school and then reintegration into their original cohort in the
6th grade. This demonstration program would help develop, evaluate and disseminate other models for use
at the elementary, middle and high school level.

This more focused approach reflects and builds on the investments we have been making to strengthen
learning opportunities in the early grades, including class size reduction, teacher training and tutoring for
early reading, expanded investments in Head Start, and after-school programs. A growing number of states
and districts are implementing their own early reading initiatives. Consequently, the timetable for phasing in
supports and promotion requirements in four years is more feasible at the early grades than in higher grades.

Option 2:           Delay Implementation of Promotion Requirements
This approach would retain a requirement that states adopt promotion requirements in key transition points
at the elementary, middle and high school levels, but it would delay implementation. Instead of requiring
that promotion standards be implemented within four years, we would require that states adopt policies to
end social promotion within four years, while the implementation of the promotion standards themselves
would be phased in over an additional 2-3 years. This additional time would better enable states and
districts to phase in the supports that students need. In particular, it would enable states to first meet our
requirement to phase out the use of unqualified teachers (within four years) and then phase in the promotion
standards over several additional years. We could even consider more directly addressing the civil rights
groups concern that inputs and supports must preceed accountability for students by explicitly making
required implementation of the promotion standards contingent on first meeting the requirement to phase
out the use of unqualified teachers,

This approach could also be coupled with the additional school accountability and demonstration provisions
in Option 1.

Option 3:          Focus on Performance Instead of Policy
The fundamental approach here is to "end social promotion" by rewarding those states that effectively
reduce the incidence of social promotion and retention, and sanction those states that increase the frequency
of either or both of these practices. Instead of requiring states to adopt promotion policies, we would
require them to collect data and report on retention rates, promotion rates, and academic performance. As
indicated above, we would need to figure out a way to determine social promotion rates (since no state or
district would admit to the practice), most likely by looking at the percent of students at a grade level
                                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

performing below a basic standard of proficiency, and assuming that these are students who have been
promoted without meeting standards. Once establishing a baseline ofretention and social promotion rates
for each state, we would provide fmancial rewards to those that increased on-time promotion and reduced
retention rates, and fmancial sanctions to those that increase retention and or social promotion.

This approach could also be coupled with the additional school accountability and demonstration provisions
in Option I. Because this options does not directly require students to meet promotion standards, it is likely
to be the one most acceptable to the civil rights groups (and had initially been raised by them). However,
the measurement issues it poses are novel and complex, and we have some concerns about the technical
feasibility of this approach.


We are tentatively scheduled to meet with Kennedy's staff and representatives of the civil rights groups
early next week, and will continue to work through that process as long as it holds the promise of reaching
an acceptable compromise. However, if we are unable to convince Kennedy and Clay to support a
proposal based on one ofthese options, we believe we will then face a difficult choice. We will either have
to send up two bills, our ESEA proposal that Kennedy and Clay can introduce and Democrats can rally
around, as well as a separate bill with the social promotion requirement. Alternatively, we would have to
drop any effort to require an end to social promotion, and instead use your bully pulpit to encourage the
trend already underway at the state and local level.
,.
