          RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

          CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

          CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-APR-1999 18:52:06.00

          SUBJECT:   secrets revealed

          TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1 )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TEXT:
          ---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 04/19/99
          06:55 PM ---------------------------




          Michael Waldman
          04/19/99 09:43:08 AM
          Record Type:    Record

          To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
          cc:
          Subject:         secrets revealed

          SEE BOLDFACE BELOW

                                WHY IS BERGER SOFT ON CHINA?
                                   By DICK MORRIS

                                   FROM international trade to satellite launchings to
                                   spying, National Security Adviser Sandy Berger
                                   has consistently downplayed intelligence warnings
                                   and urged closer ties with China. What makes this
                                   troubling is Berger's past (and possible future)
                                   commercial relationship with the Chinese
                                   government.

                                   Berger was a lawyer-lobbyist in the years before
                                   Clinton tapped him to be deputy national security
                                   adviser. In a Jan. 26, 1997, Washington Post
                                   article by Nat Hentoff, Rep. Nancy Pelosi
                                   (D-Calif.) revealed that Berger was the' 'point
                                   person at the Hogan and Hartson law firm for the
                                   trade office of the Chinese government. " This
                                   suggestion raises key conflict-of-interest issues.

                                   Pelosi's comment, which Berger never denied,
                                   aroused little interest when it was first reported
                                   because Berger's key role in the administration's
                                   China dealings was not yet widely known. But
                                   investigative reporter Jeff Gerth revealed last
                                   week that intelligence officials alerted Berger to
                                   Chinese spying in April 1996 - but he chose not
                                   to tell the president about it until July 1997.

                                  Specifically, Gerth reports that Berger learned of
                                  China's theft of the W-88 nuclear-warhead
                                  design, neutron-bomb designs and other ongoing


                    Chinese espionage in the 1996 meeting. While
                    Berger denies learning about the neutron-bomb
                    espionage at the 1996 meeting, he admits that he
                    was told about the intelligence failures at the Los
                    Alamos nuclear laboratory, where information
                    about the W-88 warhead design was stolen. Why
                    Berger waited 15 months to tell Clinton about the
                    Los Alamos situation remains a mystery.

                    Also last week, Berger was reported to be the
                    one administration official who labored ceaselessly
                    to complete a trade deal with China during the
                    recent negotiations with Premier Zhu Rongji.

                    This is not the first time that Berger advocated a
                    position that ultimately helped China at American
                    expense. He has been identified as the person
                    whose urgent memos to the president triggered
                    the administration's decision to grant a waiver to
                    Loral Space Systems to launch its satellite on
                    Chinese rockets.

                    National Security Adviser Berger's memos cited
                    Loral's critical financial situation in urging prompt
                    approval of the waiver - even though Berger
                    knew that the Justice Department was likely to
                    indict Loral on "serious"   charges of sharing
                    classified information with the Chinese without
                    government approval.

                    Another example? In their new book' 'Year of the
                    Rat, " defense experts Edward Timperlake and
                    William C. Triplett II report, " I t was Berger who
                    led the charge to repeal export controls on
                    satellites for China."

                    In view of Berger's law firm's past business
                    relationship with the Chinese government, one
                    may ask if he is subject to a conflict of interest
                    when he takes the Chinese side so frequently.

                    Here's an interesting bit of background: In 1995,
                    the administration was considering a ban on
                    contacts by Executive Branch officials with
                    lobbyists for foreign governments. Disturbed at
                    the number of Republican former trade and
                    foreign policy officials in the Nixon, Ford, Reagan
                    and Bush Administrations who had farmed out as
                    lobbyists for foreign governments, the Clinton
                    administration was considering closing them down
                    by denying them access to their buddies in
                    government.

                    Although the president was interested in the
                    proposal and it was discussed at several strategy
                    meetings, Sandy Berger, then serving as deputy
                    national security adviser, fought hard against the
                    proposal. He defended those who lobbied for
                    foreign governments as legitimate advocates.


                    Could Berger be planning to return to a lucrative
                    role in representing the Chinese government after
                    he leaves public service? After a period of a year,
                    he would be allowed to do so.

                    with Berger's role as a China apologist becoming
                    so evident, it would appear that Congress is
                    entitled to ask him detailed questions about his
                    past contacts with the Chinese government and
                    those of his former law firm. Would it not be
                    appropriate to ask what his firm did for the
                    Chinese, how much they were paid, when they
                    worked, and what role Berger played? Are they
                    now involved in business dealings with China even
                    as their former partner pushes for a more
                    pro-Chinese policy in the White House?

                    In my own communications with Berger on the
                    China issue, he has always stressed the
                    importance of a close U.S.-Chinese relationship.
                     , 'The key thing, " he told me in a private meeting at
                    the Jefferson Hotel in mid-1995, "is to prevent a
                    coalition of the militant Arab states, Russia and
                    China from joining together to confront the United
                    States globally." He was antsy about tough
                    rhetoric on trade with China and opposed making
                    toughness with China a political issue in the 1996
                    campaign.

                    In the Fox News/Opinion Dynamics poll of April
                    8, voters said by two to one that Clinton was not
                    being tough enough in his dealings with China.
                    With reports of Chinese espionage widening and
                    the trade deficit with Beijing growing, a closer
                    relationship with China carries with it a significant
                    political price for this administration. Add in the
                    reports of an explicit effort by the Chinese
                    intelligence community to funnel money to the
                    Clinton 1996 campaign, and the president is
                    clearly vulnerable on this issue.

                    Republicans would be wise to jump allover the
                    China issue with hearings and investigations to
                    probe the intelligence disasters and the possible
                    conflicts of interest of high administration
officials
                    like Sandy Berger.
  '.

