RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-APR-1999 09:18:19.00

SUBJECT:   Article for School Board Lawyers

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The National School Boards Assoc's requested an article on the legal
standards for high stakes testing from Art Coleman (DAS at Ed-OCR) for
publication in the NSBA Council of School Attorney's magaizne.   Art sent
the article over to WH Counsel for review.  It is entitled "High Standards
and High Stakes: A Framework For Addressing Test Use Issues When Making
Student Promotion Decisions."

The article is taken from a longer piece that Coleman wrote for the
Virginia Jouunral of Social Policy and Law that was published last
fall.    The article summarizes some of the major legal and educational
principles that shuld guide the development and implementation of tests
used in student promotion decisions. These are:

-The determination of whether a test is valid cannot be made without
knowing the educational objective and purpose of the test,

-Any test with high-stakes consequences for students must be validated for
its particular use,

- As a general propostion, there must be an alignment among the
curriculum, instruction and material covered on such a high-stakes
assesment,

-Test results can provide very valuable guidance in making educational
judgments about promotional decision for students. However, since many
factors can affect a student's performance on a given day, psychometric
standards confirm that a single test score should not be used to make
high-stakes educational decisions (i.e., use multiple measures),

- Statitically significant disparities in test scores among discrete
student groups '(e.g. minority-nonminority) should be a cause for further
inquiry. The r~asons may reflect causal factors unrelated to the contruct
of the test (i.e~ preparation) or problems with the test itself.
Systematic monitoring of results over time can help prevent (and quickly
cure) any problem of test bias or other related problems.

I have reviewed the article closely.  It is an abbreviated version of two
earlier peices that Coleman published last year on this subject and does
not introduce any new topics.  Our ESEA social promotions policy (original
or as amended by the groups) would meet the framework laid out in the
article.   Peter Rundlet (WH Counsel) also reviewed the article and
reached the same conclusion. Although we thought we had the entire week
to review it -- ED has asked us to expidite our approval (they are late
meeting NSBA's publishing deadline).   Are you ok if I approve this
article ?


