      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Kathleen K. Ahn ( CN=Kathleen K. Ahn/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO I )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:20-APR-1999 15:50:10.00

      SUBJECT:     racial profiling

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Charles F. Ruff    ( CN=Charles F. Ruff/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO I )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Robert B. Johnson ( CN=Robert B. Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO I )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      For your information, following is from today's NYT , New York Section's
      front page. Thank you

      April 20, 1999

                   Trenton Charges 2 Troopers With
                   Falsifying Race of Drivers


                   By DAVID KOCIENIEWSKI

                        TRENTON -- In the first official sign that the New Jersey
      State
                        Police may have illegally singled out black and Hispanic
      motorists,
                   the Attorney General Monday announced the indictments of two
                   troopers accused of falsifying documents to make it appear that
      some of
                   the black motorists they had stopped were white.

                   Troopers John Hogan and James Kenna, who shot three unarmed men
                   during a traffic stop last April and are awaiting a grand jury's
      ruling on
                possible criminal charges, will now face prosecution on 19
      misdemeanor
                charges each for falsifying records and conducting illegal
      searches.

                 Attorney General Peter verniero said that after the shooting, his
                 investigators began an inquiry into the troopers' traffic stops
      on the New
                 Jersey Turnpike. The investigators quickly noticed a disturbing
      pattern:
                 the license plate numbers reported by the officers did not
      correspond
                 with the cars owned by the motorists they had stopped.

                   After reviewing the logs of 164 troopers in the Cranbury and
                   Moorestown barracks in southern and central New Jersey,


 investigators
           found some troopers routinely falsified the race of drivers they
 stopped.
           As many as 10 other troopers could face criminal charges, a law
           enforcement official said.

              Two state police supervisors said it was common practice for
 troopers
              on the turnpike to jot down the license plate number of white
 motorists
              who were not stopped and use them on the reports of blacks who
 were
              pulled over. Officers called the tactic "ghosting."

              Although verniero did not use the term racial profiling, his
 assistant,
              James Gerrow Jr., was more direct. Gerrow said that after
 conducting
              extensive interviews with motorists who had been pulled over by
 the state
           police, prosecutors decided that the racial misidentification
 was part of a
           deliberate plan to conceal the troopers' actions.

              "This was not an omission on their part, or a mistake," he said.
 "Thi's was
           an intentional misrepresentation as to the racial
 characteristics of the
           individuals they stopped."

           When asked whether the troopers were acting to cover up racial
           profiling, Gerrow said, "That would be a good way to
 characterize it."

              Verniero's nomination to the State Supreme Court has faced
 opposition
              from civil rights leaders and legal experts who argue that he
 has been
              slow to respond to discrimination charges against the state
 police.

              But by charging the two troopers yesterday, the administration
 of Gov.
              Christine Todd Whitman signaled that it is inching toward an
 admission
           that its troopers have engaged in racial profiling to curb drug
 trafficking.

              "The practices alleged are of particular concern because they may
              evidence conduct consistent with racial profiling," Verniero
 said.

              The announcement of the indictments today came as the clamor over
              racial profiling escalated. The Black and Latino Caucus of the
 State
           Legislature is to hold its next public hearing on Tuesday in
 Newark, and
           at least a dozen motorists and, former troopers are expected to
 testify
           about discrimination. On Friday, civil rights leaders have


          scheduled a
                    march to commemorate the one-year anniversary of the shooting
                    involving Troopers Kenna and Hogan.

                    This week the Attorney General is also expected to release the
                    preliminary findings of his review of the state police, and,
          according to
                    two state officials, he may also announce that he is dropping
          his appeal of
                    a 1996 Gloucester County judge's ruling that the state police had
                    engaged in racial profiling.

                     But Verniero dismissed the suggestion that the timing of the
                     announcement was politically motivated.

                     "Absolutely not," he said at a news conference. "And I'm not
          going to
                     dignify that with further comment.

                     Governor Whitman did not attend today's press briefing or issue
          a public
                     statement.

                     For decades, black and Latino motorists have complained that
          state
                    troopers have subjected them to traffic stops and illegal
          searches for no
                    reason other than the color of their skin. The allegations
          received more
                    attention last April, when Troopers Kenna and Hogan fired at
          three
                    unarmed men, two black and one Hispanic, during a traffic stop
          and
                    wounded them 11 times. The officers said at the time that they
          shot in
                    self-defense because the van was backing toward them. Their
          lawyer,
                    Robert Galantucci, did not return repeated calls for comment
          today.

                                               Copyright 1999 The New York Times
          Company


