 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: "Christopher F. Edley, Jr." <edley@law.harvard.edu> ( "Christopher F. Edley

 CREATION DATE/TIME:21-APR-1999 11:07:09.00

 SUBJECT:   Re: racial profiling

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPO I
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: James T. Edmonds   ( CN=James T. Edmonds/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO I )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: terry.edmonds@ssa.gov ( terry.edmonds@ssa.gov [ UNKNOWN I
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Charles F. Ruff ( CN=Charles F. Ruff/OU=WHO/O=EOP   [ WHO I )
 READ:uNKNOWN

 CC: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP   [ WHO I )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: aedmonds1@home.com ( aedmonds1@home.com [ UNKNOWN I
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Thanks, Elena, for soliciting my input on the decision memo.


 1. I am for having a policy right now (even if it is provisional, pending
 data or experience), and I'm for forthrightly stating what the policy is
 and why. (Correlatively, I'm against having shadowy practices that reflect,
 sub silencio, policy made by folks who may not share the President's views
 on law enforcement or on race.)

 2. As to the nature of the policy, I can see three basic possibilities: a
 ban on racial profiling*; a general ban with an exception for certain INS
 activities; a general ban with an escape valve for exceptional
 justifications granted by the AG after notice and comment, and with
 safeguards of training, data collection, and sunset review.  While I don't
 feel strongly abot which of these POTUS does, I tend to favor the last
 option. And I think a principled discussion of why exceptions may be needed
 is precisely the kind of honest engagement of vexing issues that POTUS said
 he believes the nation needs on race.

 3. From all I have heard, the most important rationales driving the
 data-only option are the politics of embarrassment, combined with the
 traditional "Let's project cop-friendly toughness." Afterall, the agencies
 are currently doing SOMETHING. So it shouldn't be rocket science to
 describe it and decide whether POTUS approves or disapproves. Data
 collection is, fundamentally, disingenuous. It may even be dissembling.

 4.  If and when POTUS announces your version, the civil rights community
 will deride it. It is more like Safir than it is like Whitman, observers
 will say. Bradley will have a field day, and Gore will be humiliated.
 Editorial pages will write, "Fine. Data is good. Meanwhile, what is the
 policy, and why?" And I will be very interested to hear the
 Administration's answer.


 If you have a different political prediction, I'd be interested to know the
 basis for it -- with whom the White House has consulted, and with what
 description of options.

 5. In considering the merits of data-only, the President should think not
 only about cops who feel unjustly criticized and stereotyped, but also
 about the Americans who are incensed about profiling (and who see it as the
 product of the same attitudes and stereotypes that give rise to brutal
 misconduct). will these incensed people consider data collection a just and
 compelling example of leadership, responsive to their concerns? An
 inspiring use of the bully pulpit? Of course not. So, the further question
 is,  why do THEIR concerns count so much less than the competing concerns?

 6. Finally, in considering the merits of the policy, all the President has
 to do is imagine himself to be brown or black in NYC, subject to intrusive
 frisks by Giuliani's cops; or a brown, 5th generation US citizen living
 near El Paso, subject to color-coded car searches whenever driving with a
 group of family or friends.  If he can explain why that is the kind of
 America we want, then he should do so.  If he can't, then he should stop
 the practice.


 I would welcome an opportunity to discuss with Jose, or read his draft
 characterization of my position. I need to talk with him anyway about the
 current thinking on the crime bill, since I gather DPC things that the
 crime bill says just about all POTUS need to say to advance the vision in
 the book. (which is news to me!! (smile))




 At 10:14 AM 4/21/99 -0400, you wrote:
 >Jose is writing it now.   If you let us know precisely what you want   (and
 >why) , we will be sure to include it.  Is that OK with you?
 >

 Professor Christopher Edley, Jr.
 Harvard Law School,
 Cambridge MA 02138
 (617) -495-4614; (f) 496-5156


