     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Karin Kullman ( CN;Karin Kullman/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:22-APR-1999 06:52:06.00

     SUBJECT:   Revised Briefing Paper for Review

     TO: Elena Kagan
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN;Cathy R. Mays/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Paul J. weinstein Jr.   ( CN;Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     Lowell A. Weiss ( CN=Lowell A. Weiss/OU=WHO/O=EOP   [ WHO ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     Kris M Balderston ( CN=Kris M Balderston/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     briefing paper    accomplishments

     Attached is the briefing paper, and the administration record on school
     safety to be attached to the briefing, for review.==;;;=;;;;;;;;;;;;=; ATTACHMENT
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   o 00:00:00.00
     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D4]ARMS26036192A.136 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF57504370040000010A020100000002050000000AIE0000000200009DOC3A3992ADAE8A9B6C18
     A043D82ADCCOF7DBE47F7B5ABCD43010C92F87850D806CASA362BOA4F7FOBAF8783D9CA8EC66BD
     CAC49D198C228AB6CBID7EIC4D998C4D842ADE57AC190EA5F7CA8B7189E5A72453387E518194EO
     2A9CC7CBOAE4E3EED439CDA977EEF4FC9DFEAE829AE9A73FC25172E28EE650A652A5BIAB6985EO
     A9064A7E95DC2E9BDCFIEA039FDC94D8D36D59309541DE4A9958A295A5BAIDE347235E53BABOE2
     OCBEFIDC157AD12DEB0336746207706587A20952D240F2A490DC52B7FB6CA673504C7A85D3525F
     5BFE618AD4EB6308DB29EB968DBA5CDOFFA8C17A4E69F52AA64DF7353DD1488DCE9AE527735154
     lA3BC33C6A4FAB7AOAE54FF2282EOE5FlD75BBC7COlC482F8803DA9028C8EF51B5771751DF2049
                                                                            Hex.Dump Conversion



                                        April 22, 1999


                SCHOOL VIOLENCE DISCUSSION WITH STUDENTS

                            DATE:          April 22, 1999
                            LOCATION:      T.C. Williams High School
                                           Alexandria, VA
                            BRIEFING TIME: I 1:45am - 12:00pm
                            EVENT TIME:    12:30pm - 1:45pm
                            FROM:          Bruce Reed, Thurgood Marshall, Jr.


I.    PURPOSE

      To have a discussion with high school students on the recent incident in Littleton,
      Colorado and on school safety issues.

II.   BACKGROUND

      You will participate in a discussion with 25 high school students enrolled in an Advanced
      Placement government class, student conflict mediators, and school faculty. This
      discussion will also be broadcast live into classrooms nationwide by Channell, a
      classroom cable network. The students in the A.P. Government class have been
      discussing the incident in Littleton, CO, and have specifically focused on: I) whether this
      kind of event could happen at their own school; 2) what role the federal government can
      play in preventing school violence; 3) how young people get access to weapons and
      explosives; and 4) why the parents and friends of the suspects were unable to detect a
      problem before the violent incident occurred.

      T.e. Williams High School, part ofthe Alexandria City Public School System, is a large,
      urban high school with approximately 1,800 students of numerous racial, ethnic,
      religious, cultural, and socio-economic backgrounds. The students at the school come
      from more than 84 countries in the world and speak more than 56 languages. Last June,
      following the Springfield, Oregon school shooting, Attorney General Janet Reno and
      Secretary Richard Riley participated in a listening session on school safety with students
      at this high school.

      Alexandria City Public Schools have placed a high priority on school safety and security
      in their district. Every school is equipped with a team of professionals, including a
      registered nurse, school psychologist, social worker, and guidance counselor, and also has
                                                                                 Hex·Dump Conversion

       the support ofunifonned police officer serving as school resource officer. T.C. Williams
       High School currently receives COPS funds to help pay for their school resource officer.
       Four years ago, the Alexandria City Public Schools also established "zero tolerance"
       policies for weapons and drugs, which the school system credits for its subsequent
       decline in the number of incidents that could have resulted in suspensions. The schools
       also facilitate student workshops on various issues, including a mandatory anger
       management program presented to 9th grade students. Dr. Herb Berg, Superintendent of
       Alexandria City Public Schools, participated in a school safety event with you at the
       White House in March 1998, and discussed these steps the district is taking to ensure
       safe schools.

       The Alexandria City Public Schools also has a conflict resolution/peer mediation
       program, which provides special training for students starting in seventh grade. Students
       are trained to listen to both sides of an issue and help guide their fellow students toward
       peaceful resolutions of their conflicts. The peer mediators that will participate in today's
       discussion currently participate in this volunteer program, and mediate the conflicts of
       other T.C. Williams students.


III.   PARTICIPANTS

       Briefing Participants:
       Bruce Reed
       Doug Sosnik
       Loretta Ucdli
       Kris Balderston
       Lowell Weiss

       Event Participants:
       John Porter, Principal, T.C. Williams High School
       Helen Hannon, Teacher, T.e. Williams High School
       Barbara Finney, Crisis Coordinator, T.C. Williams High School
       25 High School Seniors emolled in an A.P. Government Class
       4 Peer MediatorslHigh School Seniors and Juniors


IV.    PRESS PLAN

       Pool Press. This discussion will also be broadcast live into classrooms nationwide by
       Channell, a classroom cable network which reaches 8 million middle and senior high
       school students and 500,000 educators.


V.     SEQUENCE OF EVENTS
                                                                             He)(.I)ump Conversion

       - You will enter the Media Center, accompanied by John Porter, the principal ofT.C.
       Williams High School, and will take your seat with the discussion participants.
       - John Porter will make a brief statement and introduce you.
       -You will make remarks and open a discussion with the students and faculty.
       -You will close the discussion and depart the Media Center.
       -You will proceed to the Auditorium, greet overflow students, and depart.

VI.    REMARKS

       To be provided by speechwriting.

VII.   ATTACHMENT

       -Administration Record on Promoting School Safety.
                                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

  PROMOTING SCHOOL SAFETY, PREVENTING YOUTH VIOLENCE
               AND ENCOURAGING LEARNING
                                  --The Clinton Administration Record --

                      MAKING OUR SCHOOLS AND COMMUNITIES SAFER AND DRUG-FREE

The White House Conference on School Safety_ In October 1998, the President held the first ever White
House Conference on School Safety to convene experts, parents, principals, students, law enforcement, and
local leaders from communities that experienced school shootings to discuss broad issues of school safety and
youth violence and share the wealth of infonnation we have on these issues. The Conference provided an
opportunity for Americans to learn more about how they can make their own schools and communities safer.
Over 600 satellite sites across the country were able to participate in the Conference.

A New Federal Response for Violent Deaths in Schools. President Clinton has proposed a $12 million
School Emergency Response to Violence -- or Project SERV -- in his FY 2000 budget to help schools and local
communities respond to school-related violent deaths, such as those that occurred last year in Jonesboro,
Arkansas; Paducah, Kentucky; Pearl, Mississippi; and Springfield, Oregon. Developed with input from local
officials and educators in these and other communities, Project SERV will enable the federal government to
assist local communities in much the same way FEMA assists in response to natural disasters.

Targeted Resources for Schools with Serious Crime Problems. To help give schools with serious crime
problems the tools they need to put the security of our children first, the President announced a new $65
million' initiative to hire up to 2,000 community police and School Resource Officers to work in schools -- and
to train police, educators and other members of the community to help recognize the early warning signs of
violence.

Reforms to Help Make All Schools Safe, Disciplined and Drug-Free. At the White House Conference on
School Safety, President Clinton announced the outline c.f his plan for a significant overhaul of the nearly $600
million Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program. Under the President's proposal, schools will
he required to adopt rigorous, comprehensive school safety plans that include: tough, hut fai, discipline policies;
safe passage to and from schools; effective drug and violence policies and programs; annual school safety and
drug use report cards; links to after school programs; efforts to involve parents; and crisis management plans .

.A Community-Wide Response to School Safety and Youth Violence. To help communities throughout the
 country promote a coordinated, comprehensive response to school safety, the President launched a new Safe
 Schools -Healthy Students initiative designed to help 50 cities develop and implement community-wide school
 safety plans. Earlier this month, the Departments of Justice, Education, and Health and Human Services
 announced that they wilI provide over $180 million this year, and a total of$380 million over three years
 through the Initiative for communities to fund comprehensive school safety plans that include anti-truancy
 initiatives, mentoring, mental health services, conflict resolution programs, school resource officers, and more --
 helping to prevent youth violence before it occurs. Communities wi1l have until June 1, 1999 to apply for the
 funds.

Forging School-Based Partnerships Between Schools and Law Enforcement. Under the new
School-Based Partnerships grant program, the Clinton Administration released $16.4 million in grants to 155
law enforcement agencies in September. The School-Based Partnerships grants will be used by policing
agencies to work with schools and community-based organizations to address crime at and around schools.
This initiative emphasizes using principles of community policing and problem-solving methods to address the
causes of school-related crime. The grants will help forge or strengthen partnerships between local law .
enforcement and schools to focus on school crime, drug use and discipline problems.

Helping Teachers and Principals Respond to the Early Warning Signs of Troubled Youth. President
Clinton directed the Secretary of Education and the Attorney General to develop a guidjiM-R~wPtQRB~O~d
principals identify and respond to the early warning signs of troubled youth that can lead to school violence. In
August 1998, the Departments of Justice and Education released Early Warning. Timely Response: A Guide to
Safe Schools. This guide provides schools and communities with information on how to identify the early
warning signs and take action steps to prevent and respond to school violence. Every school in the nation
received a copy of the guide, and additional copies can be obtained through the Department of Education
website.

Issuing the First Annual Report on School Safety. In December 1997, President Clinton called for an
Annual Report on School Safety, which was released on October 15, 1998 and sent to every school in the
nation. The report includes: an analysis of all existing national school crime data and an overview of state and
local crime reporting; examples of schools and strategies that are successfully reducing school violence, drug
use and class disruption; actions that parents can take locally to combat school crime; and resources available to
schools and communities to help create safe, disciplined and drug-free schools.

Enforcing Zero Tolerance for Guns and Other Weapons in Schools. In October 1994, President Clinton
signed into law the Gun-Free Schools Act, requiring states to have in effect a law requiring local education
agencies (LEAs) to expel students who bring guns to school. The President issued a Presidential Directive
later that month to enforce "zero tolerance" for guns in schools, a policy requiring the expulsion of students who
bring guns to schools. In school year 1996-97, the U.S. Department of Education estimates that, under zero
tolerance policies, 6,093 students were expelled from public schools for bringing afirearm to school.

Supporting Civic, Community and Faith-Based Organizations. Recognizing the important role that
civic, community and faith-based organizations can play in reducing crime, the Administration launched
a new Values-Based Violence Prevention Iuitiative to make $2.2 million in grants available to 16
community-based collaboratives, including religiously-affiliated organizations, that target youth
violence, gangs, truancy, and other juvenile problems by promoting common-sense values and
responsibility.

 Providing Safe After-School ODDortunities for More Than a Million Children a Year. Last year
(FY98), the 21st Century Community Learning Centers program was expanded to $200 million. This
funding is already supporting hundreds of programs in rural and urban schools in 44 states and the
District of Columbia that provide school-based after-school programs, including on weekends and
during the summer. This year, the President proposed to triple this initiative -- to $600 million - to
provide safe and educational after-school opportunities for up to 1.1 million school-age children in
communities across the country. In addition, the Education Department released a report in June 1998,
titled Safe and Smart: Making the After-School Hours Work for Kid. This report shows that after-school
programs can lower juvenile crime and improve academic performance. Safe and Smart was sent to
every school district in the country.

Cracking Down on Truanc;y. Truancy prevention initiatives have been shown to keep more children in school
and dramatically reduce daytime crime. The Education Department issued a guidebook to the 15,000 school
districts nationwide which outlines the central characteristics of a comprehensive truancy prevention policy and
highlights model initiatives in cities and towns across the country. Since then, the Education Department has
provided grants to local school districts to develop innovative truancy prevention programs of the kind
described in the guidebook.

Encouraging Schools to Adopt School Uniform Policies. School uniforms have been found to be a
promising strategy to reduce violence while promoting discipline and respect in school. Because of this, the
Clinton Administration has encouraged schools to consider adopting shool uniform policies by sharing with
every school district a school uniforms manual prepared by the Department of Education in consultation with
local communities and the Department of Justice. Since the President highlighted school uniforms, a growing
number of schools have adopted these policies including: New York City, Dade County, San Antonio,
Houston, Chicago and Boston.
Supporting Curfews at the Local Leyel Community curfews are designed to help keep children out of harm' s
                                                                                            Hex.()ump Conversion
way and enhance community safety. Because of their success, President Clinton has encouraged communities
to adopt curfew policies. A 1997 survey by the U.S. Conference of Mayors has shown that 276 of347 cities
surveyed -- or 80 percent -- had youth curfew laws, up from 70 percent in 1995.

Developed a Comprehensive Anti-Gang and Youth Violence Strategy. President Clinton has proposed a
comprehensive strategy to (1) target gangs and violent youths with tougher punishments and by expanding
anti-gang task forces and the use of racketeering statutes (i.e., RICO) for gang-related offenses; (2) crack down
on kids and guns by prohibiting violent juveniles from buying guns and increasing penalties for selling
handguns to youths; and (3) keep kids off the streets and out of trouble by expanding after-school programs and
promoting anti-truancy initiatives and youth curfews.

Keeping Guns Out of the Hands of Children. A number oflaws and initiatives are keeping guns out of the
hands of children and away from criminals. For instance, since the Brady Law's enactment, 250.000 felons.
fugitives and stalkers have been denied handguns, and the 1994 Crime Bill banned 19 of the deadliest assault
weapons and their copies -- keeping assault weapons off America's streets. The Youth Crime Gun Interdiction
Initiative (yCGII) is cracking down on the illegal gun markets that supply firearms to juveniles and criminals in
37 target cities. The ATF has already traced more than 77,000 crime guns in the YCGII cities, which has led to
the investigation and arrest of hundreds of illegal gun traffickers supplying juveniles and criminals. The
Administration's FY 2000 budget proposal proposes adding ATF agents to new YCGII cities to assist in gun
trafficking investigations. In addition to these programs, President Clinton signed a directive to every federal
agency, requiring child safety locking devices with every handgun issued to federal law enforcement officers.
And, in an historic agreement, eight major gun manufacturers have voluntarily agreed to provide child safety
locking devices with all their handguns, helping to protect our children.

Encouraging Conflict Resolution. The Departments of Education and Justice have developed and distributed
40,000 conflict resolution guides to schools and community organizations, providing guidance on how to
develop effective conflict resolution programs; Education and Justice are training community officials and
educators on these conflict resolution measures.

Targeting Young People with a National Anti-Drug Media Campaign. In July 1998, President Clinton
launched the national expansion of the Anti-Drug Media Campaign first proposed in last year's drug strategy
and budget. The 5-year, $2 billion campaign is designed to let teens know -- when they tum on the television,
listen to the radio, or surf the 'Net -- that drugs are dangerous, wrong and can kill you.

Building and Strengthening 14,000 Community Anti-Drug Coalitions. In 1997, President Clinton signed
into law the bipartisan Drug-Free Communities Support Program. Over the next five years this program will
provide $143.5 million to help community coalitions rid their streets of drugs -- the coalitions are made up of
young people, parents, media, law enforcement, religious and other civic organizations and school officials.
Under this program, the President recently announced new Federal assistance to enhance grassroots efforts in
93 communities in 46 states to prevent youth drug abuse. This assistance will fund the work of broad-based
community coalitions to target young people's use of drugs, alcohol and tobacco.


