RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: June Shih ( CN=June Shih/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-APR-1999 16:09:37.00

SUBJECT:    draft of departure statement

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 4/22/99 4 p.m.
Shih

PRESIDENT   WILLIAM J. CLINTON
STATEMENT   ON SCHOOL SAFETY GRANTS
THE WHITE   HOUSE
APRIL 23,   1999

        Good Morning.  Before I leave for the NATO Summit, I~,d like to say
a few more words about the tragedy in Littleton, Colorado that has shaken
all Americans this week -- and the latest steps we are taking to bring our
police and our communities together to make our schools safer.

        First, I have spoken to Attorney General Reno, who was in
Littleton yesterday to help the families of Columbine High School cope
with their tragedy.  And ID,d like to announce that the Justice Department
will make $750,000 available to help the victims in their long journey
toward recovery -- from mental health counseling to assistance with
medical and funeral bills. As' more needs become apparent, we will move
quickly to respond to them.

        Perhaps what is most disturbing to all Americans is that what we
saw in Littleton has become too familiar.  WeD,ve seen the grieving
families, the terrified children, the police tape and ambulance sirens
before -- though not to this extent -- in Pearl, Mississippi; Paducah,
Kentucky; Jonesboro, Arkansas; and Springfield, Oregon. Littleton is the
latest reminder that no community is immune to senseless violence.

         But it is important not to exaggerate the size of this problem.
Let me say again: AmericaD,s schools are indeed safe.  Nearly everywhere in
America, a child is still safer sitting in school than he or she is
walking down the street.  But we all know that any act of violence in
school is one too many.

        For the past six years, my administration has made school safety a
top priority.  In 1994, we put in a place a policy of zero tolerance for
guns in school, requiring principals to expel any student who brings a
firearm on campus.  We are cracking down on the illegal gun markets that
supply firearms to children and criminals, and expanding after-school


      programs to keep children safe in the hours when parents work and juvenile
      crime soars.

              And last year, in close consultation with parents, students, and
      school officials from Pearl, Paducah, Jonesboro and springfield, we
      developed a comprehensive plan to prevent youth violence in our schools.
      At our White House Conference on School Safety, I launched an
      unprecedented collaboration between the Departments of Justice, Education
      and Health and Human Services to help communities meet their school safety
      needs -- from boosting security measures to hiring mental health
      counselors to establishing new mentoring programs.  The deadline for these
      grants is June 1 -- and I encourage all schools to apply for them.

              Last fall, I also launched a new initiative to bring more
      community police officers into our schools.   Today, I am pleased to
      announce that the first round of these grants will be awarded to 337
      schools and communities, enabling them to hire more than 600 police
      officers. All across America, community police officers have had
      tremendous success wroking with neighborhood residents to prevent crime
      and violence in our streets. They can do the same for our schools by
      getting to know and working with our troubled young people and mediating
      conflicts before they escalate into violence.

              But we have much more to do.  Many efforts will require new
      legislation    and I will have more to say on them on Monday.

              This weekD,s tragedy must steel our national resolve to act -- to
      prevent violence from ever again shattering the peace of our schoolyards;
      to keep guns and firearms out of the hands of children and away from our
      schools; to reach out to our troubled youth and to help them resolve their
      anger and alienation with words, not weapons.  That will be the best way
      to honor the memories of those who lost their lives Tuesday morning.


