        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

        CREATION DATE/TIME:23-APR-1999 13:45:42.00

        SUBJECT:     Teacher quality, British style

        TO: Elena Kagan        CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ:UNKNOWN

        TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ:UNKNOWN

        TEXT:
        An interesting read.
        ---------------------- Forwarded by Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP on 04/23/99
        01:41 PM ---------------------------



                "Pekel, Kent" <Kent_Pekel @ ed.gov>
                04/23/99 10:28:06 AM
        Record Type: Record

        To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
        cc:
        Subject: Teacher quality, British style




        Pasted below is an interesting piece from last week's Economist on British
        education reform, in particular their increasing focus on improving teacher
        quality and putting in place effective policies and practices for turning
        around low-performing schools.   It's worth a read, not least because it '.s
        striking how similar their problems -- and proposed solutions -- are to
        ours. Kent

           DATE
                   10-Apr-99
          WORDS
                   2684

                   The government should not be deterred by the howls of anger
                   from the teachers unions. Efforts to raise standards in schools
                   are working

                   Journey up the learning curve

                   BACK in 1861, The Economist reported that farmers were
                   among the main obstacles to the efforts then being made to


             improve the education system, amid worries that other
             countries seemed to be doing rather better at it. At that time,
             education for poor children was provided by local boards of
             guardians with tax-raising powers. In rural areas, the boards
             were often dominated by farmers who doubted the value of
             education and wanted boys at work in the fields, not the
             classroom. Their attitude, noted Walter Bagehot, then editor of
             this paper, was that "a bad education would be quite sufficient
             for the poor."

             Nowadays it seems that the main obstacles to improving the
             nation's schools are entrenched attitudes within the education
             world itself. As with the farmers of Victorian times, these
             attitudes are held sincerely by people who insist both that their
             views are realistic and that they have the children's best
             interests at heart. However, the effect is much the same-many
             children, poor ones especially, end up achieving much less than
             they are capable of.

             The latest evidence that British schools have been
             systematically failing a large number of their pupils came with
             the release last month of the Moser report on adult literacy. It
             found that 22% of British adults are "functionally
             illiterate"-unable to perform simple tasks like looking up the
             entry for "plumbers" in the phone book. Britain's performance
             on this measure was almost three times as bad as Germany's.

             Yet the efforts of the Labour government-and of the Tory
             governments that preceded it-to drag up standards in
             Britain's schools have been opposed systematically by the
             teaching unions. They howled when the Conservatives
             introduced "league tables" which showed schools ranked by
             exam results. And they were enraged when the Labour
             government not only kept the league tables, but reappointed
             their champion, Chris Woodhead, as England's chief inspector
             of schools. Mr Woodhead, chief scourge of educational excuse
             making, is still under fire. Indeed his opponents have gained a
             damaging new weapon, as allegations-strongly denied-that
             he once had an affair with an A -level student have resurfaced.

             But, with or without Mr Woodhead, the government is likely to
             remain committed to a radical programme of educational
             reform. A fresh battle broke out over Easter as teaching unions
             threatened to strike over plans to introduce
             "performance-related pay", which would allow head teachers
             to give outstanding teachers a rise in pay. This should allow the
             best teachers to earn substantially larger salaries and help to
             ease the problem of persuading graduates to choose a career in
             teaching. But Doug McAvoy, the head of the biggest union, the
             National Union of Teachers ( NUT ), is outraged. He predicts
             that efforts to introduce payment-by-results will end in
             "disaster" .

             In response, the government has made a tactical withdrawal.
             The introduction of performance-related pay is likely to be
             delayed by a few months, and there will be further
             consultations over the method of assessment. But the
             government insists that it remains committed to linking teachers'
             pay to performance, and to using exam results (suitably
             weighted for the quality of pupils) as part of the method of


         assessment. If the government sticks to this plan, it may
         provoke a confrontation with the teachers. And even if the
         government manages to smooth the way for performance pay,
         other battles loom. The NUT is also threatening to call strikes in
         response to the government's "fresh start" policy for failing
         inner-city schools. This would allow the government to close
         poor schools, and then to re-open them with new teachers and
         management-perhaps provided by private firms, which the
         government has invited to submit bids.

         Some teachers claim that basing pay on judgments of
         performance will sow division in the staff-room. Others attack
         the closure of bad schools as gimmicky, and as a way of
         stigmatising the many disadvantaged children and those
         teachers who are working in the most difficult conditions. Their
         position reflects a particular ideological view-albeit one that is
         no longer shared by the leadership of the Labour Party. But the
         arguments offered by the NUT also display something less
         defensible-a defeatist tolerance of low expectations and
         standards.

         To give an example: in February, the latest tables were
         published of how many ll-year-olds had reached "level four"
         in the national tests. (The test's creators assumed that about
         three-quarters of 11-year-olds should be able to reach this
         level.) The NUT said that last year's lack of progress showed
         that the government's targets for a further big improvement by
         2002 were "unrealistically high" (see 1). David Blunkett, the
         education secretary, insists that they can be reached and, to his
         credit, has offered to resign if they are not.

         Moreover, it is often claimed that schools' vastly differing
         results are simply determined by the social mix of their pupils.
         Yet it is clear from the recently completed five-year
         programme of inspecting every state school in England that
         although there is indeed some correlation between social mix
         and test results, what is more noteworthy from the broad
         scattering of results is that some schools do far better than
         others with similar intakes. Mr Woodhead's most recent report
         concluded: In a set of schools with similarly high levels of
         disadvantage across a range of indicators, the proportion of
         pupils achieving level 4 or above (in standardised national
         literacy tests) ranged from about 65% to 15%. Some schools
         do well against the odds, while others in similar circumstances
         underachieve.

         In fact, if all schools with similar intakes did as well as the
 best,
         then Mr Blunkett's targets would be exceeded. If a school like
         Biddick Hall Junior, on a crime-ridden estate in Tyneside
         where 54% of the pupils are poor enough to get free meals
         (almost three times the typical figure), can beat the national
         average, then other schools in less challenging circumstances
         ought to be doing much better than they are. As Mr
         Woodhead puts it: "the rich do not have a monopoly on
         intelligence."

         Along with that often implicit assumption, there frequently
         comes another which is usually stated more explicitly: that a
         lack of spending on schools is the main barrier to improving


           standards. In fact, the evidence shows a surprising lack of
           correlation between spending and success. This is true whether
           you compare individual schools in Britain, or compare the
           achievements of entire education systems using the results of
           the giant Third International Mathematics and Science Study,
           published in 1996, in which 500,000 pupils in 41 countries
           took part and in which Britain's performance was mediocre. In
           particular, though it would seem counter-intuitive, studies show
           that the main thing a school might spend any extra money
           on-smaller class sizes-does not seem to help, except
           perhaps for pupils aged up to seven.

           So if neither school spending nor social deprivation entirely
           explain why some schools do much better than others, what
           does? Having overseen the inspection of all of England's
           24,000 state schools, Mr Woodhead insists it is now
           abundantly clear that two things make most of the difference:
           good teaching methods and effective leadership by the head
           teacher.

           When the five-year inspection programme began, it soon
           became clear that these qualities were especially lacking in
           "junior" schools (ones for children aged seven to 11). In the
           under-performing schools, lessons were often poorly planned
           and undemanding; and the pupils were too often left to do their
           own thing rather than actually being taught-a hangover of the
           "progressive" theories that were foisted on teachers from the
           late 1960s. In such schools, the head teachers were often too
           ready to believe that their staff were doing their best under the
           circumstances, even where the evidence of failure was
           unmissable. And they themselves were doing little to unite the
           school behind a well-thought-out plan for progress.

           In the best schools, inspectors soon found, teachers spent
           rather less time dashing round the class offering encouragement
           to pupils as they worked on individual projects and rather more
           time addressing the whole class, posing challenging questions to
           the pupils in turn to ensure they are keeping up. In the
           educational jargon, this is "whole-class interactive teaching". In
           plain language, teaching. In the schools that do well, it is
 usually
           found that each lesson fits in to a carefully crafted plan of
           where the teacher wants to take the class each term; and that
           pupils' progress is carefully monitored.

           Shoot the messenger

           These findings, as they began to emerge, emboldened Mr
           woodhead to launch a crusade against sloppy teaching,
           expressing his criticisms with a bluntness that caused gasps of
           horror in the normally polite world of education. He started to
           quote figures for the numbers of teachers that he wanted
           sacked. He tore into the educational sacred cows of smaller
           class sizes and the need for more "resources" (ie, public
           spending). Tim Brighouse, Birmingham's influential chief
           education officer, accused him of conducting a "reign of
           terror". Mr Brighouse resigned last month from a government
           task force for schools, seemingly because he could no longer
           bear to sit alongside Mr Woodhead. In the education journals
           and in staff rooms across the land, Mr Woodhead became a


         hate-figure: they called him "Woodentop",   "Dickhead" and
         worse, no doubt.

         But Mr Woodhead's constant badgering seems to be bearing
         fruit: there has been a sharp improvement in the quality of
         junior-school lessons during his reign of terror (see 2 above)
         and pupils are finishing their compulsory schooling with better
         exam passes than ever before (see ). Still, there are few signs
         that he is easing off: presenting his latest annual report in
         February, Mr Woodhead said some local-education authorities
         were a "mire of political incompetence" which damaged the
         schools supposedly in their care; in a speech a few days later
         he attacked the "pretension and pomposity and empty
         romanticism" of education professors who sought to build a
         fake mystique around teaching instead of concentrating on the
         practicalities of which methods work best.

         As well as providing ammunition for Mr Woodhead, the
         evidence emerging from the programme of school inspections
         and the league tables of test results has led to a drastic change
         in the politics of education. In the late 1980s the then
         Conservative government was pushing through the reforms that
         led to the gathering of such evidence against stiff opposition
         from the Labour Party, whose view on education was pretty
         much whatever the NUT said. Now things have changed: on
         taking power in 1997, Labour horrified the unions by "naming
         and shaming" a list of persistently failing schools, which it said
         would have to shape up quickly or be shut. The pressure has
         been kept up, with Tony Blair recently saying that he did not
         blame other parents for rejecting inadequate inner-city schools
         for their children, just as he had.

         Measures to speed up the departure of bad teachers, and to
         pay the rest by their results, are the next steps. Apart from this,
         the two bastions of the educational
         establishment-Iocal-education authorities and the universities'
         teacher-training departments-have been told that if found
         wanting, the former may be privatised and the latter may have
         their funding cut off. League tables, having once been
         considered divisive and misleading, are now thought of as such
         a good thing that they are being extended to universities,
         hospitals and social services. And, in the ultimate insult to
         opponents of this tough regime, Mr Woodhead was recently
         offered a renewal of his contract with a big pay rise.

         In one respect, though, the government's Damascene
         conversion has been incomplete: having, laudably, continued
         the previous government's policy of encouraging schools to
         specialise in a particular subject area (from technology to the
         arts), ministers are prepared to allow such schools to select a
         proportion of their pupils on the basis of aptitude for the
         specialist subject. Yet selection by overall academic ability is
         still being frowned on, officially (though not by some of Mr
         Blair's advisers).

         Schools that develop a distinct ethos seem to do especially
         well, and having a fair and open system for choosing their
         pupils is a good way to help them develop such an ethos. The
         alternative, for schools with more applicants than places, is to
         have a catchment area-which means selection by house


         prices, ie, by parental income-which is not the egalitarian
         solution that proponents of non-selective education claim it to
         be.

         Onwards and upwards

         This one lapse aside, the government has shown itself to be
         willing to abandon dogma and to adopt a policy of "what
         counts is what works". Having learnt from inspections and
         international studies which methods work best, it has begun a
         programme of ensuring that all schools get to know about
         them-particularly methods for teaching basic literacy and
         numeracy. This in itself is a good thing but there is an important
         lesson to be learned from the imposition of progressive, or
         "pupil-centred" teaching methods on schools following the
         Plowden Report in 1967. Many teachers at the time doubted
         the evidence on which this push to abandon traditional methods
         was based (and they were right, since the evidence was often
         flimsy). But it became the orthodoxy of the day and they were
         made to adopt it.

         It then took about 30 years to realise that progressive methods
         had not proved possible to implement successfully in most
         schools, and that instead many had ended up with an
         unworkable mess. Could the same fate befall the present
         attempt to foist "new" techniques on a fearful profession?

         At least the methods being promoted through the schemes for
         daily literacy and numeracy hours in England's primary schools
         have the backing of more convincing research than was
         available to Lady Plowden and her committee in 1967. Pupils
         on the government's schemes are being monitored and so far
         they seem to be making good progress.

         But already, a trial in Scottish schools has found that a rival
         system for teaching children to read seems to produce better
         results than the government's. The scheme, "Jolly Phonics",
         takes an even more fundamentalist approach than the one that
         is officially approved south of the border: not only do pupils
         learn to break words down into their component sounds
         (phonemes), they start by memorising all 44 phonemes of the
         English language.

         To help it avoid charges of suppressing the emergence of
         methods that may prove better than its favoured ones, the
         government should look to one particular principle, outlined in
         its education white paper of autumn 1997: that intervention in
         schools should be in inverse proportion to their success. If a
         school finds new ways of achieving good results, then it should
         be applauded-and copied. If not, then there is a strong case
         for intervention.

         Since it now seems much clearer what does work, the question
         is how to import such successful measures, and quickly, into
         the minority of persistently failing schools. One way, which the
         government now seems prepared to allow, is to encourage the
         formation of private school-management chains based on the
         methods of the best schools. These will be encouraged to take
         over failing schools and then to run them under contract to the
         state.



             Such radical measures were unthinkable until a matter of
             months ago. But, for the time being at least, there seems to be
             a realisation that, in spite of the progress made in improving
             schools over recent years, drastic measures are still needed to
             root out the significant pockets of under-achievement that
             remain.

             With this welcome realisation, the prospects look brighter than
             for some time. As Mr Woodhead commented in February, on
             presenting his fifth annual report: "there is every reason for
             optimism but a long way yet to go." Or, as walter Bagehot put
             it in The Economist of June 29th, 1861, commenting on an
             earlier inquiry into the state of schools: "nineteen-twentieths of
             our children are receiving an education of some sort. We may
             well be warmed into hope by this result, though we should
             neither be lulled into apathy nor stimulated into
             over-confidence."




     Message Sent
     TO:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~___
     "Smith, Mike" <Mike_Smith @ ed.gov>
     "Rogers, Diane" <Diane_Rogers @ ed.gov>
     "Peterson, Terry" <Terry_Peterson @ ed.gov>
     "Johnson, Judith" <Judith_Johnson @ ed.gov>
     "O'Leary, Ann" <Ann_O'Leary @ ed.gov>
     "Weinman, Janice" <Janice weinman @ ed.gov>
     ;'Dozier, Terry" <Terry_Do;:ier @ ed.gov>
     "Blegen, Mary Beth" <Mary_Beth_Blegen @ ed.gov>
     "Schwarz, Paul" <Paul_Schwarz @ ed.gov>
     "Ramirez; Heidi" <Heidi_Ramirez @ ed.gov>
     "Kvaal, James" <James_Kvaal @ ed.gov>
     "Abernathy, Pauline" <Pauline_Abernathy @ ed.gov>
     "Kimball, Kristi" <Kristi_Kimball @ ed.gov>
     "Eisner, Elizabeth" <Elizabeth_Eisner @ ed.gov>
     "Butler, James" <James_Butler @ ed.gov>
     "Crum, Laurette" <Laurette_Crum @ ed.gov>
     "Luczak, John" <John_Luczak @ ed.gov>
     "Mancini, Steve" <Steve_Mancini @ ed.gov>
     "Smith, Audrey" <Audrey Smith @ ed.gov>
     Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP-
     "Bradley, Bridget" <Bridget_Bradley @ ed.gov>
     "Moore, Heather" <Heather_Moore @ ed.gov>
     Bethany Little/OPD/EOP
    "
