RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Constance J. Bowers ( CN=Constance J. Bowers/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-APR-1999 11:35:56.00

SUBJECT:   Education "Prospectus" (summaries) of ESEA Reauthorization Draft bill

TO: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bethany Little ( CN=Bethany Little/OU=OPD/O=EOP   [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Wei-Min C. Wang ( CN=wei-Min C. Wang/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Barry White ( CN=Barry White/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: James J. Jukes   ( CN=James J. Jukes/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Iratha H. Waters   ( CN=Iratha H. Waters/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Wayne Upshaw ( CN=Wayne Upshaw/OU=OMS/O=EOP@EOP   [ OMB ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMS/O=EOP@EOP   [ OMS)   )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
ED is anxious to receive clearance of the prospectus material summarizing
each title of the ESEA draft bill. ED's need to use a commercial printer
necessitates a longer lead time than normal to prepare this material in
final.   Therefore, please review this material as soon as possible.
Unresolved issues are highlighted. Each title is presented as a separate
file.  It would assist ED is you could quickly provide clearance on the
prospectus material for those titles with no outstanding issues. You may
access these files easily though the following website.   I am also
attaching below the "word" files containing the overview, Title I, and
Title II.   (I will forward you by email the other titles if you so
request.   The length of the material will not allow for compilation and
transmittal in one email.)

ED requests clearance of all prospectus material no later than Friday,
April 30th.  please advise me of your clearance of specific titles of the


prospectus as time permits before the Friday deadline.  As decisions are
made on the bill, ED will revise, and we will make available, those titles
of the prospectus with major unresolved issues.

http://tabula.ost.dot.gov/ed
Use the following identifying information:
username: LRM
password: text


 - overview.doc

 - TITLE I.doc

 - TITLE II, High Standards.doc
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D72]ARMS27236833L.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCFIIEOAIBllAEl000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
0000000000080000004003000000000000001000008AOIOOOOOIOO0000FEFFFFFF000000004D03
0000850100004203000045030000460300004703000041030000BE020000FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                 TITLE I
          HELPING DISADVANT AGED CHILDREN MEET HIGH STANDARDS

                                 BASIC GRANTS (TITLE I, PART A)



                                                 What's New

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:

   Holds districts and schools accountable for student performance by requiring States to
    implement one rigorous, statewide accountability system in all schools, including Title I
    schools;

   Authorizes additional funding for States and school districts to implement immediate,
    intensive intervention in low-perfonning schools and districts to improve their perfonnance;

   Supports high-quality instruction by requiring Title I districts to (1) set aside funds for
    professional development activities, (2) ensure that new Title I teachers are certified in the
    field in which they are teaching, and (3) raise the minimum qualifications for
    paraprofessionals working in Title I programs;

    Strengthens schoolwide efforts to improve high-poverty schools by incorporating promising
     features of the Comprehensive School Refonn Demonstration program;

   Incorporates key research findings on improving the teaching and learning of reading,
    including encouraging districts to provide early identification and intervention for children
    with difficulties learning to read;

   Helps districts and schools develop high-quality instructional programs through peer review
    of schoolwide plans, school improvement plans, district Title I plans and district
    improvement plans;

   Strengthens provisions to help limited English proficient (LEP) students learn English and
    meet their State's challenging content and perfonnance standards, including requiring States
    to give State reading and language arts assessments in English to LEP students who have
    been in the United States for three years or longer;

   Ensures equitable leaming opportunities for Title I students who attend private schools by
    emphasizing the requirement that districts consult with the teachers and parents of private
    school Title I participants;

   Strengthens extended learning time opportunities for students experiencing difficulty
    meeting high academic standards by requiring schools with schoolwide Title I programs to
    provide extended learning time for them;                       .



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                  Title I, Page 1
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

                                               What's New
                                               (continued)

   Strengthens provisions requiring that Title I schools receive resources comparable to other
    schools within a district, focusing on such factors as staff quality, curriculum and course
    offerings, and safe school facilities; and,

   Strengthens opportunities for program improvement by reserving 0.3 percent of Title I
    funds for evaluation, State partnerships to gather information necessary to improve
    program management, applied research, technical assistance and information
    dissemination.


Enacted in 1965 as part of the War on Poverty to help our most disadvantaged students, the Title
I Basic Grants program is the largest federal investment in elementary and secondary education.
Title I now provides over $8 billion each year on behalf of over 11 million children in 45,000
schools.

Title I funding helps improve teaching and learning in schools with concentrations of low-
achieving and poor children to help them meet challenging State academic standards. By
targeting Federal resources to school districts and schools with the highest concentrations of
poverty - where academic performance tends to be low and the obstacles to raising
performance are the greatest - Title I helps address the severe educational problems facing
high-poverty communities.

Of the 11 million Title I students, about two-thirds are between the first and sixth grades.'
Minority students participate at rates higher than their proportion of the student popUlation:
African American students make up 28 percent of Title I participants, Hispanic students 30
percent, and non-Hispanic whites 36 percent. 2

The Title I Basic Grants program serves about 167,000 private school children, close to 300,000
migrant children, and over 200,000 children identified as homeless. Title I services are provided
to about two million students with limited English proficiency - almost one-fifth of all students
served by the program and growing in number - and to one million students with disabilities. 3

During the 1970s and most ofthe 1980s, Title I contributed to closing the achievement gap
between minority and white students. 4 However, during the late 1980s and early 1990s, the gap
widened again.

Prior to 1994, research indicated that fundamental change was needed in Title I to help at-risk
students achieve to the same high standards expected of other children. 5 As a result, the
Congress and the Administration restructured Title I in 1994 to focus on helping low-performing
students master challenging curriculum and meet high standards.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                  Title I, Page 2
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


                                           What We've Learned

The 1994 reauthorization of Title I was intended to support schools, districts, and States in
ensuring that all children meet the same challenging standards. The reforms were designed to
link the program to standards-based State and local reform efforts. Though there has clearly
been progress in establishing State standards across the country, States and school districts have
not fully implemented them in their classrooms.


Schools are beginning to show gains in student performance.

It has been just four years since the Improving America's Schools Act of 1994 and, under the
schedule mandated by that law, many States are still implementing the 1994 provisions.
Nonetheless, there is growing evidence that standards-based reforms supported by Title I are
having a positive impact on teaching and learning. With Federal support and encouragement,
educators in all 50 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have made great progress in
establishing high academic standards in reading and mathematics.

States are also making progress in developing assessments aligned with their standards, which
are not required to be used until the 2000-01 school year. In 1997, 14 States had established
transitional assessment systems linked to State content standards. 6

Most importantly, the impact of standards-based reform is beginning to be seen in improved
achievement by Title I students. Reading and math performance among nine-year-olds in high-
poverty public schools and among the lowest-achieving fourth graders has improved
significantly on the National Assessment of Educational Progress.? Similarly, three-year trends
reported by States and districts show progress in the percentage of students in the highest-
poverty schools meeting State and local standards for proficiency in mathematics and reading. 8

Nonetheless, despite the progress States and districts have made, a substantial achievement gap
remains between students in the highest- and lowest-poverty schools. 9


Title I concentrates resources on communities with the greatest needs.

Title I is intended to help address the greater educational challenges facing high-poverty
communities by concentrating extra resources on school districts and schools with the highest
concentrations of poverty, low academic performance, and great obstacles to raising
perfonnance. The record shows that the 1994 reforms heightened the concentration of resources
where the need is the greatest:

   Title I is helping 95 percent of the nation's highest-poverty schools (where three out of every
    four students are from low-income families) in 1997-98, up from 79 percent in 1993-94. The
    number of the highest-poverty secondary schools receiving Title I funds also increased over
    that time, from 61 percent to 93 percent. 10




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title I, Page 3
                                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

   While the highest-poverty schools make up only about 15 percent of schools nationwide,
    they receive 46 percent of Title I funds. About three-fourths (73 percent) of the funds go to
    schools with 50 percent or more students who are eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. I I

   The share of Title I funds allocated to low-poverty schools (where fewer than one student in
    three is from a low-income family) declined from 49 percent in 1994-95 to 36 percent in
    1997-98.



                                                 Exhibit
                               Percentage of Schools Participating in Title I,
                                    by School Poverty Level, 1997-98

                      100.".                    95"1.

                                                            BPt.

               .
               
               o
                       80%

                                                                          64 'Y.
               "
               ~       60%
                                   58%
               ~
               o
               
               at
               .!!!    40%                                                             36"1
                c
               
               ..
               ~
                      20%



                        0%
                                   Total     7 5%100%
                                      SChool Poverty Level (Free or Reduced-Price Lunch)




        Source: U.S. Department of Education, unpublished tabulations from the
        Follow-Up Survey ofEducation Reform.


Almost all Title I funds go to the local level to support instruction.

Almost 99 percent of Title I dollars go to the local level. School districts, in tum, use 90 to 93
percent of their Title I funds for instruction and instructional support, most often in reading and
math. 12

Title I provides flexible funding that may be used for supplementary instruction, professional
development, new computers, after-school or other extended-time programs, and other strategies
for raising student achievement. For example, Title I funds were used to purchase an average of
3.5 computers in the highest-poverty schools in 1997-98. 13 Title I funds used for professional
development amounted to about $20 million in 1997-98, about 29 percent of total Federal
support for teacher professional development. 14




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                                 Title I, Page 4
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion',



Accountability systems tied to standards and assessments provide focus for schools,

Accountability systems for school quality, including student performance, can help schools and
districts use data to identify student needs and make improvements, Recent research on
accountability in 12 States and 14 districts found that decision-making relied heavily on data.
The study found that many districts were going beyond requirements of Title I to use
performance data to identify and develop strategies for staff development and curriculum
improvement to address gaps in performance. IS

Even though Title I accounts for a relatively small portion (about three percent) of total Federal,
State, and local spending on elementary and secondary education, some evidence suggests that
Title I accountability provisions are having a significant effect in high-poverty districts, For
example, a recent study of accountability in large urban districts found that Title I has been "a
model and an instigator" for standards-based reforms and efforts to track student progress and
improVe schools. 16 Nationally, 50 percent of small, poor districts and 47 percent of large, poor
districts report that Title I is driving reform to a great extent. Fourteen percent of all districts
report that Title I is driving reform to a great extent in their districts as a whole. 17

States are making progress in implementing the accountability provisions of Title I, although the
law does not require full implementation of accountability systems until final assessments are in
place in the 2000-01 school year. But States are also facing new challenges as they transform
their educational systems into higher-performing, results-based systems. 18 For example,
although there is considerable overlap between schools identified for improvement under Title I
and those identified through other State or local mechanisms, States report that they are having
difficulty integrating the Title I requirements with their own systems. Only 23 State Title I
directors report that the same accountability system is used for Title I schools as for other
schools in their State. 19


States and districts lack the capacity to tum around schools in need of improvement.

The lack of capacity of State school support teams to assist schools in need of improvement
under Title I is a major concern.

   The State Improvement Grants - designed to be the mechanism to provide additional
    resources for the operation of school support teams - have not been funded in the past four
    years. Although State school support teams have mainly assisted schoolwide programs, their
    charge also includes providing assistance to other schools in need of improvement. In 1998,
    only eight States reported that school support teams have been able to serve the majority of
    schools identified as in need of improvement.

   Fewer than half (47 percent) of schools that reported in 1997-98 that they had been identified
    as in need of improvement also reported that this designation led to additional professional
    development or assistance. 2o



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                  Title I, Page 5
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion



A focus on high standards at the classroom level can make a difference in student achievement.

There is evidence of progress for students in high-poverty schools where staff members focus on
challenging standards and strategies to help students achieve them. Preliminary findings from
the Longitudinal Evaluation of School Change and Performance (LESCP),21 a study of
instructional practices in 71 high-poverty schools, found that:

   Students were likely to make better progress in reading if their teacher gave them more
    exposure to reading in the academic content areas and opportunities to talk in small groups
    about what they had read; and,

   Students whose teachers used a curriculum that reflected the standards of the National
    Council of Teachers of Mathematics recorded higher gains in mathematics.

Another study found that in high-performing, high-poverty schools, 80 percent of the principals
reported using standards extensively to design curriculum and instruction and 94 percent
reported using standards to assess student progress. 22 The proportion of Title I principals who
reported using content standards to guide curriculum and instruction to a great extent has
increased substantially, from approximately half in 1995-96 to three-quarters in 1997-98. 23


Teachers need more preparation to implement standards in the classroom.

Despite reported use of standards, most teachers do not feel very well prepared to implement
them in the classroom. In 1998, only 37 percent of teachers in schools with 60 percent poverty
or greater reported that they felt very well prepared to implement State or district curriculum and
performance standards. 24

Teachers' sense of preparedness is a key factor in predicting student outcomes, according to the
LESCP study of71 high-poverty Title I schools. The LESCP found that teachers' reported
preparedness in both subject matter and instructional strategies had a positive relationship with
student progress. 25 Current teacher training seems insufficient.

   In 1998, public school teachers - regardless of the poverty level of their school - spent a
    very limited amount of time in professional development, although they did focus on topics
    that supported standards-based reform. Most teachers are not participating in training that is
    intensive or sustained, two essential characteristics of effective professional development. 26

   Over half (55 percent) of all teachers in high-poverty schools reported spending less than
    nine hours per year on training in the content areas. Over two-thirds (70 percent) reported
    receiving less than nine hours per year of professional development related to content and
    performance standards, yet this topic was the most common one on which teachers received
    training (80 percent received professional development in this area).27




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                  Title I, Page 6
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


Teacher aides are widely used to provide direct instruction in Title I schools.

Paraprofessionals continue to be widely used in Title I schools to provide instruction. In the
1997-98 school year, 84 percent of principals in high-poverty schools reported using aides,
compared to 54 percent in low-poverty schools. 28 Although very few paraprofessionals have the
educational background necessary to teach students, almost all (96 percent) were either teaching
or helping teach students. 29 Three-fourths of paraprofessionals (72 percent) spent at least some
time teaching without a teacher prescnt. 30


Schoolwide programs are more likely to integrate Title I services into overall standards-based
reforms at the school level.

Each Title I school operates either a Title I schoolwide program, in which Title I funds are
combined with other funds to improve the quality of the whole school, or a Title I targeted
assistance program solely for Title I students.

Recent findings show that schools with schoolwide Title I programs are more likely than schools
with targeted assistance programs to use a strategic plan that effectively integrates Title I into the
larger educational program of the school. Strategic plans can allow Title I services to be
considered within the broadeI: context ofa school's reform goals. 31


Extended learning time can improve achievement, but is not fully utilized in Title 1.

In a recent study of high-performing, high-poverty schools, 86 percent of the schools provided
extended learning time for reading and 66 percent provided extra time in mathematics. 32 In
another study of Maryland elementary schools, researchers found that the more successful
schools were seeing consistent academic gains as a result of extended day programs. 33

Although the proportion of schools offering extended time has increased from nine to 41 percent
since the last reauthorization, most Title I schools still do not. Those schools that do offer such
extended learning programs serve few students with them. 34


Family involvement in education strengthens learning.

Principals and teachers see the need to engage parents to achieve reform, especially in high-
poverty schools. 35 The Federal role in supporting parental involvement can be catalytic,
encouraging schools to get parents to help their children learn and to participate in school
activities and decisions.

Title I school-parent compacts, first required under the 1994 reauthorization, can bring schools
and parents together around their shared responsibilities, but they need sustained support to be
successful. The proportion of Title I schools with school-parent compacts rose from 20 percent



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                    Title I, Page 7
                                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

in 1994 to about 75 percent in 1998. A substantial majority of schools - especially those
serving high concentrations oflow-income children - find compacts helpful in promoting
parental involvement. 36 However, 25 percent of Title I schools still do not have such
agreements.

                                            What We Propose

Title I is the primary source of Federal support for raising the quality of instruction in high-
poverty schools. The program focuses on challenging all students to reach high academic
standards and providing the high-quality education necessary to reach those standards. The
Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:              .

   Focus on high academic standards for all children. Almost every State has established
    challenging standards describing what all students - including Title I students - should
    know. Soon all States will be administering assessments that measure student progress
    toward those standards.

    States and school districts must now translate State standards from policy documents into
    classroom practices to see meaningful gains in student learning. State standards and
    assessments will help teachers and schools determine how their students are doing and how
    they can improve. Standards and assessments will also help States and districts better
    identify schools in need of help.

    Our proposal would not change the schedule for implementing standards-based reform
    mandated by the 1994 laws, including the requirement that States develop assessments
    aligned with their standards by the 2000-2001 school year.

   Strengthen accountability for districts and schools. For standards-based reform to improve
    student achievement, States must hold districts and schools accountable for student
    performance against State standards, with an emphasis on helping the lowest-performing
    students continually improve. Accountability systems are most meaningful when all schools
    understand them. In some States, schools are confused by mUltiple accountability systems.

    Our proposal would require States to develop one rigorous, statewide accountability system
    for all schools, including Title I schools, that requires schools to make annual, substantial
    gains in student performance until every student is mastering challenging standards. States
    could use either a model outlined in the statute or an alternative that is at least as rigorous and
    effective.

   Reward improvement and success. Acknowledging high-achieving and improving schools
    and districts helps them sustain their momentum and identifies sources of lessons for other
    schools. Our proposal would require States to establish criteria for recognizing distinguished
    districts and schools. For example, these criteria might lead States to recognize districts and
    schools that show substantial gains for three consecutive years; have helped virtually all of
    their students meet the State's advanced level of performance; or raised student achievement
    across gender and racial groups to promote equity in achievement.


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                   Title I, Page 8
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


   Increase funding to help low-performing schools implement sound programs that improve
    student performance. States and districts would receive funding from a 2.5 percent set-aside
    under Title I to strengthen their capacity to tum around low-performing schools. This set-
    aside would increase to 3.5 percent in the 2003-04 school year. At least 70 percent of these
    funds would go to districts to tum around low-performing schools. States would begin with
    districts and schools already identified as needing improvement. This set-aside would
    provide more funds for swift, intensive intervention such as expert consultation and in-depth
    teacher training in low-perfonning schools and districts.

    No school will be allowed to continue to languish in failure. To help schools and districts
    that fail to show improvement after State intervention, States and districts would be required
    to take stronger corrective actions that dramatically alter the teaching force and instructional
    strategies in the school. Districts would take at least one of the following corrective actions:
    (1) implementing a new curriculum that is research-based and offers substantial promise of
    improving student achievement; (2) redesigning or reconstituting the school, including re-
    opening it as a charter school; or (3) closing the school and allowing its students to transfer.

   Emphasize high-quality teaching. Teacher quality is the greatest single in-school factor in
    determining student success. 37 To enable teachers in our poorest schools to teach to
    challenging standards, our proposal would require districts to use at least five percent of their
    Title I funds in the first two years, and 10 percent in subsequent years, to support teacher
    development tied to challenging standards. (PD set-aside is still an outstanding issue)

    In addition, all new teachers would have to be certified in the field in which they teach or
    have a bachelors' degree and be working toward full certification within two years. All
    paraprofessionals would be required to hold at least a high-school diploma or equivalent and
    only paraprofessionals with at least two years of college could assist teachers by providing
    appropriate instructional help, such as tutoring. Paraprofessionals would participate in
    professional development and school districts would be encouraged to develop career ladders
    for paraprofessionals to become certified teachers.

    This effort will be complemented by the teacher quality provisions in Title XI, which will
    increase the number of certified teachers in Title I schools, as well as Titles II and III, which
    increase support for professional development.

   Strengthen schoolwide efforts to improve education in high-poverty schools. Schoolwide
    programs can be a highly effective way to help students in high-poverty schools meet high
    standards for performance. Schoolwide programs improve the entire instructional program
    - rather than offering a separate program for Title I students - by combining Federal,
    State, and local funds to integrate programs.

    Our proposal would continue to emphasize schoolwide programs in schools that have at least
    50 percent poverty, because research shows that a concentration of children from poor
    families of this magnitude impacts the educational achievement of all children in the school.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                   Title \, Page 9
                                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

    Our proposal would make schoolwide programs more effective by emphasizing promising
    features of the Comprehensive School Reform Demonstration program - which operates
    under the Title I demonstration authority and the Fund for the Improvement of Education -
    and other research-based approaches for raising student achievement. Key elements of
    schoolwide reforms are:

        (1) A comprehensive assessment that examines the performance of all children in the
            school in relation to State content and performance standards, student mobility,
            attendance, violence and drug use, class size, staff quality, classroom management,
            parent and community involvement, and the availability of resources;

        (2) A comprehensive design to improve teaching and learning throughout the school
            based on data from the assessment. This design would include, for example,
            instruction by highly qualified staff; on-going high-quality professional development;
            effective research-based methods and strategies to strengthen the core academic
            program, increase the amount and quality of learning time, and meet the needs of the
            most at-risk children; and strategies to increase parental involvement. These elements
            must be aligned and included in a comprehensive design that addresses the needs of
            the whole school; and,

        (3) A regular review of the school's progress in implementing its program and meeting
            its goals for student achievement. The school would use the results of this review to
            continuously improve the design and implementation of its schoolwide program.

    Accounting practices can be a barrier to successfully integrating program funds. Our
    proposal would require each State to work to reduce its fiscal and accounting barriers to
    encourage school districts to combine Title I funds with funds from other Federal, State, and
    local sources to achieve schoolwide reform.

   Incorporate key findings of reading research and encourage preschool programs. Research
    shows that children who receive language and cognitive development enrichment early in life
    later show much higher reading achievement in elementary and middle school. 38 Title I
    currently authorizes services to preschool children, but there are no specific provisions for
    how these services may be provided.

    Our proposal would make clear that a district may provide services directly to eligible
    preschool children in all or part of its jurisdiction, through any participating Title I school, or
    through a contract with another preschool program. The proposal also would emphasize that
    such services must focus on the developmental needs of participating children and use
    research-based approaches that build on children's competencies that lead to school success.
    Our proposal would also encourage the use of diagnostic assessments in the first grade to
    ensure early identification and intervention for students with reading difficulties.

   Encourage peer support for schoolwide programs and school improvement strategies.
    Schools and districts can leam a great deal from each other. To support critical feedback and
    improvement on schoolwide programs and school improvement plans, our proposal requires



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                  Title I, Page 10
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

    school districts to peer review each other's schoolwide plans and school improvement plans
    and States to peer review each other's district-level Title I plans and district improvement
    plans.

   Focus attention on improving the education of limited English proficient (LEP) children.
    Despite growing populations ofLEP students, many States exclude them from their
    assessment and accountability systems, possibly leading to lower expectations and less
    rigorous curricula for these students. Our proposal would continue to hold Title r schools
    accountable for the perfomlance ofLEP students in reaching high academic standards and
    learning English.

    Schools would annually assess the progress of LEP students in learning English and use the
    results ofthose assessments to modify instruction. As under current law, States would have
    to include LEP students in State assessments and (to the extent practicable) test them in the
    language and manner most likely to yield accurate information about what they know. At a
    minimum, States would be required to have tests available in Spanish. To assess student
    progress and hold schools accountable for teaching them English, LEP students who have
    attended schools in the U.S. for three consecutive years would be tested in English on the
    State's reading or language arts assessment.

   Ensure equitable learning opportunities for Title I participants who attend private schools.
    Our proposal would clarify that: (1) teachers and families of participating private school
    students are to participate in Title I professional development and parental involvement
    activities on an equitable basis, and (2) services provided to private school students are to
    meet the needs of those students.

    Our proposal would also strengthen consultation between public and private school officials.
    First, new provisions would clarify that consultation will include meetings among school
    district and private school officials and continue throughout the implementation and
    assessment of Title I services. Additional changes will specify that the issues discussed
    during consultation are to include:
    - The amount offunds generated by low-income private school children;
    - The methods and sources of data to be used to determine the number of low-income
        students in participating school attendance areas who attend private schools;
    - How and when the school district will make decisions about the delivery of services to
        eligible students attending private schools; and,
    - How the results of assessments will be used to improve services to eligible children
        attending private schools.

   Promote greater use of extended learning time to help students achieve high academic
    standards. Although the use of extended learning time programs has increased significantly
    and recent evidence has affirmed their effectiveness, fewer than half of Title I schools offer
    these programs. Where they do exist, few students participate.

    Because extended learning time can improve student performance, our proposal would
    require that schoolwide Title I programs provide extended learning programs to students



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                 Title I, Page I I
                                                                                       Hex텱ump Conversion

    experiencing difficulty in mastering State academic standards. Our proposal would also
    require school districts to describe in their applications how they will give primary
    consideration to extended learning time, such as a longer school year, before- and after-
    school programs, and summer programs.

   Maintain the current funding formulas and targeting provisions to ensure that Title I
    resources go to the highest-poverty school districts and schools. The 1994 reauthorization
    created the new targeted grants formula and changed the within-district allocation provisions.
    The Congress also increased the portion of Title I funds appropriated for concentration grants
    over the past several years. As a result, a larger proportion of Title I funds are spent in high-
    poverty schools. Ninety-five percent of the highest-poverty schools - where at least three
    students in four live in poverty - received Title I funds in 1997-98, an increase from 79
    percent in 1993-94. (Outstanding issue regarding Puerto Rico)

    Our proposal would maintain the current funding formulas and targeting provisions. It also
    updates the provisions directing that an increasing portion of Title I funds be distributed
    through the targeted grant formula.

   Strengthen comparability provisions to ensure that Title I schools are treated the same as all
    other schools in a district in terms of the qualifications of staff, curriculum and course
    offerings, and condition and safety of school facilities. With the expectation that all children
    are to meet challenging State standards, it is more important than ever to ensure that high-
    poverty schools are qualitatively comparable to other schools in their districts.

   Build capacity to develop new knowledge about program operation and innovations. Our
    proposal would authorize the Secretary to reserve 0.3 percent of Title I funds to conduct
    evaluations of Title I programs to determine their effectiveness, consistent with the
    Government Performance and Results Act of 1993. Our proposal would mandate a national
    assessment of Title I to examine, for example, its impact on State standards-based reform
    systems and student academic performance relative to that system. Our proposal would also
    mandate a national longitudinal study of Title I students to provide an accurate description of
    Title 1's short-term and long-term effectiveness. Finally, our proposal would authorize State
    partnerships to inform program management and support continuous improvement by States,
    districts, and schools.

    Currently, there is no authority in Title I to support national level activities such as
    commissioning papers, convening expert panels to advise on issues related to program
    implementation, or developing and testing model approaches to improve student achievement
    in high-poverty schools. Our proposed evaluation funds would also support technical
    assistance, program improvement, and replication activities, consistent with the other major
    ESEA programs.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                 Title I, Page 12
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion       .


         COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOL REFORM DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM



                                                 What's New

 The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:

    Continues the commitment to comprehensive school reform by extending the Title I
     demonstration authority and the Fund for the Improvement of Education, through which the
     Comprehensive School Reform Demonstration program operates;

    The recently-established CSRD program:

         Helps schools adopt comprehensive, research-based reform efforts that strengthen the
         entire school;

         Assists schools to identify, select, and implement effective models that are based on
         reliable research and effective practices, and that best match the learning needs of
         students;

     -   Supports continuous professional development of school staff to implement
         comprehensive school reform designs; and,

     -   Supports high-quality, ongoing technical assistance from States, districts, and external
         experts in schoolwide reform.



The Comprehensive School Reform Demonstration (CSRD) program was established in
November 1997 under the Title I Demonstration authority and the Fund for the Improvement of
Education. CSRD provides incentives to schools - especially Title I schools identified for
improvement - to implement research-based programs to strengthen the quality of education
within the entire school. By the fall of 1999, approximately 2,500 schools will be selected for
funding to implement comprehensive school reform programs based on reliable research and
effective practices.

                                           What We've Learned

Comprehensive reform efforts - such as those supported by CSRD, which draw on methods and
strategies with a track record of success - can be a powerful tool for school improvement.
Research on effective schools points to the importance of high standards and rigorous curriculum
for all students, a school environment that promotes collaboration and mutual respect among
staff, ongoing and high-quality staff development, efficient school management, and sustained
parental involvement. An increasing number of districts and schools are undertaking and getting



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title I, Page 13
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

results from such approaches, often using                  Harriet Tubman Elementary School
models developed externally to help guide                             New York City
coherent school improvements.                        Just a few years ago, P.S. 154 in New York City,
                                                     where 99 percent of students receive free- and
Research supports the comprehensive                  reduced-price lunch, was one of the lowest-
approach to school reform. Several                   performing schools in the city. After being
studies have found larger studc;:nt                  assigned to the Chancellor's District, school
achievement gains in schools                         leaders, parents and teachers devised a plan for
implementing comprehensive programs                  comprehensive change.         As . part of the
than in coinparable schools without such             comprehensive reform effort, the school adopted
programs. 39                                         Success for All, an intensive reading program.
                                                     By 1997-98, P.S. 154 was removed from the
These studies - as well as a recent                  State's list of low-performing schools, reading
evaluation of reform models by the RAND              scores had improved, the percent of students
Corporation40 -identify the essential                performing at or above grade level on the
elements for the implementation of                   citywide assessment rose from 30 percent (in
effective schoolwide reform. Critical                1996) to 46 percent in 1998.
ingredients for successful implementation
include stable, supportive leadership at                Nathaniel Hawthorne Elementary School
both district and school levels; district                          San Antonio, Texas
support in helping schools choose reform             Hawthorne Elementary School, a high poverty
models that best fit their needs; and district       school where 96 percent of students qualify for
provisions for some school autonomy and              free lunch and 28 percent of students have
resources for professional development               limited proficiency in English, adopted Core
and planning. These attributes are                   Knowledge in 1992-93, a model that provides
important in determining the success of              content guidelines to help schools provide
implementation, and ultimately the success           challenging curriculum and a common core of
of school improvement.                               knowledge for students in the early grades. In
                                                     1994 only 24 percent of students in the school
Over 600 schools nationwide have already             passed all portions of the Texas Assessment of
received competitive CSRD awards to                  Academic Skills (T AAS). In 1998, almost 63
work with experienced partners in                    percent of students passed the T AAS, with the
schoolwide reform to implement their                 largest gains over the period being made by
comprehensive school reform plans. Early             African American students.
reports from States indicate that the
legislation is providing valuable incentives
and support for schools to undertake research-based, effective school-wide reforms. As. a result,
CSRD is spurring significant interest in identifying what works to help students reach hIgh
standards.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                    Title I, Page 14
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
                                             What We Propose

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:

       Continue the promising CSRD program by extending the Title I demonstration authority and
        the Fund for the Improvemerit of Education. Maintaining the program will provide stable
        support for continuing reforms, enable the program to be fully implemented, and allow the
        evaluation of its effect on student achievement.

       Integrate the most promising features of CSRD into the schoolwide provisions of Title I,
        including the reliance on research-based reforms and the components that have the greatest
        effect on student achievement.


                                               EVEN START



                                              What's New

    The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:

        Improves the quality of Even Start projects by emphasizing research-based
         approaches to effective family literacy programs and encouraging State-level
         collaborations and coordinated services;

        Increases service intensity by providing instruction through the summer and
         encouraging the use of distance learning;

        Strengthens the qualifications of instructional staff, including paraprofessionals;

        Fosters continuous improvement by strengthening the requirement for independent
         local project evaluations;

        Authorizes funds for exemplary projects to serve as models; and,

        Increases the program's compatibility with welfare reform initiatives .
                                                                .



Even Start is a family literacy program intended to break the cycle of poverty by teaching parents
the literacy and parenting skills they need to help their children learn to high standards. Even
Start is implemented through cooperative projects that build on existing community resources to
create a new range of services. There are about 750 Even Start projects throughout the United
States, serving over 34,000 families.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                    Title I. Page 15
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

Even Start's integrated, inter-generational approach makes it unique among Federal programs. It
serves parents and their young children - from birth until age eight - through programs that
coordinate early childhood education, parenting education, and adult literacy (either adult basic
education or English as a second language).

The U.S. Department of Education distributes Even Start funds to States by fonnula. States
make sub grants to partnerships that include one or more school districts and one or more
nonprofit community organizations, public agencies, or institutions of higher education.

                                          What We've Learned

The Even Start program serves families that are most in need. In 1996-97, approximately 90
percent of Even Start families had incomes at or below the Federal poverty level. Eighty-six
percent of Even Start adults were emolled without a high school diploma or GED and 45 percent
had not advariced beyond the 9 th grade. In more than one-third of Even Start families, parents did
not speak English at home, and three-quarters of these parents had difficulty speaking or reading
English. 41

The Even Start program benefits both adults and children, according to national assessments.
Adults make moderate gains on measures of math and reading achievement and the literacy
environment of the home. Children make gains on measures of language development and
school readiness. 42

To build on this success, the Even Start program should improve the quality, intensity, and
frequency of instruction, and the retention of participants. Even Start instructors and aides
should have stronger qualifications. While most Even Start instructors have at least a bachelor's
degree, many aides do not. Only 34 percent of instructors and 22 percent of aides have any
special certification or endorsements relevant to Even Start instruction. 43

The first national evaluation of Even Start found that program intensity was related to
educational outcomes for children and adults.44 Although hours of instructional services have
increased on average,45 the intensity still may not be sufficient to cause meaningfulleaming
gains. In fact, only about 25 percent of Even Start projects meet the benchmark for hours of
instruction in the program's perfonnance plan: at least 60 hours per month of adult education, 65
hours a month of early childhood education, and 20 hours per month of parenting education. 46

Retention of participants is another area that needs improvement. Almost 50 percent of the new
families who entered the program in 1995-96 dropped out within the first year, although they
neither met their goals nor moved away from the area. 47 The national evaluation has shown that
the longer children participate in Even Start, the greater their gains on measures of language
development and school readiness. 48 The program needs to stress continuity of services
throughout the year, including over the summer months.

Although local Even Start projects must conduct independent local evaluations, State
administrators are not required to review them. A 1998 report found that the quality of local




The Educational Excel1ence for AI1 Children Act of 1999                               Title I, Page 16
                                                                                  Hex텱ump Conversion
evaluations varied and they were rarely used systematically by Even Start projects "to manage
and improve their programs.'.49

                                             What We Propose

The Educational Excellence for All Children would:

   Improve the quality oflocal Even Start projects by requiring them to take account of best
    available research in planning and implementing programs, especially research on preventing
    reading difficulties and promoting language development in young children.

   Increase intensity of services by providing instruction through the summer months,
    encouraging the use of distance learning where appropriate, and requiring States to assess
    projects' efforts to retain families in the program. These changes are designed to help retain
    families in the program longer and increase the academic learning of families during the
    summer and in remote, rural areas.

   Strengthen the qualifications of instructional staff, including paraprofessionals. Projects
    would be required to pay more attention to hiring instructional staff with more education and
    with certification in the subjects they are teaching. Paraprofessionals providing instructional
    support, such as follow-up educational activities in home visits, would be required to have
    two years of college and be under the direct supervision of a teacher.

   Increase the quality oflocal projects by supporting State collaborations and coordinated
    services.

   Promote improved implementation by requiring States to submit a plan. The plan would
    describe State efforts to develop and use indicators of program quality to evaluate and
    improve Even Start projects, ensure that each project fully implements all of the Even Start
    program elements, conduct the competition for sub grants, and coordinate resources to
    improve family literacy services.

   Foster continuous improvement by strengthening the requirement for independent project
    evaluations.

   Allow States to fund up to two exemplary projects to serve as models and mentor sites for
    other family literacy programs in the State. State models would help States and localities
    leam from well-tested, proven models that achieve 'significant outcomes for low-income
    families and that have the capacity to provide technical assistance to other projects.

   Increase the program's compatibility with welfare reform initiatives. The explicit addition of
    "career counseling and job placement services" clarifies that they are allowable costs and
    emphasizes the allowance of such support services, increasing projects' flexibility in meeting
    the needs of welfare recipients.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title I. Page 17
                                                                                  .      Hex-Dump Conversion


                           EDUCATION OF MIGRATORY CHILDREN


                                               What's New

 The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:

 CI   Holds States accountable for helping migratory students meet challenging State academic
      standards;

     Simplifies the fonnula that allocates funds among States and better targets migratory
      students;

     Limits annual changes in State program allocations to prevent disruptive fluctuations in
      funding and establishes funding minimums to ensure that States with small migrant
      populations can afford effective programs;

     Streamlines planning by no longer requiring States to develop both a comprehensive plan
      for service delivery and an application for program funds;

     Increases parental involvement;

     Increases support for coordination activities, including interstate records transfer; and

     Simplifies the State incentive grants program.



Overcoming the poverty, mobility, and limited-English proficiency characteristic of migrant
children requires a high degree of program flexibility and attention to educational and support
services far beyond those traditionally funded by State and local governments. For this reason,
Congress authorized the Migrant Education Program (MEP) in 1966.

The MEP is a formula grant program which helps States offer services specifically for children
of migrant agricultural workers and fishers. These services differ from State to State, depending
on the needs of each State's migrant children and when in the year they are present.

Unlike most educational programs, MEP services are often take place outside the regular school
day, in the summer or through distance learning and correspondence programs. MEP services
are geared to meet the needs of out-of-school, working youths. The MEP also provides support
services that link migrant children and their families to community resources.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                  Title I, Page 18
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


                                           What We've Learned

In 1996-97, States reported approximately 580,000 MEP participants, including 475,000 served
in the regular term and 285,000 in the summer term. Most migratory students are concentrated in
California (210,000) and Texas (115,000). Five other states -Florida, Washington, Oregon,
Kansas, and Kentucky- each reported more than 20,000 students eligible for funding. 50

Over the last decade, summer projects have grown faster than the regular program. They have
increased from serving approximately 100,000 student in 1984-85 to 285,000 students in 1996-
97,51 and now serve approximately 60 percent the number of students served during the regular
term. 52 In a study of schoolwide programs that serve migrant students, over 70 percent of the
schools offered summer or intersession programs. 53 Eighty percent of the summer or
intersession programs offered were available to all students in the school. 54

The Migrant Education Program seeks to reduce the negative impact of educational disruptions
on student achievement. States are using MEP funds to help design, implement, and support
innovative mechanisms to improve the continuity of instruction for migrant students through
inter- and intrastate coordination.

The State consortium arrangement reduces administrative costs and helps States share
information. In FY 1998, the Department approved eight consortia arrangements involving a
total of32 States, an increase from five consortia serving 15 states in FY 1995. 55 Several of the
consortia were formed to facilitate the transfer of records. Others share resource materials,
model practices in educating migrant students, and provide greater access to technology to
improve the education of migrant students. Based on their consortium participation, State MEPs
are eligible to receive small incentive grant awards above their State MEP formula grant awards
to provide direct services to migrant children.

Technology is an invaluable tool for coordination among schools and States and for connecting
students to continuous educational resources. Several projects across the country have received
federal grants to use technology to improve educational access and continuity for migrant
students and to transfer student records and information.

Two years after the elimination of the Migrant Student Records Transfer System (MSRTS) in
1994, most States and school districts relied on mail, telephone, and fax to transfer records for
migrant students. 56 It is encouraging that 20 states have some type of electronic system in place,
although many of these systems are used for maintaining, rather than transferring, student
records. States need more proactive guidance in designing and implementing records transfer
systems, such as Federal grants to use technology effectively.

Some program participants believe that the current formula for making the annual State MEP
allocations is overly complex and likely to cause large year-to-year variations in funding. These
funding variations can disrupt the continuity of even basic program services, especially in States
receiving small program allocations.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title I, Page 19
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

The current formula relies on data that is burdensome to collect. The current statutory references
to "estimates" and to "full-time equivalents (FTE)" are ambiguous. Moreover, they require
either a burdensome data collection on the number of days of residency for each migrant child in
each State or the use of increasingly dated FTE adjustment factors calculated with 1994 data.

Because the program is operated and administered by States, States that receive small program
allocations have had difficulty in both establishing adequate MEP programs for migrant children
and paying the costs of needed State administration.

These difficulties are exacerbated by the annual fluctuations in some States' need for agricultural
workers (e.g., due to droughts, floods, employer closings and relocations) which sometimes
result in abrupt drops in certain States' MEP allocations. Even States that have maintained stable
numbers of migrant children from one year to the next have seen allocations fall as other States
identify additional migrant children and require more of the overall MEP allocation. While the
instability of State funding levels reflects the dynamic reality of a mobile population. it has also
severely impaired the ability of States with fewer migrant children to maintain an effective MEP.

When a State's federal funding drops even though the number of migrant children does not, it
must cut back on efforts to identify and reach out to migrant children, as well as the services
provided to them. As a result, the State reports even fewer migrant children the following year,
beginning a downward spiral in the quality and availability of services.

In FY1998, 29 of the 51 States participating in the MEP received grants less than one percent of
the total formula grants pool. Eighteen States received grants of less than $1 million, and four
received less than $200,000.

                                             What We Propose

Our proposal for the Migrant Education Program will clarify and simplify the program's
statutory provisions, enabling States to provide much-needed services to migrant children.

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:

   Hold States accountable for student performance. Consistent with our emphasis on high
    standards for all children, our proposal would require States' applications to describe how
    they will include migrant students in State assessments required under Title I, Part A.

   Simplify the State funding formula. Our proposal would base a State's allocation on the
    number of eligible children between the ages of three and 21 who resided in that State during
    the previous year, plus the number of those children who received MEP-funded services in
    summer or inter-session programs. This proposed approach is simpler to understand and
    administer, minimizes States' data-collection burden, and encourages the identification and
    recruitment of eligible children. Counting children served in summer or intersession
    programs twice would reflect the greater cost of those programs and would encourage States
    to provide them.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title I, Page 20
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
   Limit annual changes in State program allocations and establish funding minimums. No
    State would receive an allocation greater than 120 percent or less than 80 percent of its
    allocation for the previous year, except that each State would receive, at a minimum,
    $200,000. This provision would limit the disruptive impact of significant changes in migrant
    child populations from year to year. The $200,000 minimum would ensure that each
    participating State receives enough funds to carry out an effective program, including the
    costs of identifying eligible children.

   No longer require States to develop both a comprehensive service-delivery plan and a
    program application. The most important elements of the plan, regarding the integration of
    services and joint planning across all programs, would be incorporated into the application
    requirements.

   Increase the maximum amount that the Secretary could reserve each year from the program
    appropriation to support coordination grants. This increase is consistent with the
    Department's recent appropriations acts and will increase the amount of funds available for
    State incentive grants and to assist States and school districts in transferring the educational
    and health records of migrant children.

   Simplify the State incentive grants program. First, our proposal would provide the Secretary
    flexibility to determine whether incentive grant funds should be devoted to other
    coordination activities. Second, our proposal would delete the requirement that these awards
    be awarded competitively. The competitive grant requirement has created a needlessly
    restrictive and complicated process for evaluating applications when all applications merit
    approval and sufficient funds are available. Finally, our proposal would award future
    incentive grants based on a State's participation in multi-State consortium arrangements that
    improve the delivery of services to migrant children whose education is interrupted. Current
    law awards grants to States whose participation in a multi-State consortium reduces their
    MEP administrative funds.

   Strengthen parental involvement by clearly requiring State and local MEP consultation with
    parent advisory councils and clarifying that the MEP is subject to the Title I, Part A,
    provisions to increase the involvement of individual parents.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                  Title I, Page 21
                                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion


                         NEGLECTED AND DELINQUENT CHILDREN



                                                What's New

 The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:

    Emphasizes the importance of holding all students - including those in institutions for
     neglected and delinquent youth - to the same challenging academic standards; and,

    Concentrates resources to more effectively serve neglected and delinquent students by
     requiring school districts to help these students with their fair share of Title I, Part A, funds
     and to ensure they receive educational services that are comparable to services provided to
     other Title I students.


Title I, Part D, authorizes two programs to serve neglected and delinquent children and youth.
The first, the State program authorized by Subpart 1, assists States financially in operating
educational programs for children and youth who are in institutions or community day programs
for neglected or delinquent children or youth in adult correctional facilities.

The second program, the local agency program, was created in 1994 under Subpart 2. It
provides funds directly to school districts to help them serve children and youth in locally-
operated correctional facilities and non-institutionalized at-risk children and youth. As a result,
Subpart 2 often supports the operation of drop-out prevention and intervention programs for at-
risk youth, such as pregnant and parenting teens, gang members, students who are a year or more
behind their grade level, migrants, immigrants, and limited English proficient students.

                                           What We've Learned

The population of delinquent and neglected students is extremely disadvantaged, isolated and
growing. These students are, on average, three years behind in grade level and generally lack job
skills. The population served by Part E has grown over the past decade: Despite declines in
1995 and 1996, juvenile arrests for violent crimes in 1996 were 60 percent above the 1987
level. s7

The 1994 establishment of the local agency program expanded the scope of Part D to serve
additional categories of at-risk youth. Before 1994, school districts were required to use the
portion of their Title I funds for local delinquent youth to target services to those students. Now,
however, the Federal funds allocated based upon delinquent children finance a broader program
for at-risk students that was administered by States, rather than the districts where the institutions
and students are located.

Although there has been no evaluation ofthe effectiveness of Part D, Subpart 2, the program has
proven to be difficult and confusing for States to administer.


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                   Title I, Page 22
                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

 Under Subpart 2, States send funds to districts with high proportions of youth in local
 correctional facilities for drop-out prevention and intervention programs that serve all at-risk
'students, rather than just institutionalized, delinquent youth. This variety of programs dilutes
 services to especially needy students in local delinquent and correctional institutions. Moreover,
 unlike children in local correctional and delinquent institutions, many of these at-risk students
 already receive services from other Title I program funds.

Subpart 2 also reduces districts' incentives to help students in local correctional and delinquent
institutions, since Title I, Part A, funds are no longer allocated to individual districts for these
students. Evidence suggests that school districts have difficulty using Subpart 2 funds to operate
viable programs of sufficient size, scope, and quality for either at-risk students or for children in
local correctional facilities.

                                             What We Propose

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:

   Redirect Title 1. Part D, Subpart 2, funding to Title 1. Part A. Instead of funding the
    ineffective and unduly complicated Subpart 2, our proposal would make the funds available
    for the sole purpose of serving students in local correctional facilities and delinquent
    institutions. The proposal would require school districts receiving Title 1, Part A funds for
    these children to use these funds to provide Title I services to institutionalized students that
    are comparable to those received by students served in other district-based Title I programs.
    This proposal would allow school districts to operate programs for students residing in local
    correctional and delinquent institutions in the same way that they currently operate programs
    for students living in institutions for neglected children.

   Highlight the importance of helping institutionalized neglected and delinquent students learn
    to the same challenging standards as every other student in the State by requiring State plans
    to ensure that participating children are held to the same standards and offered comparable
    services as students in traditional public schools.

   Allow States to use multiple measures of student progress in conducting program
    evaluations, as appropriate. This provision would recognize that students who are (or were)
    neglected or delinquent may require different assessments than children in traditional public
    schools.

   Amend the name of the program to "State Agency Programs for Children and Youth Who are
    Neglected or Delinquent" to more accurately reflect the function of the program after the
    deletion of Subpart 2.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                 Title I, Page 23
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

                                       READING EXCELLENCE



                                                    What's New

    The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:

       Supports the intent of the law to improve reading and reading instruction by applying the
        findings of scientific reading research;

       Clarifies the law's purpose - ensuring that students can read by the end of third grade-
        by limiting participation to schools serving students in the 3rd grade or below; and

       Emphasizes the Reading Excellence Act's commitment to serving the poorest schools and
        students by including it in Title I.



Enacted in October 1998, the Reading Excellence Act (REA) provides resources to high-poverty
schools to improve the teaching and learning of reading for children in pre-kindergarten through
3rd grade. The program supports research-based reading activities that are integrated into State
and local refonn efforts. Local projects are designed to improve instruction at the pre-school and
elementary school levels, work with families to ensure that children receive support for learning,
and provide extended-learning opportunities that enhance classroom instruction in reading.
Through these strategies, the REA will help poorly-perfonning schools improve and provide
additional support to good schools struggling to serve their neediest students.

The REA supports four primary activities related to reading:
 Professional development;
 Extended learning, such as tutoring and after-school programs;
 Family literacy; and,
 Transition programs for kindergarten students as they move into 1st grade.

The REA strongly emphasizes the importance of scientific research on reading, including
findings related to phonemic awareness, systematic phonics, fluency, and reading
comprehension. To ensure broad-based participation and commitment to State and local reading
goals, each State's reading excellence program will include a reading and literacy partnership
among parents, teachers, the governor, the chief State school officer, members of the State
legislature, eligible school districts, community organizations, family literacy service providers,
and State directors of federal or State programs supporting reading instruction. In addition, each
school district will work in partnership with a community-based organization.

The Department of Education distributes REA funds competitively to States, which in turn make
competitive grants to high-need school districts to support two programs: Local Reading
Improvement and Tutorial Assistance.



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                               Title I, Page 24
                                                                        M@lt텱ump Conversion
                                           What We've Learned

According to the 1998 results from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), 68
percent offourth graders in high poverty schools cannot read at the basic level on NAEP. These
children are already far behind their more advantaged peers - 23 percent of children in schools
with lower poverty rates cannot read at the basic level.

In the last 20 years, considerable research has been completed on how children learn to read. A
new consensus on "what works" in teaching reading has recently emerged. This consensus is
summarized for parents, teachers, and others in the National Research Council's report,
Preventing Reading Difficulties in Young Children. 58 The study clearly identifies the key
elements all children need in order to become good readers. Specifically, children need to learn
letters and sounds and how to read for meaning. They also need opportunities to practice reading
with many types of books. While some children need more intensive and systemic
individualized instruction than others, all children need these three essential elements in order to
read well and independently by the end of 3rd grade.

A recently published analysis clearly demonstrates that nearly all children - about 98 percent -
can become effective readers if given intense early reading instruction. 59 In addition, literacy-
related professional development for teachers can have direct beneficial effects on teachers'
interactions with children and on children's literacy development and readiness. 6o

Other studies have concluded that extended-learning reading programs that incorporate research-
based elements produce improvements in reading achievement. 61 Tutoring interventions are
particularly effective when there is close coordination with the classroom or reading teacher;62
when there is intensive and ongoing training for tutors;63 and when tutoring sessions are well-
structured and carefully scripted. 64

                                             What We Propose

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:

   Demonstrate our commitment to the program as enacted by proposing only modifications to
    clarify the intent of the law. The REA is unique in its commitment that only high-quality
    propo.sals based on scientific research receive funding.

   Focus the program on ensuring that all children read well by the end of 3rd grade by limiting
    funding to districts and schools that serve students in 3rd grade or younger. This change
    reflects the purpose of the statute, which is to ensure that children receive appropriate and
    effective reading instruction in their earliest years.

   Allow States to receive successive grant awards. The statute now limits each State to only
    one grant during the program authorization period. Our proposal would limit each State to
    one grant at a time, allowing it to compete for a second grant to continue program activities
    once the first grant ends.



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 .                              Title J, Page 25
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

   Encourage consistency in State funding decisions by requiring States to submit a description
    of the process and criteria they will use to review and approve school districts' applications.

   Fund technical assistance, program improvement, and replication activities by allowing the
    Secretary to reserve up to one percent of the program funds for those purposes.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title I, Page 26
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                   NOTES


1 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the 1996-97 Title I
Perfonnance Report.
2 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the 1996-97 Title I
Perfonnance Report.
3 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the 1996-97 Title I
Perfonnance Report.
4 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1991). Trends in
academic progress. Washington, DC: Author. Grissmer, D.W., Kirby, S.N., Berends, M., &
Williamson, S. (1994). Student achievement and the changing American family. Santa Monica:
Rand. O'Day, l.A., & Smith, M.S. (1993). Systemic reform and educational opportunity. In
S.H. Fuhrman (Ed.), Designing coherent education policy, improving the system. San Francisco:
lossey-Bass.
5 U.S. Department of Education. (1993). Reinventing Chapter 1: The current Chapter 1
program and new directions. Washington, DC: Author.
6 Schenck, A., & Carlson, D. (in press). Standards-based assessment and accountability in
American education: A report on the states' progress, as of 1997, in implementing the
requirements of IASA, Title I.
7 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, National Assessment
of Educational Progress (NAEP). (1998). NAEP reading trends, unpublished tabulations.
NAEP mathematics trends, unpublished tabulations. NAEP main reading assessment 1994 to
1998. NAEP main mathematics assessment 1990 to 1996.
8 The McKenzie Group. (in press). Student achievement and accountability systems in urban
districts.
9 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, National Assessment
of Educational Progress. (1999). NAEP main reading and mathematics, unpublished
tabulations.
10 Stullich, S., Donly, B., & Stolzberg, S. (in press). Within-district targeting of Title I funds.
11 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Study of Education
Resources and Federal Funding.
12 U.S. Department of Education. (1998). The use offederalfundsfor administrative costs.
Washington, DC: Author.
13 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Study of Education
Resources and Federal Funding.
14 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Study of Education

Resources and Federal Funding.
15 Goertz, M., Massell, D., & Chun, T. (1998, October 29). District response to state
accountability systems. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Association for Public
Policy Analysis and Management, New York City.
16 The McKenzie Group. (in press). Student achievement and accountability systems in urban
districts.
17 U.S. Department of Education. (in press). Local Implementation Study.
18 Anderson, L., & Turnbull, B.1. (1998). Living in interesting times: Early state
implementation of new federal laws. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title I, Page 27
                                                                              Hex-Dump ConversIon

19 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up Survey
of State Implementation of Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
20 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up Survey
of State Implementation of Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
21 U.S. Department of Education. (1998). Longitudinal evaluation ofschool change and
performance: Some preliminary findings from the first two years. Unpublished manuscript.
22 The Education Trust, Inc., & Council of Chief State School Officers. (1999). Dispelling the
myth: High poverty schools exceeding expectations. Manuscript submitted for publication.
23 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up Survey
of State Implementation of Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
24 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). Status of
education reform in public elementary and secondary schools: Teachers' perspectives.
Washington, DC: Author.
25. U.S. Department of Education. (1998). Longitudinal evaluation of school change and
performance: Some preliminary findings from the first two years. Unpublished manuscript.
26 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). Status of
education reform in public elementary and secondary schools: Teachers' perspectives.
Washington, DC: Author.
27 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). Status of
education reform in public elementary and secondary schools: Teachers' perspectives.
Washington, DC: Author.
28 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up Survey
of State Implementation of Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
29 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Study of Education
Resources and Federal Funding.
30 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Study of Education
Resources and Federal Funding.
31 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up Survey
of State Implementation of Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
32 The Education Trust, Inc., & Council of Chief State School Officers. (1999). Dispelling the
myth: High poverty schools exceeding expectations. Manuscript submitted for publication. P.6.
33 Hawley, W., Schager, W., Schager, F., Hultgren, F., Abrams, A., Lewis, E., & Ferrara, S.
(1997, March 25). An outlier study of school effectiveness: Implications for public policy and
school improvement. Paper presented at the annual meeting ofthe American Educational
Research Association, Chicago, IL.
34 U.S. Department of Education. (1993). Reinventing Chapter 1: The current Chapter 1
program and new directions. Washtingon, DC: Author. U.S. Department of Education. (1999).
Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up Survey of State Implementation of Federal
Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
35 U.S. Department of Education, Partnership for Family Involvement in Education, & GTE
Foundation. (1998). The study of opportunities for and barriers to family involvement in
education. Washington, DC: Author. Louis Harris & Associates, Inc. (1998). The
Metropolitan Life survey of the American teacher.
36 U.S. Department of Education. (1998). Title I school-parent compacts: Supporting
partnerships to improve learning. Washington, DC: Author.



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                            Title I, Page 28
                                                                       Automated Records Management System .
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

37 Ferguson, R. (1991). Paying for public education: New evidence on how and why money
matters. Harvard Journal on Legislation, 28(Sumrner),465-498.
38 Snow, C.E., Bums, M.S., & Griffin, P. (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young
children. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
39 Stringfield, S., Winfield, L., Millsap, M.A., Puma, M.1., Gamse, B., & Randall, B. (1994).
Special strategies for educating disadvantaged children: First year report. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Education, Office of the Undersecretary.
40 Bodily, S.J. (1998). Lessonsfrom New American Schools' scale-up phase: Prospects for
bringing designs to multiple schools. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Education.
41 Tao, F., Gamse, B., & Tarr, H. (1998). National evaluation of the Even Startfamily literacy

program: 1994-97 final report. Washington, DC: US. Department of Education. Pp. 37,42,
47-48.
42 St. Pierre, R., Gamse, B., Alamprese, J., Rimdzius, T., & Tao, F. (1998). Even Start:
Evidence from the past and a look to the future. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education. Pp. 23-25.
43 Tao, F., Gamse, B., & Tarr, H. (1998). National evaluation of the Even Start family literacy
program: 1994-97 final report. Washington, DC: US. Department of Education. P.66.
44 Tao, F., Gamse, B., & Tarr, H. (1998). National evaluation of the Even Start family literacy
program: 1994-97 final report. Washington, DC: US. Department of Education. P. x.
45 Tao, F., Gamse, B., & Tarr, H. (1998). National evaluation of the Even Startfamity literacy
program: 1994-97 final report. Washington, DC: US. Department of Education. P. xvii.
46 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the National Evaluation
of the Even Start Family Literacy Program.
47 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the National Evaluation
of the Even Start Family Literacy Program.
48 Tao, F., Gamse, B., & Tarr, H. (1998). National evaluation of the Even Startfamily literacy
program: 1994-97 final report. Washington, DC: US. Department of Education. P. 145.
49 St. Pierre, R., Ricciuti, R., & Creps, C. (1998). Synthesis of state and local Even Start
evaluations Washington, DC: US. Department of Education. Pp. 23, 25.
50 Henderson, A., Daft, J., & Fong, P. (1998). State Title I migrant participation information:
1996-1997. Washington, DC: US. Department of Education. Pp. 1-2, 1-3, 1-23, 1-24.
51 Henderson, A., Daft, J., & Fong, P. (1998). State Title I migrant participation information:
1996-1997. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. Pp. 1-20.
52 Henderson, A., Daft, J., & Fong, P. (1998). State Title I migrant participation information:
1996-1997. Washington, DC: US. Department of Education. Pp.I-3.
53 Siler, A., Stolzberg, S., von Glatz, A., & Strang, W. (1999). Meeting the needs of migrant
students in schoolwide programs: Technical report of the congressionally mandated study of
migrant student participation in schoolwide programs. Washington, DC: US. Department of
Education. P. 52.
54 Siler, A., Stolzberg, S., von Glatz, A., & Strang, W. (1999). Meeting the needs ofmigrant
students in schoolwide programs: Technical report of the congressionally mandated study of
migrant student participation in schoolwide programs. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education. P. 52.
55 US. Department of Education. (1998, August 3). Memorandum to state directors of migrant
education on consortium incentive grant awards, 1995-1999. Washington, DC: Author.



The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                            Title I, Page 29
                                                                                         HU.()ump Conversion
56 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Promising results, continuing challenges: The final
report of the national assessment of Title 1. Washington, DC: Author. Ch. 10, pp. 6-7.
57 Snyder, R.N. (1998). Juvenile arrests 1996. OJJDP Juvenile Justice Bulletin. Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention. P.2.
58 Snow, C.E., Burns, M.S., & Griffin, P. (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young

children. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
59 Vellutino, F.R., Scanlon, D.M., Sipay, E. R, Small, S.G., Pratt, A., Chen, R., & Denckla, M.B.

(1996). Cognitive profiles of difficult-to-remediate and readily remediated poor readers: Early
intervention as a vehicle for distinguishing between cognitive and experiential deficits as a basic
cause of specific reading disability. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 601-638.
60 Lonigan, C.J., & Whitehurst, G.J. (1998). Relative efficacy of parent' and teacher involvement

in a shared-reading intervention for preschool children from low-income backgrounds. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, 13(2),263-290. Neuman, S.B. (in press). Books make a
difference: A study of access to literacy. Reading Research Quarterly. Neuman, S.B., &
Roskos, K. (1993). Access to print for children in poverty: Differential effects of adult
mediation and literacy-enriched play settings on environmental and functional print tasks.
American Educational Research Journal, 30(1), 95-122.
61 Cohen, P.A., Kulik J.A., & Kulik, c.L.C. (1982). Educational outcomes of tutoring: A meta-

analysis of findings. American Educational Research Journal, 19(2),237-248. Topping, K., &
Whitely, M. (1990). Participant evaluation of parent-tutored and peer-tutored projects in
reading. Educational Research Quarterly, 32(1), 14-32. Madden, N.A., & Slavin, RE. (1989).
Effective pullout programs for students at risk. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
62 Venesky, R.L., & Jain, R. (1996). Tutoringfor reading improvement: A background paper.

Unpublished manuscript. Reisner, E.R, Petry, C.A., & Armitage, M. (1990). A review of
programs involving college students as tutors or mentors in grades K-12. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education. Jenkins, J.R, & Jenkins, L.M. (1987). Making peer tutoring work.
Educational Leadership, 44(6), 64-68.
63 Wasik, B.A., & Slavin, R.E. (1993). Preventing early reading failure with one-to-one tutoring:

A review of five programs. Reading Research Quarterly, 28(2), 179-200. Reisner, E.R, Petry,
e.A., & Armitage, M. (1990). A review ofprograms involving college students as tutors or
mentors in grades K-12. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
64 Cohen, P.A., Kulik, J.A., & Kulik, c.L.e. (1982). Educational outcomes of tutoring: A meta-
analysis of findings. American Educational Research Journal, 19(2),237-248.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                              Title I, Page 30
                                                                                Hex텱ump Conversion
                                    TITLE II
                        HIGH STANDARDS IN THE CLASSROOM

                            TEACHING TO HIGH STANDARDS



                                            What's New

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:

   Creates a new grant program, Teaching to High Standards, that will support State and
    local efforts to help all students meet or exceed challenging State academic standards.
    The program will succeed current Titles II and VI of the ESEA and Title III of Goals
    2000, and will focus on giving teachers the tools they need to raise student
    achievement;

   Advances efforts to make high standards a reality in every classroom by supporting
    State and local efforts to align instruction, curriculum, assessments, and professional
    development to challenging academic standards;

   Focuses federal resources on support for the kind of sustained, intensive, content-
    based and collaborative professional development in core content areas that teachers
    say most improves their teaching;

   Addresses the urgent need to reduce teacher attrition by giving priority to professional
    development proposals that support new teachers during their first three years in the
    classroom;

   Increases federal funding for professional development in mathematics and science;

   Enhances teacher quality by supporting efforts to improve systems for licensing,
    hiring, evaluating, and rewarding teachers;

   Promotes educational equity by distributing approximately 50 percent of funding for
    local school districts through a formula targeted to high-poverty districts;

   Encourages innovation by distributing approximately 50 percent of funding for local
    districts through a grant competition; and,

   Authorizes support for several national initiatives to improve teaching and learning in
    America's schools.


With federal support and encouragement, educators in all 50 States, the District of
Columbia, and Puerto Rico have made great progress in establishing high academic


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title II, Page I
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
standards in mathematics and reading. Those educators are now working to improve
classroom practice, curricula, and assessments to hcelp all students meet or exceed high
standards in reading, math and other core academic subjects.

The Teaching to High Standards Initiative will help educators apply high standards to
improve learning in America's classrooms. The initiative will support State and local
efforts to: (1) align curricula and assessments to challenging State and local content
standards, (2) provide teachers with sustained and intensive high-quality professional
development in core academic content areas, (3) support new teachers during their first
three years in the classroom, and (4) ensure that all teachers are proficient in relevant
content knowledge and teaching skills.

This new initiative would succeed the State reform program under Title III of Goals
2000, ESEA Title II (Eisenhower Professional Development) and ESEA Title VI
(Innovative Education Program Strategies) in current law.

                                      What We've Learned

The great majority of States have made significant progress in developing content
standards that set benchmarks for what all students should know and understand about
core academic subject areas. However, many States are still crafting the performance
standards for what students should know and be able to do in these areas at each grade
level.

In addition, many teachers and school administrators are just beginning the challenging
process of reforming school-based curricula and assessments to reflect State and local
standards. One recent national study found that only 36 percent ofteachers of the core
academic subjects currently feel "very well prepared" to implement State or district
standards. I These and other findings underscore the pressing need to continue federal
support for the implementation of comprehensive, standards-based reform at the local
level.

Career-long, high-quality professional development is a central and indispensable part of
reinforcing the use of high standards to guide instruction in the classroom. Research
indicates that the knowledge and skills teachers bring to the classroom affect all aspects
of their classroom practice, including the achievement of their students. A review of 60
studies examining the correlation between school resources and student learning found
that teachers' experience and education are clearly associated with increases in student
achievement. 2

Research also indicates that high-quality professional development can contribute to
improvements in teachers' skills and practice and thereby increase student achievement.
A recent study found that the longer California mathematics teachers engaged in ongoing,
curriculum-centered professional development that supported reform-oriented teaching
practice,"the better their students did on the State mathematics assessment. 3 Other studies
have confirmed more broadly that high-quality professional development focused on


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                  Title II, Page 2
                                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

academic content - and on how students learn that content - contributes to gains in
student achievement. 4 In New York City, Community School District #2 has invested in
sustained, intensive professional development since the late 1980s, which has contributed
to steady increases in student achievement. 5,6

Professional development is also an important component of ongoing federal efforts to
raise standards and improve student achievement. Last year 89 percent of Goals 2000
grantee districts reported spending Goals 2000 funds for professional development linked
to standards. 7 Similarly, findings from a recent study of Title VI of the ESEA - which
gives districts funds to support a wide range of innovate program strategies - indicate
that many large districts that receive substantial allocations of Title VI funds use a
significant portion of those resources for professional development. 8

In addition to improving instruction and contributing to increased student achievement,
sustained and high-quality professional development programs can also help to reduce
teacher attrition. The need for such programs is great, as approximatel~ 22 percent of all
new teachers currently leave the profession within the first three years. Retaining
talented teachers will be an even more urgent priority in the decade ahead, as the United
States must hire approximately 2.2 million teachers to accommodate increasin~
enrollments, continued attrition, and the retirement of many veteran teachers. I
Comparative international research indicates that other countries are more likely than the
United States to support beginning teachers with lightened workloads, in-depth
professional development, and outstanding mentor teachers. II

Ongoing research is also clarifying the kind of professional development that teachers
find most useful. Emerging findings from the national evaluation of the Eisenhower
Professional Development Program indicate that teachers believe the Eisenhower
activities that contribute most to improving their own knowledge and skills are those that:
 Sustain activities over an extended period of time;
 Connect professional development activities to State and district standards and
    assessments;
 Strongly emphasize deepening teachers' knowledge of academic content and
    understanding of ways that students learn that content;
 Encourage teachers from the same grade levels, departments and schools to work in
    teams; and
 Offer opportunities to observe and practice the skills and techniques being introduced.

Preliminary analyses from the Eisenhower evaluation also suggest that teachers regard the
Eisenhower-supported professional development activities administered by institutions of higher
education or non-profit organizations as highly effective because they are likely to be intensive
and of meaningful duration, emphasize academic content and involve active learning. Seventy-
five percent of participants in activities administered by institutions of higher education or non-
profit organizations report that they enhanced their in-depth knowledge of math and science,
compared to 49 percent of participants in Eisenhower activities administered by districts. 12




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title II, Page 3
                                                                                                Hllll텱ump Conversion

But despite this growing consensus on the kind of professional development that works,
relatively few of America's teachers currently participate in activities of sufficient quality
and duration to improve their classroom practice. For example, while 81 percent of the
teachers of core academic subjects reported in 1998 that they had participated in
standards-based professional development within the previous year, approximately 50
percent of these teachers had participated for eight hours or less. Only 7 percent had
participated in standards-based professional development for 32 hours or more. 13

                                        What We Propose

Teaching to High Standards would succeed three existing federal programs with a new
initiative to ensure that all students can achieve to challenging State standards in the core
academic subjects. Teaching to High Standards builds upon the lessons learned from -
and includes the best elements of- Goals 2000, Eisenhower Professional Development,
and Title VI programs.

The initiative would (1) support the ongoing efforts of States and school districts to
develop challenging content and student performance standards and to align curriculum,
assessments, and classroom practice to those high standards, and (2) assist States, school
districts, and institutions of higher education in providing teachers and administrators
across the country with access to sustained and intensive high-quality professional
development.

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:

   Continue the work of standards-based school reform. Teaching to High Standards
    funds would support States and school districts in their ongoing efforts to develop
    content and student performance standards and aligned curriculum and assessments.

   Invest in the knowledge and skills of America's teachers. Teaching to High
    Standards would focus federal funding more tightly on the type of professional
    development that teachers say they need most. The proposal would direct funds, for
    example, toward efforts to strengthen instruction in core academic content areas
    rather than toward general strategies for improving classroom practice. The proposal
    would also promote the use of professional development activities that are sustairi.ed
    over time, rather than those that are condensed into a single workshop, and that
    incorporate active collaboration among teachers, rather than passive lectures and
    disconnected practice in isolated classrooms.

   Leverage federal resources to support reform at the State and local level. Teaching to
    High Standards funds would be allocated by formula to the States. States would then
    distribute the funds as follows:
    - States could use up to 10 percent of the funds to continue developing content and
        performance standards and assessments and for other State reforms.
    - An annual national total of$60 million would allow State agencies of higher
        education to award competitive grants to colleges, universities, and non-profit


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                 Title II, Page 4
                                                                                                            .... , "f'
                                                                                                            ,            '

                                                                                 Automated Records ManagementSystel'ftm
                                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

        organizations (such as museums and libraries) to develop innovative professional
        development activities in partnership with school districts.
        All of the remaining funds would be distributed directly to school districts. Half
        of these funds would be allocated through a formula targeted to high-poverty
        districts and the other half would be distributed through a State-administered
        grant competition. Districts would apply for both formula and competitive funds
        through a single application.

   Increase federal support for professional development in the priority subjects of
    mathematics and science. As part of its focus on linking professional development to
    academic content, our proposal would increase the annual $250 million dollar set-
    aside for professional development in math and science under the Eisenhower
    program to $300 million under Teaching to High Standards.

   Promote efforts to enhance teacher quality. States and school districts would be able
    to use Teaching to High Standards funds to design, implement or improve State and
    local systems for licensing, hiring, supporting, evaluating, and rewarding teachers and
    principals. These efforts could include development of a teacher licensure system
    that is more rigorous and flexible and the creation of incentives to encourage current
    teachers to earn additional certifications in subject areas for which their school
    districts have identified a shortage of qualified teachers.

   Support new teachers and help to reduce teacher attrition. Teaching to High
    Standards modestly expands support for the professional development partnerships
    administered by institutions of higher education and non-profit organizations that
    have been a successful element of the Eisenhower program. Our Teaching to High
    Standards proposal includes a new provision requiring States to give priority to
    proposals that would support teachers during their first three years in the classroom.
    These proposed programs could include activities such as mentoring, team teaching
    with experienced teachers, and the provision of time to observe and consult with
    experienced teachers.

   Provide a reliable base of support for professional development and other initiatives.
    The formula funding for school districts included in the Teaching to High Standards
    proposal would continue the sustained federal support for professional development
    that has been central to the Eisenhower program's success, providing districts and
    schools with a firm foundation on which they can build long-term, high-quality
    professional development programs.

   Encourage innovation and increase resources through competition. The competitive
    funding for school districts included in Teaching to High Standards would provide
    additional resources to districts with the highest quality proposals and the greatest
    need, to allow them to expand and intensify their efforts. The competition would also
    promote innovation and careful planning in program design.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title II, Page 5
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

   Reward results. Competitive grants made by States under the Teaching to High
    Standards proposal would be three years in duration. States could extend these grants
    for an additional two years if it determined that the grantee had made substantial
    progress toward reaching a set of specific program goals that the district would be
    required to include in its grant application.

   Look to the future. The Teaching to High Standards proposal would reauthorize
    federal funding for two promising national programs, the Eisenhower National
    Clearinghouse for Mathematics and Science Education and the National Board for
    Professional Teaching Standards. It would also authorize funding for a number of
    new initiatives of national significance, including support for State efforts to
    strengthen and improve professional licensure systems for teachers and principals.


                                   TEACHERS FOR TOMORROW
(Note - ongoing discussion about whether this will be partially folded into Part A)


                                                What's New

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act. of 1999:

   Expands Federal support for State and local efforts to recruit and retain high-quality teachers
    in high-need school districts and academic subject areas;

   Continues the work of the Troops to Teachers program in recruiting, preparing, placing and
    supporting retired military personnel as teachers in high-need areas;

   Builds upon the success of Troops to Teachers by creating a new initiative - Transition to
    Teaching - to recruit, prepare, place and support talented mid-career professionals from
    diverse fields as classroom teachers; and,

   Authorizes innovative programs of national significance to recruit and support talented
    teachers and principals.


The centerpiece of Teachers for Tomorrow is the Transition to Teaching initiative, which
continues and builds upon the highly successful work of the Department of Defense's Troops to
Teachers program. Transition to Teaching would broaden the focus of Troops to Teachers to
recruit, place and support a wide range of talented career-changing professionals as teachers,
particularly in high-poverty school districts and high-need subject areas. Former members of the
military services would continue to be a key focus ofthe new program's recruitment efforts.

Teachers for Tomorrow would also address the growing shortages of qualified and certified
teachers and principals throughout the country. The initiative would create a nationwide job


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title II, Page 6
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

bank for teaching positions and support efforts to increase the portability of teacher credentials,
pensions and credited years of experience among States and school districts.

                                           What We've Learned

As a result of increasing enrollments, natural teacher turnover, and the retirement of many
veteran teachers, our nation faces the challenge of hiring more than two million teachers over the
next ten years. 14 High attrition rates further complicate the challenge of providing all of
America's students with high-quality teachers. The problem of attrition is particularly acute
among new teachers, approximately 22 percent of whom leave the profession after teaching for
three years or less. IS

In addition, research shows that highly qualified teachers are not evenly distributed across
academic disciplines or geographic areas. 16. 17 Causes of this uneven distribution include a lack
of information on available jobs and the difficulty of transferring teaching licenses, credited
years of teaching experience, and pensions among States and school districts.

America's supply of qualified school principals is also a source of concern. As retirement and
other causes of attrition diminish the pool of experienced administrators, many school districts
report a growing shortaie of qualified candidates to become principals at the elementary, middle,
and high school levels. I

In recent years, States and school districts have responded to shortages of instructional and
administrative personnel in a number of innovative ways, including the creation of alternative
routes to State licensure and certification. Districts have also worked in partnership with public
and private non-profit organizations to place highly qualified recent college graduates as teachers
in high-need schools.

Mid-career professionals interested in changing jobs are another important and largely untapped
resource for addressing teacher shortages. Recent studies have found that a significant number
of mid-career professionals who possess strong subject matter skills are interested in beginning a
teaching career. 19. 20

The Troops to Teachers program has been a particularly effective vehicle for recruiting former
members ofthe military services and placing them as teachers in high-need subject areas and
school districts. 21 Since the program was established in January 1994, over 3,300 former
military personnel have been hired as teachers in 48 States and the District of Columbia. Over
83 percent of the participants are still in the classroom today. The average participant is 41 years
old.

Teachers recruited through Troops to Teachers are twice as likely to teach mathematics, science,
or special education and three times more likely to be a member of a minority group than a
traditional public school teacher. On surveys, they also indicate a greater willingness to teach in
inner cities or rural communities.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                 Title II, Page 7
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


                                             What We Propose

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:

   Extend the successful Troops to Teachers program for recruiting, preparing, placing, and
    supporting retired military personnel as teachers in high-need subject areas and school
    districts.

   Build on the Troops to Teachers approach to support similar programs for other mid-career
    professionals by awarding grants to public agencies, institutions of higher education, and
    nonprofit organizations to recruit, prepare, and support career-changing professionals from
    diverse fields whose knowledge and experience could help them become successful teachers.

   Support the development and implementation of a national teacher recruitment clearinghouse
    and job bank, which would disseminate information nationwide on entering the teaching
    profession; serve as a national resource center for effective practices in teacher recruitment
    and retention; link prospective teachers to school districts and training resources; and provide
    information and assistance to prospective teachers about certification and other State and
    local requirements related to teaching.

   Support partnerships between school districts and public or private non-profit organizations
    to recruit highly talented individuals into the teaching profession through alternative routes to
    teacher certification, and to place and retain those individuals as teachers in high-need local
    educational agencies. .

   Support research, evaluation, and dissemination of effective strategies for increasing the
    portability of teacher pensions, credentials and credited years of experience across State and
    district lines.

   Support the implementation or expansion of programs to recruit, prepare, and retain
    principals to serve as instructional leaders, effective and innovative administrators, and
    leaders in the restructuring of schools in high-need school districts.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                  Title II, Page 8
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

                EARLY CHILDHOOD PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
(Policy decision outstanding on this program)



                                                 What's New

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:

   Provides high-quality professional development opportunities for early childhood educators to
    improve their knowledge and skills at working with young children and their families,
    particularly in the area of developing language and literacy skills; and

   Improves the quality of early childhood education programs for children in poverty.



The road to learning to read begins long before students enter elementary school. Young
children who are in environments rich in language and literacy are much more likely to become
successful readers than children who are not.

The Early Childhood Professional Development Initiative would enhance the future academic
success of young children, particularly those living in poverty. The initiative would create
professional development opportunities for early childhood educators who serve high
concentrations of children living in poverty by awarding competitive grants to local partnerships
of school districts and one or more organizations providing professional development for
teachers, such as a university.

                                           What We've Learned

National studies indicate that most early child-care and education programs fail to help children
prepare for the rigors of classroom learning experiences. One study concluded that only 14
percent of these programs are of high quality, while five percent of them are dangerous to the
health, safety, and development of children. 22

Consistently poor early education programs hinder children's cognitive and language
development, pre-reading skills, and other age-appropriate development. As a result, some
children are less ready to attend school and learn to read, the foundation for nearly all later
learning. Recent research indicates that young children living in poverty are more positively
influenced by high-quality ~rograms than their advantaged peers, but are also more vulnerable to
harm from poor programs. 2

Research also indicates that the quality of the language and literacy environment in early
childhood programs predicts later language development, reading success, and other academic
outcomes for children. 24


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title II, Page 9
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

The training and education of teachers and caregivers is directly related to the quality of the early
education they provide25 and the quality of their service, in tum, is direct! y related to chi Idren' s
readiness for schoo1. 26 As a result, early childhood educators with more education and training
provide higher-quality language stimulation and literacy experiences that are critical for
children's success in school.27

Currently, 40 percent of pre-school teachers have only a high school diploma and another 10
percent have a two-year degree from a community or junior collegc. About half of all assistant
teachers and aides have no more than a high school diploma. Pre-school teachers receive only
about 10 hours of training each year. 28 With more preparation, early childhood teachers would
be able to contribute to the language and literacy development of the children in their care.

Increasing the number of well-trained early childhood educators would lead to significant
improvements in the quality of early childhood education for children in poverty. Focusing
professional development on early language and literacy will enhance children's reading and
overall school success.

                                             What We Propose

The foundations of school success are laid in the early childhood years. Children's success in
school depends in large part on strong early language, literacy, and pre-reading skills,
meaningful involvement by families, and access to high-quality early childhood education
programs. Well-trained educators are crucial to improving the quality of early childhood
education programs and, thus, young children's learning.

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:

   Authorize new funding for professional development for early childhood educators in local
    communities. New resources would increase the number of high-quality professional
    development opportunities for early childhood educators, including a research-based focus
    on early language, literacy, and reading development.

   Require partnerships between school districts with early childhood education programs and
    organizations providing high-quality professional development, such as institutions of higher
    education. This initiative would strengthen existing professional development activities for
    early childhood educators. Community-based partnerships tend to use available resources
    efficiently, promote high-quality professional development for educators in a variety of
    education settings, and strengthen relationships between public schools and community-
    based early childhood programs.

   Target resources to where they are needed most by requiring that partnerships include at least
    one school district that operates an early childhood program and at least one institution of
    higher education or non-profit organization that serves children from low-income families in
    high-need communities. Children living in poverty have the greatest need for high-quality
    early childhood programs.


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                 Title II, Page 10
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

   Promote high-quality, research-based professional development activities including:
    - Training that is based upon the best available research on child language and literacy
       development as well as the diverse needs of children in the community;
    - Coordination with successful professional development efforts for early childhood
       educators;
       Assessments to determine the most critical professional development needs; and
    - Accountability through clear identification of program goals, objectives, and progress
       measures, as well as annual reporting responsibilities against these indicators.


                BUILDING CAPACITY FOR IMPROVING SCHOOLS


                                                What's New

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:

   Supports an integrated system of technical assistance and information dissemination that is
    responsive to customer needs, leverages resources, and promotes high quality;

   Empowers customers by redirecting resources to States and high-need districts to allow them
    to identify their needs, select technical assistance services, and build their capacity for school
    improvement;

   Provides States and districts with the information they need to make informed judgements
    about the effectiveness of various sources and types of technical assistance;

   Uses technology and electronic networks to disseminate information, assistance, and
    promising instructional strategies;

   Makes expert technical assistance available in areas of high need by supporting a network of
    providers dedicated to national priorities, including two technical assistance centers focused
    on linguistically and culturally diverse students; and,

   Increases coordination among technical assistance providers, States, and school districts to
    meet local needs and target high-poverty districts and low-performing schools.


Two 1994 laws - the Improving America's Schools Act, which reauthorized the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act, and the Goals 2000: Educate America Act - reconfigured the
Department of Education's technical assistance services. First, the laws consolidated 48 existing
technical assistance centers operated by five different categorical programs into a single
authority providing for a network of 15 Comprehensive Regional Assistance Centers.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                 Title II, Page II
                                                                                   !-lex-Dump Conversion
Second, the laws created three other technical assistance programs to address priority areas: the
Eisenhower Regional Mathematics and Science Education Consortia, the Regional Technology
in Education Consortia (R*TECs), and the Parent Information and Resources Centers (PIRCs).

Finally, the laws created a new system of State-led school support teams to provide assistance to
Title I schools. This network oftechnical assistance has increasingly demonstrated success in
developing expertise, building capacity, and coordinating resources.

                                           What We've Learned

Research suggests that high-quality technical assistance has the following attributes: 29
 It is responsive to customer needs and aligned with State standards, local standards, or
   standards developed by national professional associations;
 Its products and services are based on sound research;
 It provides a level of service that is appropriate for the customer's capacity and needs;
 It is sufficient to prompt change in scope, intensity, and duration;
 It builds customers' capacity to identify and solve problems on their own;
 It is carefully targeted; and,
 It incorporates strategies for reaching a large number of customers effectively.

Although the current technical assistance programs are still quite young, the Department has
conduced early evaluations of their effectiveness. Key findings include:

   Title I School Support Teams. By fall 1998, Title I school support teams were serving
    schools in all but five States. 3D However, State-level data on the actual numbers of schools
    served by school support teams appear to be limited. The State Improvement Grants -
    designed to be the mechanism to provide additional resources for the operation of school
    support teams - have not been funded in the past four years.

    In 1998, almost half of all State Title I directors (24) reported that there were more schools in
    need of school support team services than Title I could accommodate, while only 20 Title I
    directors reported that their programs were able to accommodate all schools in need. 31

   Comprehensive Regional Assistance Centers. In 1994, the Comprehensive Centers were
    charged with responsibility for supporting State and local implementation of federal
    programs. However, only 36 percent of State administrators of federal programs and 29
    percent of district administrators reported that Center assistance was helpful in understanding
    federal legislative provisions.32 State customers are most satisfied with assistance on general
    reform topics.

    The Centers are generally targeting their services to high-priority customers. However, there
    is a need for further targeting. In Fiscal Year 1998, 50 percent of Center services to schools
    were tarfeted to schoolwide programs and 65 percent were targeted to high-poverty
    schools. 3




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title II. Page 12
                                                                              Hex-Oump Conversi1m

   Eisenhower Regional Mathematics and Science Education Consortia. In 1998, Eisenhower
    Regional Consortia training and technical assistance activities reached over 36,000
    participants, slightly more than half of whom were classroom teachers. Over a third (38%)
    of the participants received 12 hours or more of assistance. Almost two-thirds of Eisenhower
    Consortia customers report that they represent schools that serve a majority of at-risk
    students?4

    Most customers give Eisenhower Consortia services high marks for quality and usefulness. 35 .
    36 Specific professional development and networking activities sponsored by the Consortia
    appear to have had a measurable effect on teachers: Nearly two-thirds of participants in
    selected professional development activities reported that thel had incorporated some new
    behavior into their jobs as a result of what they had leamed. 3

    The Consortia have collaborated to achieve economies of scale and to take full advantage of
    the special capacities of individual Consortia. Together with strategies to leverage resources
    from other institutions and programs, these collaborations have helped the Consortia stretch
    their limited resources. 38

   Regional Technology in Education Consortia (R*TEC). The R *TEC target many of their
    products and services to students who have traditionally had limited access to technology.
    Surveys indicate high satisfaction with R*TEC services. More than 80 percent ofR*TEC
    customers describe them as "an important resource" that facilitates learning. More than 90
    percent of participants in regional, statewide, or schoolwide alliances facilitated by the
    R*TECs rated them highly or moderately well in increasing access to resources, supporting
    school reform, and addressing educational concerns. 39



    The NetTech R*TEC helps improve the use of technology in teacher education programs in
    Maine and Pennsylvania. NetTech supports the Technology in Teacher Education Network,
    which helps higher-education faculty to integrate technology in their instruction and efforts to
    train prospective teachers.

    NetTech also supports the NorthEast States' Commission on Technology, which supports the
    education technology-related professional development for district superintendents in
    Massachusetts, Vermont, and New Hampshire.



   Parent Information and Resource Centers (PIRC). The PIRCs were authorized in 1994 and
    began providing services in 1995. Participation has risen steadily as funding levels and the
    number ofPIRCs has increased. Parent centers are currently operating in every State and are
    increasin'gly involving schools and coordinating with other service providers.

   Other Sources of Technical Assistance. States - with the support of Federal funds - play
    an important role in providing technical assistance to districts and schools. In 1998, 91
    percent of State administrators of Federal programs reported that their programs provided


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                 Title II, Page 13
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

    technical assistance on at least one topic to sub grant recipients, while 41 percent reported that
    they provided assistance on eight or more topics. Surveys of local administrators substantiate
    the prevalence of State-provided technical assistance4o .                               .

    Technical assistance providers authorized by the ESEA are working with providers
    authorized by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) as well as the Regional
    Education Laboratories authorized by the Educational Research and Improvement Act to
    enhance the quality oftheir services and eliminate duplication of effort

    Finally, the Department of Education disseminates of written information itself. Surveys
    indicate that this information reaches the largest number of State and local staff and also
    generates the highest levels of satisfaction. In 1998, Title I principals gave higher ratings to
    the ERIC Clearinghouse System than to any other Federal source of technical assistance. 41

However, there are areas for improvement in Federal technical assistance. For example,
although they are moving in the right direction, technical assistance providers have not fully
exploited the full potential of new telecommunications technology to disseminate information
and deliver services.

Finally, States and large school districts - particularly those with large numbers of poor
families or low-performing schools - report the increasing need for mechanisms to determine
their technical assistance needs and select appropriate providers. The technical assistance model
created in 1995 by the School-to-Work Technical Assistance program provides "lines of credit"
directly to grantees to purchase technical assistance from high-quality providers. Early surveys
indicate that grantees are very satisfied with the services they obtain through this demand-driven
model. 42

                                             What We Propose

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:

   Create an integrated system of technical assistance that provides a supply of high-quality
    technical assistance providers to support school improvement.

   Increase State and local opportunities to detennine what technical assistance is most helpful
    to them. The proposal would continue, throughout the Act, to provide a variety of resources
    to States and districts to improve local capacity for improvement. In addition, our proposal
    would redirect funds from the Comprehensive Regional Assistance Centers, which have
    proven less effective in helping States and districts understand federal programs, to formula
    grants to States and the 100 school districts with the largest numbers of children in poverty.
    These grants would help States and districts to coordinate resources and directly purchase
    technical assistance services aligned to their needs.

   Support local decision-making by providing information to States and districts to improve
    their own technical assistance systems and select high-quality technical assistance services
    and providers.


The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                Title II. Page 14
                                                                                     Hex텱ump Conversion
   Support the use of technology to provide meaningful information and to support improved
    education practice. Our proposal would expand the use of technology to create an electronic
    information dissemination network to support teachers, administrators, parents, and students.
    In addition, all technical assistance providers would be required to use electronic
    dissemination networks and World Wide Web-based resources, as well as other technologies,
    to expand their reach and improve delivery of high-quality technical assistance.

   Support expertise in areas of national importance. The proposal would continue to support a
    network oftechnical assistance providers specializing in key areas, including improving math
    and science instruction, integrating education technology into effective classroom practice,
    and promoting meaningful parent and farnily involvement.

   Help all children, regardless of cultural background, achieve to high standards. Our proposal
    would create two new technical assistance centers dedicated to improving teaching and
    learning for limited텲nglish proficient, migratory, Indian, and Alaska Native students. Our
    proposal would also require Federal technical assistance providers to target most intensive
    support to districts and schools most in need, particularly high-poverty, low-performing
    schools.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                                 Title II, Page 15
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                   NOTES

1 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). Teacher

quality: A report on the preparation and qualifications ofpublic school teachers. Washington,
DC: Author. P.48.
2 Greenwals, R., Hedges, L., Laine, R. (1996). The effect of school resources on students'
achievement. Review of Educational Research, 66(Fall), 361-396.
3 Cohen, D.K., & Hill, H.C. (1998). Instructional policy and classroom performance: The
mathematics reform in California. Philadelphia: Consortium for Policy Research in Education.
4 Kennedy, M.M. (1998). Form and substance in inservice teacher education. Madison, WI:
National Institute for Science Education.
5 Elmore, R.F., & Burney, D. (1997). Investing in teacher learning: Staff development and
instructional improvement in community school district #2, New York City. NY: National
Commission on Teaching and America's Future and the Consortium for Policy Research in
Education. P.6.
6 Haycock, K. (1998). Good teaching matters ... a lot. Thinking K-16, 3(2, summer), 12.
7 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Study of Education
Resources and Federal Funding.
8 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Study of Education
Resources and Federal Funding.                                     .
9 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). Unpublished
tabulations for the 1993-94 Schools and Staffing Survey and the 1994-95 Teacher Follow-up
Survey.
10 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1998, September 8).
A back to school report on the baby boom echo: America's schools are overcrowded and
wearing out. Washington, DC: Author.
II APEC Education Forum. (1997). From students of teaching to teachers of students: Teacher
induction around the Pacific rim. Washington, DC: Author.
12 American Institutes for Research. (1999, March 25). National Evaluation of the Eisenhower
Program: Briefing Package. Unpublished manuscript.
13 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). Teacher
quality: A report on the preparation and qualifications ofpublic school teachers. Washington,
DC: Author. P. B-24.
14 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1998, September 8).

A back to school report on the baby boom echo: America's schools are overcrowded and
wearing out. Washington, DC: Author.
15 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). Unpublished
tabulations for the 1993-94 Schools and Staffing Survey and the 1994-95 Teacher Follow-up
Survey.
16 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1997). America's
teachers: Profile ofa profession, 1993-94. Washington, DC: Author. Errata, October 28, 1997,
p..26.
 7 Haycock, K. (1998). Good teaching matters: how well-qualified teachers can close the gap.
Thinking K-16, 3(2, Summer), 8-9.
18 Educational Research Service & Gordon S. Black Corporation. (1998). Is there a shortage of
qualified candidates for openings in the principalship? Washington, DC: National Association
of Secondary School Principals and National Association of Elementary School Principals.

The Educational ExcelJence for AlJ Children Act of 1999                            Title II, Page 16
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


 19  Feistritzer, C.B., & Chester, D. (1998). Alternative teacher certification: A state-by-state
  analysis 1998-99. Washington, DC: National Center For Education Infonnation. P.9.
  20 Recruiting New Teachers, Inc. (1998). Take this job and love it! The mid-career move to
  teaching. Belmont, MA: Author.
  21 Feistritzer, C.E., & Chester, D. (1998). Alternative teacher certification: A state-hy-state
  analysis 1998-99. Washington, DC: National Center For Education Infonnation. P.34.
  22 University of Colorado. (1995). Study on cost, quality, and child outcomes. Boulder, CO:
  Author.
  23 Smith, S. (1998). The past decade's research on child care quality and children's
  development: What we are learning, directions for the future. New York: New York University
  Press.
  24 Dickinson, D.K., & Smith, M.W. (1994). Long tenn effect of preschool teacher's book
  readings on low-income children's vocabulary and story comprehension. Reading Research
  Quarterly, 29(2), 104-122. The National Institute for Child Health and Human Development
. (NICHD). (1998). The NICHD study of early child care. Washington, DC: Author.
  25 Snow, C.E., Burns, M.S., & Griffin, P. (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young
  children. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
  26 Bamett, S. (1995). Long-tenn effects of early childhood programs on cognitive and school
  outcomes. Future of Children, 5(3), 25-50. University of Colorado. (1995). Study on cost,
  quality, and child outcomes. Boulder, CO: Author. Burchinal, P., Peisner-Feinber, E., Bruynat,
  D. & Clifford, D. (1998) Children's social and cognitive development and child care quality:
  Testingfor differential associations relate to poverty, gender, or ethnicity. Chapel Hill, NC:
  National Center for Early Development and Learning.
  27 The National Institute for Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). (1998). The
  NICHD study of early child care. Washington, DC: Author. Whitebook, M., Howes, C., &
  Phillisps, D. (1990). Who Cares? Child care teachers and the quality of care in America.
  Oakland, CA: Child Care Employment Project.
  28 Adams, G. c., & Poersch, N.O. (1997). Key facts about child care and early education: A
  briefing book. Washington DC: Children's Defense Fund.
  29 U.S. Department of Education, Office of the Under Secretary. (1999). Federal education
  legislation enacted in 1994: An evaluation of implementation and impact. Washington, DC:
  Author.
  30 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up
  Survey of State Implementation of Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
  31 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up
  Survey of State Implementation of Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
  32 The Urban Institute. (1998). Unpublished tabulations from the District Survey: Local
  implementation of Federal Programs (II).
  33 Policy Studies Associates, Evaluation of the Comprehensive Centers, unpublished tabulations

  from quarterly progress reports of the comprehensive Centers, 30 Dec. 1998
  34 Cross-Consortia Descriptive Data System. (1999). Eisenhower mathematics and science
  regional consortia preliminary report, fiscal year 1998. Washington, DC: Eisenhower
  Mathematics and Science Regional Consortia Program. Pp. 18,40.




 The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                            Title II, Page 17
                                                                        .   I'\~.oump Conversion


35 Haslam, M.B., Turnbull, BJ., Humphrey, D.C. (1998). Eisenhower mathematics and science
regional consortia program: Final evaluation report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education. P.23.
36 Cross-Consortia Descriptive Data System. (1999). Eisenhower mathematics and science
regional consortia preliminary report, fiscal year 1998. Washington, DC: Eisenhower
Mathematics and Science Regional Consortia Program. P.25.
37 Haslam, M.B., Turnbull, B.J., Humphrey, D.C. (1998). Eisenhower mathematics and science
regional consortia program: Final evaluation report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education. Pp. 27, 50.
38 Haslam, M.B., Turnbull, BJ., Humphrey, D.C. (1998). Eisenhower Mathematics and Science
Regional Consortia program: Final evaluation report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education. P.96.
39 U.S. Department of Education, R*TEC Program. (1999). Regional Technology in Education
Consortia program performance: Draft Report, Fiscal Year 1998. Washington DC: Author. P.
13,25.
40 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up

Survey of State Implementation of Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
41 U.S. Department of Education. (1999). Unpublished tabulations from the Follow-Up

Survey of State Implementation of Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Programs.
42 School-to-Work Learning Center, Semi-Annual Web Site Customer Survey, July 1998-

December 1998, 15 Jan. 99, n.p.




The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999                          Title II. Page 18
                                                                                 cords
                                                                             ex- ump Conversion

                                       INTRODUCTION

In 1999, Congress and the President will reauthorize the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act of 1965. For the ninth time, they will reaffirm the fundamental principal of the ESEA: that
the Federal government should help ensure that children in our poorest communities, those most
at risk of educational disadvantage, are provided with a first-rate education. Now, at the tum of
the century, we must reflect on American education and the role of the Federal government in
making America's public schools world-class.

In the 20 th Century, the United States has become the richest, most productive country in the
world, yet we have struggled to provide our children with a first-in-the-world education. The
poorest children in our country have grown familiar with overflowing classes where there are up
to forty students for every one teacher, crumbling school buildings, and teachers unqualified to
teach.

As we enter the 21 5t Century, our economy is increasingly driven by technology and global
competition. Our Information Age economy requires well-prepared, adaptable workers for
continued growth and prosperity. And we have a world that is knit ever-closer together and
demands the diverse talents for every America to support the peaceful expansion of freedom and
democracy.

To meet these demands, we must promote close working relationships between all levels of
government through this reauthorization. Together, we can make every school in America a
good school that helps all of its students meet high academic standards.

                                       BACKGROUND

Established in 1965 as part of President Lyndon B. Johnson's War on Poverty, the ESEA offered
Federal support, for the first time, to schools in low-income communities. It opened a new era of
Federal involvement in education, an era in which Federal assistance would focus on students
who stand to gain the most from it: poor children.

Over the years, Congress amended and expanded the Act eight times, creating programs to help
children who speak little English, migrant children, neglected and delinquent youngsters, and
other students with special educational needs. Over time, other programs were added to support
school improvement that would benefit all students throughout the country. In the early 1980s,
dozens of small categorical grant programs were consolidated into a block grant for fostering
school improvement. Other programs were launched to improve math and science instruction
and to make schools safe and free of drugs and violence. Smaller programs offered over the
years promoted school desegregation and championed innovation.

For nearly 30 years, the ESEA has contributed to improvements in American education. The
needs of at-risk children, once ignored, are now recognized. The academic achievement of these
children has improved, particularly in the core academic areas of reading and math. Public
awareness about the role of schools in combating illegal drug use and youth violence has grown,
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

and most schools have curricula and policies to prevent drug abuse. Professional development
opportunities have expanded, as has support for instructional innovation

                                   PROGRESS SINCE 1994

The 1994 reauthorization of the ESEA, titled the Improving America's School Act of 1994, and
the Goals 2000: Educate America Act fundamentally changed the Federal role in elementary and
secondary education to support the development and implementation of high academic standards
for all children. In the past, our education system too often supported and encouraged a two tier
system that held lower expectations for poor and disadvantaged children. The Improving
America's Schools Act and Goals 2000 established the clear expectation that all children can and
should be given tools to reach high standards.

Four principles guided the 1994 reauthorization toward its overarching goal of helping all
children meet high standards:
1) A focus on teaching and learning;
2) Increased flexibility and accountability for States and local school districts;
3) Links among schools, parents, and communities; and,
4) Targeted resources to the Nation's highest poverty schools and communities.

The 1994 ESEA reauthorization and Goals 2000 legislation defined the Federal role in education
as promoting equity and excellence for all children. These two laws introduced an approach that
built upon standards-driven reform: using Federal resources to enhance State efforts to develop
and implement challenging State 1;itandards for all children.

Federal, State and local practitioners were asked to work in concert to improve teaching and
learning. New and reauthorized Federal programs would provide leadership, resources, and
assistance to improve schools through professional development for teachers, access to new
technology, and a safe climate for learning. Federal programs would provide flexibility and
increase public school choice to stimulate local reform efforts. Programs would couple increased
flexibility for States and districts with responsibility for student performance.

At the time of the passage of the 1994 Federal legislation, some States were at the forefront of
reforming their educational systems and much farther advanced than federal programs; others
had yet to begin. Fundamentally, the 1994 laws envisioned a partnership across levels of
govemment that would help all States and school districts move forward with their reforms that
were consistent with the national purposes of the Federal programs. Federal programs supported
and complemented State and local reforms. Any credit for changes since 1994 must be shared
broadly with all who have a stake in the future of America's children.

The 1994 laws succeeded in complementing, enhancing, and accelerating reforms in States and
school districts. School districts in States that had begun standards-based reforms early - such
as Maryland, Kentucky, and Oregon - used challenging State standards for all students to
change teaching and learning in their districts (Urban Institute, 1997). In these States and
districts, where standards are used as a tool for classroom instruction, student achievement has
shown significant gains in both reading and math scores (Cohen, 1996; RAND, 1998).
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


States that had not begun standards-driven refonn in 1994 saw a new Federal catalyst to change
curriculum, teaching practices, and assessments to support more rigorous and 'challenging
instruction. For example, in 1994 Georgia had developed standards but lacked resources to
update and fully implement them. Goals 2000 provided Georgia with the necessary resources
and, in 1995, the State fonned an Improvement Council to begin this hard work (Goals 2000
Report to Congress, 1998). In a recent GAO report, State officials told GAO that Goals 2000 was
achieving its purpose of supporting systemic education refonn in States and districts by helping
them meet their own State's education refonn goals (GAO, 1998).

                          GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR ESEA 1999

As the U.S Department of Education began work on the 1999 reauthorization, we examined the
effectiveness of our efforts over the past five years by beginning conversations throughout the
country - based upon themes defined in 1994 - with hundreds of teachers, principals, parents,
community activists, State and local policy makers, researchers, and other education experts.

We asked the following questions: Have we been successful in promoting the development and
implementation of challenging academic standards? Have standards been used to improve
teaching and leaming and have they led to increased student achievement? Have States taken
advantage of flexibility to further their locally-driven reform efforts? Did our accountability
provisions have a positive impact in turning around failing schools? Are more parents involved
in their children's schools? And, are we reaching the students most in need of help?

Many States and districts are still working hard to implement the 1994 refonns. In many cases,
evaluation results from fully implemented ESEA programs are not yet complete. However, it is
clear that where States continued work on standards-based refonn over a period of time, students
have benefited. In these States, teaching and learning have improved as demonstrated by rising
scores on State assessments and on the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP)
(RAND, 1998). This evidence provides a compelling argument for the Federal government to
continue supporting States' efforts to implement standards-based reform and, at the same time, to
improve incentives and strengthen accountability mechanisms to ensure that these reforms take
hold to meet the needs of children.

As we developed our proposal to modify ESEA to continue the progress that has been made in
education since 1994, we were guided by five priorities: (1) a continued commitment to using
standards-based refonn to improve instruction for all children; (2) improved teacher quality; (3)
strengthened accountability; (4) a renewed commitment to equity and excellence; and, (5) an
assurance that every child is provided with a safe, healthy, and disciplined learning environment.


                   A Continued Commitment to Standards-Based Reform
                        Reaching All Children in Every Classroom

The 1994 laws emphasized the importance of establishing the same challenging standards for all
students' learning. We have made progress, but the hard work has only begun. We must renew
                                                                                       Helt-Dump Conversion

our commitment to this important principle and push for the next stage of standards-based reform
by helping States, districts, schools, and teachers use challenging States standards to guide
classroom instruction and student assessment.

We've learned that ...

States have made substantial progress developing state content standards. Goals 2000 and Title I
of the ESEA are spurring standards-based reform in local schools and communities. Almost
half of all school districts nationwide and more than 80 percent of poor districts reported that
Title I is "driving standards-based reform in the district as a whole." (National Title I
Assessment). A recent study by the General Accounting Office (GAO) finds that states report
that Goals 2000 has been a significant factor in promoting their education reform efforts (GAO,
November 1998). In part because of these laws, standards-based reform is taking hold
nationwide.

   Educators in all 50 States, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia have made great
    progress in establishing high academic standards in reading and mathematics;
   Forty-eight States, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia have completed the
    development of State content standards;
   Twenty-one States and Puerto Rico have completed the development of student performance
    standards in at least reading/language arts and mathematics;
   Fourteen States and Puerto Rico report that they have established transitional assessments
    aligned to state content standards in place; and,
   Six States have policies that link or aligns teacher professional development to State content
    standards and 11 States are developing such policies.

The rapid and simultaneous development of State academic standards is unprecedented in the
United States. There is a strong, nationwide awareness of the need to change teaching and
assessment practices to support standards. Educators are headed in the right direction, but
standards-based reform is a tremendous long-term challenge that requires much time, effort and
resources.

Although States have made significant progress in developing content standards, much work
remains to be done in further refining and implementing challenging State standards. Progress
has been slower, for example, in developing student performance standards and aligned
assessments. The rigor of State standards is also a concern. There is little evidence that States
have benchmarked their standards against outside criteria, such as the National Assessment of
Educational Progress (NAEP). In many classrooms, moreover, teachers have not yet begun to
relate the new standards to their everyday teaching activities.                                  .

Our proposal to reauthorized the ESEA, the Educational Excellence for All Children Act of
1999, would continue to support State efforts to help all children reach challenging academic
standards. It would:

   Continue the process of establishing challenging standards in every State. Title I of the
    ESEA will continue to focus on ensuring that all children have the opportunity to meet high
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


      expectations by requiring the development and implementation of challenging standards and
      aligned assessments. Our proposal would retain the current statutory requirement that States
    . to establish content standards, student performance standards, and assessments aligned to the
      standards by the 2000-01 school year.

   Create a cycle of continuous improvement based on challenging standards. States must hold
    all school districts accountable for continuous and substantial progress by monitoring the
    percentage of students meeting State performance standards and emphasizing the importance
    of increasing thc percentage of low-achieving students who meet the standards.

   Move standards from the Statehouse to the schoolhouse. Throughout the ESEA, there will be
    a greater focus on moving standards from the Statehouse to the schoolhouse. States have
    done a good job of developing standards, but only 36 percent of teachers report that they feel
    well prepared to teach to high standards.! Our proposal would launch a major initiative to
    implement standards in the classroom by increasing professional development for teachers,
    encouraging the use of technology to help students meet standards, and increasing the
    number and quality of after-school programs to give students the opportunity to participate in
    extended learning time.

   Supporting Technology as a Tool to Implement Standards in the Classroom. Technology for
    Education, Title III of ESE A, will target resources to high-need communities with a specific
    focus on improving professional development of teachers to help them learn how to integrate
    technology into the every day lesson plans aligned to challenging State standards; use tools
    such as distance learning to get challenging standan;ls into all classrooms; and, will
    encourage dissemination of best practices and the development of innovative uses of
    technology.

   Focusing on the Fundamentals. ESEA will focus on supporting State and local efforts to
    improve the teaching and learning ofthe fundamentals by raising standards in reading and
    mathematics:

       Improve the teaching and learning of reading. Our proposal would help reduce class size,
        better prepare early childhood educators so more children will start school ready to learn,
        strengthen Even Start Family literacy services; and, reauthorize the Reading Excellence
        Act. The Class-Size Reduction initiative would help States and school districts recruit,
        train, and hire 100,000 teachers in first through third grade to reduce the national average
        class size to 18 students per regular classroom. Our proposal would improve teaching in
        the early grades with small classes so all students can learn to read well and
        independently by the end of the third grade; focus on professional development, extended
        learning time, and family literacy through the Reading Excellence Act; and, ensure that
        children start school ready to learn my increasing the intensity and quality of services
        provided under Even Start as well as provide professional development for early
        childhood educators to give them the tools they need to help children develop critical
        language and literacy skills in early childhood.
       Making Math a Must. ESEA will continue to have a special emphasis on improving
        mathematics instruction with an assurance that the first $300 million of the Teaching to
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

        High Standards grants - Title II, Part A - will be spent on improving professional
        development in the areas of mathematics and science. This ESEA proposal also calls for
        the reauthorization of the Eisenhower National Clearinghouse for Mathematics and
        Science Education and the Eisenhower Regional Mathematics and Science Education
        Consortia.

Provide States and districts with capacity to provide high-quality technical assistance focused on
implementing challenging standards. States and districts need tools and resources to help all
schools ensure that their students are meeting challenging State standards. The 1999 ESEA will
include support for technical assistance through the bill with a concentrated effort within Part D
of Tile II - High Standards in the Classroom - to support an integrated system of technical
assistance and infonnation dissemination that is responsive to customer needs, leverages
resources, and promotes high quality support. Technical assistance will empower customers by
redirecting resources to States and high-need districts to allow them to identify their needs, select
technical assistance services, and build their capacity for school improvement.


                                   Improved Teacher Quality

For too long, we have tolerated unqualified teachers teaching our neediest students in our
highest-poverty schools.

We've leamed that ...

There are encouraging signs that professional development is helping teachers improve their
skills and implement standards-based refonn, but efforts must be redoubled to ensure that every
child in America has a talented and dedicated teacher who is prepared to help all children reach
high standards. (we need cites for all these facts - please check with Joanne Wiggins)

   Only 36 percent of a national sample ofK-12 teachers of core academic subjects said that
    they felt "very well prepared" to implement state or district standards.

   Only about half of the teachers who participated in professional development activities
    provided by school districts under the Title II Eisenhower Professional Development
    program said that the activities helped them teach in ways consistent with state standards and'
    content frameworks.

   In 1993-94, the most recent year for which data are available, teachers lacking a major in
    their primary assignment taught almost a quarter of the classes offered to students in high-
    poverty schools, but less than 15 percent of classes in low-poverty schools.

   Students in high-poverty schools are more likely than others to be taught some part of the day
    by teachers' aides with limited education and training.

   The number ofteachers equipped to serve students with limited English proficiency is not
    keeping pace with the demand for services, which is growing annually.
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


The facts are startling. Sixty percent of the new teachers hired by the Los Angeles school district
last year did not have a teaching license. When urban districts do find qualified teachers, they
often do not stay. In our urban areas, as many as half of all new teachers leave within their first
five years in the school (NCTAF, 1996). Nationally, in our Title I schools, teacher aides are
being hired at twice the rate of certified teachers and an increasing number of aides, who usually
have little more than a high school diploma, are providing direct instruction without a teacher's
supervision (RNT, 1996). These problems persist despite research indicating that qualified
teachers are the most important in-school factor in improving student achievement in reading
(Ferguson, 1991; NAS, 1998).

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would take several important steps to
ensure that all children are taught by highly qualified teachers. It would:

   Renew our commitment to high-quality teachers. Our proposal would require that a1\ new
    teachers in Title I schools be fully certified and that all secondary school teachers be certified
    in the field in which they teach. Our proposal would also limit paraprofessionals without two
    years of college to non-instructional duties and paraprofessionals with two or more years of
    college to instructional support and tutoring under the supervision of a fully-certified teacher.
    Finally, our proposal would require school districts to set-aside five percent of Title I funds
    for professional development in the first two years and ten percent thereafter.

   Help teachers teach to high standards. The Teaching to High Standards initiative
    would help educators apply high standards to improve learning in American
    classrooms. The initiative would support State and local efforts to: (1) align curricula
    and assessments to challenging State and local content standards, (2) provide teachers
    with sustained and intensive high-quality professional development in core academic
    content areas, (3) support new teachers during their first three years in the classroom,
    and (4) ensure that all teachers are proficient in relevant content knowledge and
    teaching skills.

    This new initiative would succeed the State reform program under Title III of Goals
    2000, ESEA Title II (Eisenhower Professional Development) and ESEA Title VI
    (Innovative Education Program Strategies) in current law.

   Recruit and retain high-quality teachers. The Teachers for Tomorrow initiative would
    address the national need to recruit 2.2 million teachers over the next decade. Teachers for
    Tomorrow would fund projects to recruit and retain quality teachers in high-need areas,
    including a teacher recruitment clearinghouse and job bank, a project to help recruit, prepare,
    and support talented principals, and the study of strategies to increase pension and credential
    portability across State lines.       .

    The Troops to Teachers program, which recruits former members of the military services,
    has been an effective at recruiting teachers in high-need subject areas and school districts.
    Recent studies have found that a significant number of mid-career professionals who possess
    strong subject matter skills are interested in beginning a teaching career. Our Transition to
                                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


    Teaching proposal would continue to work of Troops to Teachers as well as recruit, place
    and support other professionals as teachers, particularly in high-poverty school districts and
    high-need subject areas.

   End the practices of hiring emergency certified teachers and asking teachers to teach classes
    out of their subject expertise. Our proposal would help ensure that classroom teachers are
    qualified and prepared to teach to high standards by requiring teachers to demonstrate both
    subject-matter knowledge and teaching expertise as part of the certification process. In
    addition, it would phase out the use of teachers with emergency certificates and the practice
    of assigning teachers to subjects for which they lack adequate preparation.

    Our proposal would require States to ensure that, within four years, at least 95 percent of
    their teachers are (I) fully certified, (2) working toward full certification through an
    alternative route, or (3) are fully certified in another State and working toward meeting any
    State-specific requirements. States would also be required to ensure that at least 95 percent of
    secondary school teachers have academic training or demonstrated competence in the subject
    area in which they teach.


                    Strengthened Accountability for Student Performance

Our ESEA proposal includes the Education Accountability Act: a package of accountability
measures to hold students, teachers, schools and districts to high standards and ensure that school
districts and States provide students with a high quality education.

We've learned that ...

The 1994 laws provided States and districts with increased flexibility to coordinate, modify, and
combine program activities in exchange for greater accountability for their schools' and students'
performance, States, districts and schools have begun to take advantage of the increased
flexibility in the legislation to create learning environments that can help all students reach
challenging academic standards. However, effective accountability mechanisms are still
incomplete or non-existent in many programs. (Cites for these bullets)

   Over three-fourths of school districts in the nation - and all low-income districts - report
    that Federal programs are more flexible now than they were prior to the 1994 reauthorization.
    Eighty-four percent of districts said that even if they were given even more flexibility to
    administer the Federal programs, they would not change the services they provide.

   Relatively few waivers of federal requirements have been requested, even though waivers are
    available to States and districts through the Department or the Ed-Flex program.

   Only three of the programs authorized in 1994 - Title I, Safe and Drug-Free Schools, and
    Eisenhower Professional Development - require the use of performance measures for
    accountability. No other programs require a performance-based accountability system.
                                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion    .

   Accountability under Title I remains incomplete because the 1994 laws allowed States until
    2000-01 to fully develop aligned accountability systems. Some states are still defining
    adequate yearly progress for districts and schools. Variation in definitions across States
    makes it difficult to hold districts and schools accountable for progress made using federal
    funds.

   There is evidence, however, that accountability tied to consequences is a motivating force in
    improving student achievement. Texas and North Carolina - two States recently recognized
    by the National Education Goals Panel for the most significant gains for all States on the
    National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) as well as for progress on 33
    indicators related to improving education - are also considered by Education Week to have
    the two most comprehensive State accountability systems in the nation. A recent study by
    RAND researchers concludes that the most plausible explanation for the States' test score
    gains is the States' aligned system of standards, curriculum, and assessments, and efforts to
    hold schools accountable for improvement of all students.

The Educational Accountability Act would continue and strengthen existing accountability
provisions will be continued and expanded. It would:

   Improve public accountability. As a condition of receiving ESEA funds, we would require
    States and school districts to produce and distribute annual report cards for each school,
    school district and the State as a whole. The report cards would include information on
    student achievement, teacher professional qualifications, class size, school safety, attendance,
    and graduation rates. Where appropriate, the student achievement data would be show
    achievement by demographic groups to allow a greater focus on the gaps between
    disadvantaged students and their peers.

   Hold States accountable for low-performing schools. Our proposal would require States to
    publicly identify the lowest-performing schools that have not improved over the previous
    three years. States would be required to take corrective actions in these schools, such as
    addressing the fundamental staffing and curricula issues critical for improved student
    performance. Initial corrective actions could include extended learning opportunities, proven
    school reform models, and extensive teacher training. If there is no satisfactory
    improvements in student performance within two years, States would be required to take
    further corrective actions such as reconstituting the school by making wholesale staff
    changes or closing the school down entirely and reopening it with new staff or as a charter
    school.

    Our proposal would set aside 2.5 percent of Title I funds to support States and district
    interventions in failing schools. The President's Fiscal Year 2000 budget requests $200
    million to jumpstart this process and require States to intervene in the lowest performing
    schools immediately.

   Help students meet challenging standards on time by ending the practices of social promotion
    and retention. Our proposal would hold States and school districts accountable for
    supporting students who need additional help to meet State academic standards by (1 )
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

    implementing good educational practices such as early identification and intervention
    strategies; (2) strengthening learning opportunities in classrooms; (3) creating smaller classes
    with well-prepared teachers; (4) encouraging high-quality professional development; and, (5)
    providing extended learning time for students who need extra help, including after-school
    and summer school programs.

    Our proposal would allow States four years to implement these education supports. After
    these supports are in place, our proposal would require States to end social promotion and
    traditional retention practices. Instead, States would require students to meet academic
    performance standards before being promoted at key transition points (e.g., 4th and 8th grade)
    or graduating from high school. State policies would use multiple measures, including an
    assessment valid for these purposes, to determine if a student has met the standards.



                      A Renewed Commitment to Equity and Excellence

The 1994 laws were intended to help all students perform to high academic standards.

We've learned that ...

There has been evidence of student progress over the past four years. (cites?)

   Reading achievement on the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) has
    improved slightly for eighth and twelfth grade students since 1994. High-poverty and
    minority students have made significant gains in reading since 1994, although this
    improvement only restored achievement scores to levels seen in the late 1980s. There were
    also fairly substantial improvements in reading among the lowest-achieving public school
    fourth graders between 1994 and 1998.

   In mathematics, the two most recent NAEP assessments were conducted in 1992 and 1996.
    These measures showed that student achievement - as measured by the percentage of.
    students performing at or above the basic achievement level - has improved. During this
    period, there were also improvements in mathematics among students in the highest-poverty
    public schools and among those in the lowest percentile~ of performance.

   Although our Nation's students are making progress, we still have a long way to go.
    According to the Third International Math and Science study (TIMSS) conducted in 1995,
    U.S. fourth graders' performance in reading, math, and science is among the highest in the
    world. However, our students' international standing begins to slip as they move through
    school. Our eighth graders' international standing in reading, math, and science falls to only
    average or slightly above the international average and our twelfth graders' standing in
    mathematics and science is among the lowest in the world.

   The demographics oftoday's public schools are changing. The National Center for
    Education Statistics 1998 Condition of Education report showed that the percentage of racial
                                                                                    Hex-Dump ConversIon


    and ethnic minorities in public schools has increased from 24 percent of all public school
    students in 1976 to 35 percent in 1995.

   While minority enrollment is increasing, the achievement gap between majority and minority
    students has remained static since 1988. During the period from 1970 through 1988, the
    achievement gap closed by approximately 50 percent for African Americans and by
    approximately 35 percent for Hispanic Americans as measured by NAEP long-term trend
    data for reading, mathematics and science achievement (Smith, 1998). These improvements
    were achieved through increases in scores by minorities and resulted from policies that
    helped minorities reach a solid understanding of the basics. Getting all students to high
    standards will mean closing the gap further through proven practices: systemic reform that
    includes challenging standards, aligned curriculum, and effective teacher development
    (RAND, 1998). It must be supported as a policy to improve achievement for all children
    with a focus on children in high-poverty areas.

The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 would:

   Work to close the achievement gap through research-based practices, such as class-size
    reduction in the early grades. Research demonstrates that the advantages of smaller classes
    are more profound for students attending inner-city schools or from minority groups. 2 These
    achievement gains persist until at least the eighth grade. 3 This proposal would reauthorize
    the President's Class-Size reduction initiative under Title VI of this Act.

   Provide high-quality services to limited English proficient (LEP) students to help them
    master challenging standards and learn English. Under both Titles I and VII, schools will be
    held accountable for ensuring that all LEP students make progress toward mastering
    challenging standards and developing English proficiency, with a goal of helping students
    meet English proficiency within three years. Both Titles also include a greater emphasis in
    providing all teachers with professional development to better serve LEP students.

   Focuses on improving equity, excellence and public school choice options for all students.
    Recognizing that no one school or program can meet the unique needs of every student,
    public school choice provides students the flexibility to choose among public schools and
    programs that differ with respect to educational settings, pedagogy and academic emphasis.
    Title V will support programs that can enhance options for students and parents, including
    the Magnet School Program, the Public Charter School Program, and a new authority that
    will fund innovative options for public school choice.

   Strengthen programs to help special popUlations. The migrant education program, for
    example, would be strengthened by encouraging further parental involvement and requiring
    States to describe how they will encourage migrant students to participate in State
    assessments required under Title I, Part A. Ensuring that homeless children receive a quality
    education would be addressed under the reauthorized McKinney Homeless Assistance Act by
    strengthening provisions to integrate homeless children into regular schools and ensure that
    they are identified and served.
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion



                    Safe, Healthy, and Disciplined Learning Environments

We've learned that.. ..

   A 1998 national survey of student drug use in grades 8, 10, and 12 demonstrates that alcohol
    use has slightly dipped in grades 8 and 10, although it remains high overall, and the use of
    other illicit drugs declined after six years of steady increases. Not surprisingly, high school
    seniors reported significantly higher rates of substance use outside the school building: eight
    percent had used both alcohol and marijuana at school, while 75 percent had used alcohol
    and 40 percent had used marijuana outside of school.4

   The Annual Report on School Safety 1998 concluded that schools nationally are
    comparatively safe places and that students in school today are not significantly more likely
    to be victimized than in previous years. Crime in school facilities or on the way to or from
    school has fallen and most school crime is theft, not serious violent crime. However, a small
    proportion of schools experience high rates of crime and violence. In 1996-97, 10 percent of
    all public schools reported one or more serious violent crimes to the police. 5

   While recent data shows a declining school crime rate, school disruption remains an
    important issue for educators. Between 1991 and 1997, significantly more school principals
    identified student tardiness, absenteeism, class cutting, drug use, sale of drugs on school
    grounds, and verbal abuse of teachers as serious or moderate problems in their schools.
    Surveys of the American public reveal that citizens are concerned about teaching children
    values and discipline, and keeping drugs away from schools. 6

   More and more children are leading unhealthy lifestyles - exersizing less, eating more, and
    growing increasing overweight. Recent research from the Surgeon General and the Centers
    for Disease control show that as students get older they participate in fewer formal physical
    activities ....{ need more information from Meg Small and Connie DeshpandeJ

What we propose ....

   Strengthens Safe and Drug Free Schools and Communities Act by emphasizing high-quality
    research-based programs, targetting funds to areas that need it most - those experiencing
    increases in violence and/or drug use; and, helps districts respond to violent crisis; and,
    promotes safety by requiring assessment of students who bring a gun to school.

   Requires every school district and school to have a sound discipline policy. Our proposal
    would require States to hold school districts and schools accountable for discipline policies
    that focus on prevention, are consistent and fair, and were developed with the participation of
    the school community. States would also be required to ensure that schools have a plan to
    help students who are expelled or suspended continue to meet the challenging State
    standards.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

   Promote physical fitness and lifelong healthy habits through demonstration projects.
    Exemplary physical education programs can promote life~long healthy habits, provide
    opportunities for students to connect to school, and support after-school programs.?



1 U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (1999). Teacher
quality: A report on the preparation and qualifications o/public school teachers. Washington,
DC: Author.
2 Finn, J.D. (1998). Class size and students at risk: What is known? What is next?

Washington, D.C: U.S. Department of Education. pp. 10, 13.
3 Finn, J.D. (1998). Class size and students at risk: What is known? What is next?
Washington, D.C: U.S. Department of Education. pp. 10, 13. Nye, B.B., Fulton, D., Boyd-
Zaharias, J., & Cain, V.A. (1995). The lasting benefits study, eighth grade technical repon.
Nashville, TN: Tennessee State University, Center of Excellence for Research in Basic Skills.
4 University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research. (1998,

December 18). Monitoring the Future Study Press Release. Ann Arbor: Author. University
of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research (1998). Unpublished
tabulations from the Monitoring the Future Study.
5 U.S. Department of Education & U.S. Department of Justice. (1998). Annual Repon on
School Safety 1998. Washington, DC: Author.
6 U.S. Department of Education & U.S. Department of Justice. (1999). Annual Repon on
School Safety: 1998. Washington DC: Author. Barton, P., Coley, R., & Wenglinsky, H.
(1998). Order in the classroom: Violence, discipline and student achievement. Princeton:
Educational Testing Service. U.S. News and World Repon. (1997).
7 Guidelines for School and Community Programs to Promote Lifelong Physical Activity Among

Young People U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, March 7, 1997/ Vol. 46/No.
RR-6.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 050 - FOLDER -003


[04/28/1999] [2]


