     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:27-APR-1999 22:08:25.00

     SUBJECT:   FYI -- food safety story

     TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     do you all know about this?

     sb

     From:   Dan J. Taylor on 04/27/99 06:04:00 PM
     Record Type:    Record

     To:      David W. Beier/OVP, , Sarah A. Bianchi/OVP
     cc:
     Subject:         FYI -- food safety story

     Environmentalists slam, quit administration food safety panel

         WASHINGTON (AP)    Environmental and public interest groups on
     Tuesday quit an advisory panel on food safety, created at the
     behest of Vice President Al Gore, charging the administration is
     failing to take steps to remove pesticides that pose a special
     danger to children.
         The 50-member advisory panel was created to get a broad spectrum
     of views as the Environmental Protection Agency decides how to
     proceed in eliminating hundreds of pesticides as required by a 1996
     food safety law.
         But the panel has been embroiled in internal disagreements among
     its members, who represented a range of interests that included
     environmentalists, health safety advocates, farmers and
     representatives of the chemical industry and agribusiness.
          In a letter to the EPA, the groups said they were quitting the
     panel because the agency was unwilling "to make hard choices"
     needed to take the most dangerous pesticides out of service even
     though they pose a threat to children.
          "EPA's indecision on these high-risk chemicals leaves everyone
       kids, farmers, farm workers, food processors, consumers and our
     precious biodiversity    vulnerable, " the groups complained.
         Erik Olson, of the Natural Resources Defense Council, said,
     "The pesticide industry and agribusiness lobbyists and their
     allies in Congress have hijacked this process, " and the Clinton
     administration "has let it derail"     through delays and inaction.
         In addition to NRDC, other groups that quit the panel Tuesday
     were the World Wildlife Fund, Consumers Union, Pesticide Education
     Center, Farmworker Justice Fund, National Campaign for Pesticide
     Policy Reform, and the Farmworkers Support Committee. Last year the
     Environmental Working Group withdrew from the advisory group in


           protest.
               Deputy EPA Administrator Peter Robertson, in a letter to the
           seven groups, said the agency remained "absolutely committed"    to
           assessing the dangers posed by some pesticides and removing from
           the market those chemicals that pose a particular danger to
           children as required by the 1996 law.
               "We too wish that this process could go faster, " wrote
           Robertson. "But we are on schedule for assessing risks and taking
           risk-reduction actions beginning in August as the law prescribes."
               But the environmentalists complained that the EPA and
           Agriculture Department are not moving quickly enough to remove the
           pesticides, including some widely used organophosphates, that pose
           the most critical health risks to infants and children.
               The 1996 Food Quality Protection Act for the first time required
           the EPA to consider the unique dangers the chemicals pose to
           infants and children. It said the EPA should reassess the first
           batch of these chemicals by this August.
               The EPA -'now has admitted it will not meet the August
           deadline, " the environmentalists said. They blamed the slow
           progress, in part, to -'endless debate"  within the advisory
           committee.
               Gore urged creation of the advisory panel last year after
           concerns were raised by agriculture interests and their advocates
           in Congress that the EPA was not taking into account farmers'
           views. Farm groups argued that many of the pesticides being
           targeted are essential and do not yet have adequate substitutes.
               Critics at the time said Gore's involvement stemmed from concern
           that elimination of some of the pesticides could cause Gore
           political problems in states such as Iowa, Florida, Texas and
           California   all key in Gore's presidential campaign.
               The vice president said the broad representation on the advisory
           group would ensure sound science was used in implementing the 1996
           food safety law.
           APNP-04-27-99 1739EDT

           Copyright (c) 1999 The Associated Press
           Received by NewsEDGE/LAN: 4/27/99 5:36 PM
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 050 - FOLDER -002


[04/28/1999] [1]


