     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Shannon Mason ( CN;Shannon Mason/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:28-APR-1999 16:06:04.00

     SUBJECT:   Rangel Bill Talking Points and Q&A

     TO: William G. Dauster ( CN;william G. Dauster/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Charles M. Brain ( CN;Charles M. Brain/OU;WHO/O;EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN;Karen Tramontano/OU;WHO/O;EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Charles R. Marr ( CN;Charles R. Marr/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Broderick Johnson ( CN;Broderick Johnson/OU;wHO/O;EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Barbara Chow ( CN;Barbara Chow/OU;OMB/O;EOP@EOP      [ OMB 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Rhonda Melton ( CN;Rhonda Melton/O;OVP@OVP    [ UNKNOWN 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett    ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP@EOP   [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Iratha H. Waters    ( CN;Iratha H. Waters/OU;OMB/O;EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Dario J. Gomez    ( CN;Dario J. Gomez/OU;WHO/O;EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Carolyn T. Wu ( CN;Carolyn T. Wu/OU;WHO/O;EOP@EOP      [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     ---------------------- Forwarded by Shannon Mason/OPD/EOP on 04/28/99
     04:00 PM ---------------------------




     Brian V. Kennedy
     04/28/99 03:29:57 PM
     Record Type:     Record

     To:      Shannon Mason/OPD/EOP@EOP
     cc:
     Subject:         Rangel Bill Talking Points and Q&A

     Shannon, can you forward this around to everyone for comments?




==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D13]ARMS25073443T.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000004100000000000000001000004300000001000000FEFFFFFF000000004000
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                                          Yex·Dump Conversion

        THE RANGEL SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION BILL ADDRESSES THE CRITICAL
                      NEED FOR SCHOOL MODERNIZATION


     THE RANGEL BILL PROVIDES SIGNIFICANT RESOURCES TO COMMUNITIES

     The Rangel proposal would make nearly $25 billion in bonds available to states and districts
     over the next two years to build and modernize up to 6,000 public school. The proposal
     provides:

            $11 billion in bonds available to states, to address priorities established by the state;

            $11 billion in bonds available to the 100 school districts serving the highest numbers of
            low-income children;

            $400 million in bonds available to schools funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs; and

            $2.4 billion in bonds would be available to states for business-school partnerships in low-
            income communities.

     THE NEED IS GREAT

            2,400 new schools will be needed by 2003 to accommodate rising enrollments and to
            relieve overcrowding. [National Center for Education Statistics]

            The average elementary school costs $8 million to build, and the average high school
            costs $16 million. [Council for Educational Facility Planners International]

            $112 billion is needed just to repair existing schools in poor condition across the nation.
            [National Center for Education Statistics, 1999]

            The average public school in America is 42 years old, and school buildings begin rapid
            deterioration after 40 years. [National Center for Education Statistics]

     INTEREST ON SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION BONDS IS A BIG EXPENSE

     Many states and school districts issue tax-exempt bonds to raise money for school construction.
     Bond buyers usually agree to loan money to the state or the school district, with the
     understanding that the money will be paid back with interest over a number of years. Interest
     payments take a big chunk out of the pocketbooks of local taxpayers.

             The interest on a typical 30-year tax exempt bond almost equals the amount
     borrowed. Even on less typical IS-year tax-exempt bonds, the interest is still significant -
     totaling about 65% of the amount borrowed.
                                                                            Hex.Dump Conversion


          Questions And Answers on Rangel's School Construction Proposal
                                  April 26, 1999

Q:   What is Representative Rangel's school construction proposal?

A:   Representative Rangel proposes to fund $25 billion in desperately needed school
     construction and modernization activities through Federal tax subsidies. Under the
     proposal, eligible school districts will be authorized to issue bonds for construction
     activities. The Federal government will provide the bondholders with tax credits in lieu
     of interest. There will be two types of bonds: School Modernization Bonds ($22.4
     billion) and Qualified Zone Academy Bonds ($2.4 billion).

     $22 billion in 5MB authority will be divided equally between the States and the 100-125
     urban school districts with the largest number oflow income students. The Department of
     Interior will allocate an additional $0.4 billion in 5MB authority to Native American
     tribes for BIA schools repair and replacement. Finally, the QZAB program, created by
     the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, will receive $2.4 billion in additional bond authority.

Q:   Does the Administration support Representative Rangel's school construction proposal?

A:   Yes. The Administration strongly supports Representative Rangel's bill.

Q:   How does this proposal differ from the arbitrage proposals of Representative Archer and
     others?

A:   The Rangel proposal provides deeper subsidies and funds greater levels of construction
     than the existing arbitrage (Representative Bill Archer· HR 4579, 105 th Congress)
     proposals. The arbitrage proposals would extend the period, from two to four years,
     during which States and localities can earn income on investment of bond proceeds
     without providing rebates to the Federal government. As such, the arbitrage proposal
     may delay critical construction of school facilities while bond issuers attempt to earn
     investment income in the financial markets. Conversely, Rep. Rangel's proposal
     provides incentives to renovate and construct schools in a timely manner. Further, Rep.
     Rangel's proposal would enable school districts with limited fiscal capacity to issue
     bonds for school construction by providing Federal tax credits in lieu of bond issuer
     interest payments.

Q:   Does this proposal differ from Representative Rangel's proposal last year?    If so.   how?

A:   The current proposal is similar to the Rangel school construction bill in 1998. Changes
     include increasing total bonding authority by $3 billion, adding a $0.4 billion component
     for Native American schools, and adopting structural changes that improve the
     marketability of the tax credit bonds and strengthen the quality of school construction.
                                                                                     Hex·Dump Conversion

Q:        School construction has historically been the responsibility of States and local
          communities. What is the justification for using Federal funds for this local
          responsibility ?

A:        The state of American schools has declined dramatically while enrollments continue to
          increase. According to a General Accounting Office report, a third of all schools across
          the country, with more that 14 million students, have one or more buildings that need
          extensive repair. School districts also face the cost of upgrading schools to accommodate
          computers and modem technology, and of constructing new classrooms and schools to
          meet the expected record enroIlment levels over the next decade. As such, the Federal
          government needs to take a leadership role in improving the state of American schools.
          Rep. Rangel's program is a down payment on the $112 billion school construction and
          modernization shortfall. We anticipate that this contribution will mobilize further
          investment in education by states and local communities.

Q:         Why does the Administration believe that the financial markets will embrace school
         . modernization bonds when there has been limited utilization of a similar instrument, the
           Qualified Zone Academy Bonds (QZABs)?

A:        Utilization of QZABs has been slow for two reasons: the financial market's lack of
          familiarity with this new instrument and some of the financial features that limited usage
          or reduce the price of the bonds. QZABs are the first bonds that offer Federal tax credits
          in lieu of interest payments; we expect substantial market interest as awareness spreads.
          To address financial concerns regarding the bonds, the Administration is joining Rep.
          Rangel in proposing to enhance marketability of these instruments through four
          fundamental changes. Changes to the QZAB program are as follows:

     ·    Allow bond-holders to carry forward unused tax credits; .

     ·    Base tax credit rates on prevailing market conditions at time of issuance;

     ·    Expand qualified bond holders (currently limited to financial institutions) to include
          individuals and other businesses; and

     ·    Allow borrowers to use the bond proceeds for school construction.

Q:       How can the Administration ensure that the proposal will complement, not supplant,
         existing construction funding?

A:       Under the proposal, the Secretary of Education is responsible for ensuring that bond
         issuer plans certify that bond aIlocations are used only to supplement, and not supplant,
         the amount of school construction, rehabilitation, and repair in the State or community
         would have otherwise undertaken in the absence of the allocation. All applicants for
         bonding authority will be required to submit documentation to the Secretary of Education
         that delineates need for public school facilities, including descriptions of health and
         safety problems at such facilities, the capacity of public schools in the State to house
';
                                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


              projected emollments, and the extent to which the public schools in the State offer the
              physical infrastructure needed to provide a high-quality education to all students, The
              application would demonstrate that a comprehensive survey has been undertaken of the
              construction and renovation needs in the jurisdiction and describe how the jurisdiction
              will ensure that the bond funds are used for the purposes intended by this proposal.

         Q:   Why does the Rangel proposal provide tax credits rather than direct support for schools?

         A:   Given the scope ofthe nation's school facilities infrastructure problem -- $112 billion
              needed for facility repairs and replacement alone - a limited grant program to cover the
              full cost of school construction projects could not begin to make an impact on the
              problem, By using Federal dollars in the form of tax credits to leverage increased state
              and local support, we can help states and local districts to do mush more construction
              than they would be able to do on their own,

         Q:   Why does the Rangel proposal reserve half the money for 100 urban districts?

         A:   Urban, rural and high-growth suburban areas all face different and difficult school
              modernization needs, however many school facilities problems are concentrated in urban
              districts, and these districts often have limited financial resources to meet their needs, In
              1996, the GAO reported that 38 percent of central city schools have at least one
              inadequate building, as compared to 29 percent of schools in suburbs and large towns and
              30 percent of small town and rural schools, In addition, 67 percent of central city schools
              (compared to 57 percent of suburban/large town schools and 52 percent of small
              town/rural schools) had a least one building feature, such as a roof, plumbing, or heating
              and air conditioning, needing repair or replacement.

         Q:   Will this proposal help states and communities that have already passed school
              construction bonds?

         A:   Yes, states and communities that have already passed school construction bond referenda
              could take advantage of this proposal as long as they have not yet issued their school
              construction bonds,


         Q:   Does the Administration support application of the Davis-Bacon Act to this school
              construction proposal?

         A:   The Davis-Bacon Act is a part of Rep. Rangel's proposal and the Administration supports
              its inclusion. The Administration is a strong supporter of the Davis-Bacon Act (DBA).
              The statute ensures that workers are compensated at wage rates comparable to those paid
              in the local area, Good wages are important for working families in these communities,
              In addition, payment oflocally prevailing wages attracts skilled and qualified craftsmen
              that will be able to build quality schools for our children,

         Q:   How would the Davis-Bacon provision be administered and enforced?
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


A:   The Davis-Bacon provision would be administered and enforced in the same manner as it
     is currently administered and enforced on Federal contracts. Construction contractors
     would be required to pay prevailing wage rates. DOL would investigate complaints filed
     regarding the possible wage rate violations. Neither the Department of Education nor the
     Department of Treasury would have a role in administering or enforcing the Davis-Bacon
     Act.

Q:   Given the Davis-Bacon Act drives up construction costs, would application of the Davis-
     Bacon Act decrease the amount of construction that would be conducted absent this
     provision?

A:   The payment of prevailing wages does not necessarily inflate costs, but does prevent
     costs from being cut at the expense of employees wages. The Congressional Budget
     Office testified in 1993 that the costs of paying higher wages may be offset by the
     benefits of hiring more skilled and productive workers. In addition, 31 states currently
     have "little Davis-Bacon laws." Accordingly, it is likely that most school construction
     would fall under state Davis-Bacon laws.

                                          Optional

Q:   Does the Administration support extending Davis-Bacon application to other similar tax
     credit initiatives? For example, the Better America Bonds.
                                                                         ~ex-Dump ConversIon

A:   Today, we are discussing Rep. Rangel's school modernization bonds. We agree fully
     with Rep. Rangel's approach for ensuring that Davis-Bacon will be applied to
     construction work generated by these bonds. The Administration is a strong supporter of
     the Davis-Bacon Act (DBA). The statute ensures that workers are compensated at wage
     rates comparable to those paid in the local area. The Administration has not evaluated
     how the Davis-Bacon Act might apply to construction financed by other tax credits.

Q:   Senator Daschle 's school construction bill does not include a method for ensuring Davis-
     Bacon applies to the construction his bill would support. Do you prefer the Rangel
     approach to the Daschle approach?

A:   Today, we are discussing Rep. Rangel's school construction proposal. We agree fully
     with Rep. Rangel's approach for ensuring that Davis-Bacon will be applied to
     construction work generated by these bonds. We applaud Sen. Daschle's efforts to put
     school construction on the Senate's agenda. We look forward to working with Congress
     to take action on this critical issue affecting our schools today.


