RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-APR-1999 19:36:51.00

SUBJECT:   GUN LAWS INCLUDE MANY LOOPHOLES

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
fyi. .. jc3
---------------------- Forwarded by Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP on 04/28/99
07:38 PM ---------------------------



        SHlMABUKUR L @ A1
        04/28/99 07:27:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Leanne A. Shimabukuro, Jose Cerda III
cc:
Subject: GUN LAWS INCLUDE MANY LOOPHOLES

Date: 04/28/99 Time: 17:54
SGun laws include many loopholes

    DENVER (AP)   The Columbine High massacre has demonstrated just
how complicated and full of loopholes the nation's overlapping gun
laws are.
    Federal law makes it illegal for a licensed gun dealer to sell a
handgun to anyone under 21 or to sell a rifle to anyone under 18.
Colorado law makes it illegal in most cases to give a handgun to a
minor, and makes it illegal for a minor to possess a handgun.
    But authorities say Dylan Klebold's 18-year-old girlfriend may
have done nothing illegal   even though they say she bought three
rifles and gave them to two minors who later used the weapons in an
attack in which they killed 12 students, a teacher and themselves.
    There are 30,000 gun laws at the federal, state and local level,
and many are peppered with loopholes.
    "It's a fragmented set of laws,"   said David Akerson, a Denver
criminal lawyer. "The loopholes are giant."
    For instance, to prosecute on the charge of giving a handgun to
a minor under Colorado law, prosecutors must show that the giver
"knowingly or recklessly" gave the gun with the knowledge that
the minor planned to break the law.
    Investigators, who had previously said Robyn Anderson bought a
TEC DC-9 semiautomatic handgun and a Hi Point carbine rifle, on
Wednesday said she bought two sawed-off shotguns and the carbine
but they have no information linking her to the handgun, the fourth
weapon used in the attack. Klebold and Eric Harris were both under
18 when they received the rifle and shotguns.
    A key unanswered question is who bought TEC DC-9. If Ms.
Anderson did, prosecutors would have to determine what she knew and
when she knew it.


     The federal law that bars handgun sales to anyone under 21
doesn't apply to so-called private sales, so an unlicensed dealer
can sell a handgun like the TEC DC-9 used in Littleton to an
18-year-old. Investigators say at least one of the guns was bought
at a gun show, where private sellers vie for buyers along with
licensed dealers who must follow stricter rules.
     Private sellers don't have to perform a background check or
comply with the waiting period created in the 1994 Brady bill.
     President Clinton has called for a crackdown on gun show sales,
requiring all sellers to comply with the laws made for dealers. On
Tuesday, the president said he had been to gun shows and wasn't
impressed with the legal requirements.
     --People go around with their trunks open . . . . People pay
cash,"   he said. --I'll tell you something: If we don't do
something about gun shows, we're going to continue to have serious,
se'rious problems."
     And then there's the Colorado law that bars anyone under 18 from
possessing a handgun.'
     That law has a laundry list of exemptions. For instance, a minor
can use a handgun for hunting, in organized sporting events, or on
property owned by the minor's parent or grandparent with their
permission.
     And even that law doesn't necessarily apply statewide. Denver,
for instance, passed a stricter law, requiring anyone buying even a
rifle from a Denver dealer to be 21.
     The TEe DC-9 used by Klebold and Harris is considered a handgun
because of its short barrel, 12.5 inches. The three other guns used
  the Hi Point carbine and the two sawed-off shotguns       are
considered rifles. It's illegal to saw the barrel off a shotgun,
but an 18-year-old can own a rifle.
APNP-04-28-99 1755EDT


