RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-APR-1999 19:29:01.00

SUBJECT:   STUDY: DRUGS, ALCOHOL OR TOBACCO SHOWN IN 98 PERCENT OF ...

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI -- jc3
---------------------- Forwarded by Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP on 04/28/99
07:30 PM ---------------------------



        SHlMABUKUR L @ Al
        04/28/99 07:26:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Leanne A. Shimabukuro, Jose Cerda III
cc:
Subject: STUDY: DRUGS, ALCOHOL OR TOBACCO SHOWN IN 98 PERCENT OF ...

Date: 04/28/99 Time: 19:04
EStudy: Drugs, alcohol or tobacco shown in 98 percent of popular

     WASHINGTON (AP)  Musicians sing about guzzling liquor and movie
stars puff cigarettes and take drugs on the big screen. But federal
officials ask: Where is the unglamorous side of substance use
like hangovers, slurred speech or getting in trouble with the law?
    A government study released Wednesday says that people were
depicted doing drugs, drinking or smoking in 98 percent of the top
movie rentals and 27 percent of the most popular songs in 1996 and
1997. Fewer than half these movie scenes and song lyrics mentioned
any downside to these activities.
    The $400,000 study of 200 movies   rated from "G"    for all ages
to "NC-17," no one under 17 admitted     and 1,000 songs was
commissioned by the Office of National Drug Control policy and the
Department of Health and Human Services.
    The study stopped short of saying that music and films cause
young people to use drugs, alcohol and tobacco. But researchers
said that determining the frequency and nature of substance use in
entertainment media is the first step toward understanding how much
influence films and music have on young people's decisions to
smoke, drink and take illicit drugs.
     "We do not suggest that we want to dictate the message. Drugs,
alcohol and tobacco are a reality of American life. They should be
part of the art form of the entertainment world, " said Barry
McCaff~ey, drug control policy director for the Clinton
administration. "But we are suggesting they need to be tied to the
consequences that are realistic, given our experiences in American
life. ' ,
    A Motion Picture Association of America spokesman declined to
comment, saying there hadn't been enough time to review the
.F




     two-year study.
         The Recording Industry Association of America issued a
     one-paragraph statement, saying efforts already were under way in
     the music industry to help control teen substance abuse.
         Since 1985, for example, the music industry has put labels on
     recordings that contain strong language or descriptions of
     violence, sex or substance abuse. In an average record store with
     110,000 titles, about 500 recordings would have the "parental
     advisory"    sticker, the association said.
         Nelba Chavez, administrator of the Substance Abuse and Mental
     Health Services Administration, said the entertainment media are a
     powerful influence on young people, but parents have more of an
     impact.
          "There's a lot of room for improvement in the entertainment
     world,"    she said, "but there's just as much room for improvement
     in homes and communities."
         On a positive note, Ms. Chavez said only 3 percent of the song
     lyrics mentioned tobacco. And 15 percent of the movies that
     portrayed illicit drug use also contained an "anti-use" message,
     such as limiting how much and how often substances are used.
         Only five of the movies, however, were substance-free. And in at
     least two of the five, there was a scene about using substances,
     according to Don Roberts, a Stanford University communications
     professor who helped research the study.
          "In one scene, a set of characters sit around a tea table,
     drink out of little toy tea cups and go through an entire drunk
     shtick, " Roberts said.
         Among the study's other findings:
           Of the movies, 93 percent showed alcohol use, 89 percent
     tobacco use and 22 percent drug use.
           Of the songs, 17 percent included lyrics about people drinking
     alcohol, 18 percent using drugs and 3 percent smoking.
           More than half the movies and more than 80 percent of the songs
     that mentioned drugs and alcohol indicated no consequence to users.
           Of ·the 669 major adult characters in the movies, 5 percent used
     illicit drugs, 25 smoked and 65 percent drank alcohol.
         Reflecting concern about media violence, four members of
     Congress asked President Clinton to convene an emergency summit
     meeting at the White House with the leaders of the entertainment
     industry.
         In a letter to Clinton, Sens. Joseph Lieberman, D-Conn., and
     John McCain, R-Ariz., and Reps. Ed Markey, D-Mass., and Dan Burton,
     R-Ind., said school violence is a complicated issue, but "we
     believe that media violence is contributing to this problem and we
     need the help of the entertainment community to solve it."
         The four also asked Surgeon General David Satcher to conduct a
     new study into the impact of mass media on the increase in violent
     behavior.by children and young adults.
         Also, two House Republicans, Reps. John Peterson, R-Pa., and
     James Rogan, R-Calif., introduced separate bills Wednesday that
     would establish federally funded drug testing programs in schools.
     APNP-04-28-99 1905EDT


