RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-APR-1999 10:52:28.00

SUBJECT:   Eli's Respons on Chicago Event

TO: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cheryl M. Carter ( CN=Cheryl M. Carter/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A.   Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI, here's Eli's letter to the editor in response to the Chicago Tribune
article about the Partnership's convention in August ('also included
below) .

Copyright 1999 Chicago Tribune Company
Chicago Tribune April 28, 1999 Wednesday

WELFARE REFORM    By: Eli Segal, President and CEO The Welfare to Work
Partnership.

   I was disappointed to read Cornelia Grumman's article "Glitzy salute
for welfare reform" (Metro, April 8). The article unfortunately missed the
focus of The Welfare to Work Partnership's three-day national conference
in August. The conference aims to bring together key players in welfare
reform--businesses, service providers, community-based organizations,
former welfare recipients and government officials--to present innovative
solutions to shared concerns, including retention, transportation, child
care and other challenges that lie ahead.

   Clearly it is too early to "celebrate" victory. Although welfare to
work has had unprecedented success in its infancy, much remains to be
done. We cannot possibly change a system with 60 years of history in just
30 months.

   will the conference be exciting and energize attendees from around the
country? We hope so. Will the conference utilize high-profile
personalities to draw public attention to this important issue? Again, we
certainly hope so. But the partnership's ultimate goal is to provide
conference attendees with the tools and resources needed to move people
from lives of dependence to lives of independence.

Copyright 1999 Chicago Tribune Company
April 8, 1999 Thursday, CHICAGOLAND FINAL EDITION


    GLITZY SALUTE FOR WELFARE REFORM; AUGUST EVENT'S COST, PROPRIETY QUESTIONED
    BYLINE: By Cornelia Grumman, Tribune Staff Writer.

    Chicago's Navy Pier will be the site of a 3-day national welfare reform
    conference in August, marking the third anniversary of President Clinton
    signing a historic measure ending guaranteed entitlements to low-income
    families.

           The purpose of the event, according to organizers who still are
    planning it, is to highlight the successes of welfare reform and to provide
    a forum for different regions of the country to exchange ideas about what
    has worked and what has not.

           But organizers also are counting on attendance at the Aug. 2-4 event
    by celebrities, athletes, politicians, business leaders, Cabinet
    secretaries
    and former welfare recipients to draw media attention and to create a pep
    rally-like buzz.

           "It's going to be an opportunity to stand up and say what's been
    accomplished," said Eli Segal, director of the Washington, D.C.-based
    Welfare to Work Partnership, the non-profit group organizing the event. "So
    I think there will be some celebration, but in the context of we still have
    a long way to go."

           Already, though, the conference--with roundtable discussions
    moderated by movie stars or television talk show hosts, a party at the
    House
    of Blues and possible visits by Clinton or Vice President Al Gore--is
    raising eyebrows among welfare advocates who fear the event will become a
    celebration of dramatic drops in public assistance rolls.

           "What are they going to celebrate?" says a laughing Jenny Wittner,
    who heads a Humboldt Park-based job training program, Chicago Commons ETC.
    "It's too funny. Time limits are coming up, and the point is not just how
    many people have gotten off, the point is how many people remain on and
    what
    will happen to them. To have a celebration when we have people whose lives
    have the potential to be made miserable seems to me somewhat
    inappropriate."


            Others are concerned about the projected $1 million cost of the
    event. Organizers are hoping half will be covered by city, state and
    federal
    dollars. The rest will come from corporate sponsorships and other private
    support.

            Organizers recently met with city officials to discuss how to
    shuttle
    the expected 2,000 participants between hotels and the pier, getting
    streetlight banners made and asking celebrities such as Whoopi Goldberg,
    Oprah Winfrey and Michael Jordan to help conduct roundtable discussions and
    highlight welfare-to-work success stories.

           But not everyone is convinced that a celebrity-laden, $1 million
    event is the best way to bring attention to the poverty issue.

           "If you're going to try to get businesses on board, get more people
    hiring, get more focus on the job yet to be done, it could be OK," said


John
Bouman, director of the Chicago-based Poverty Law Center. "If it's purely
celebratory, I don't think it's appropriate. It would be unrealistic to
think, and maybe distracting in a bad way, to convey that the job is done."

       But Michael Kharfen, spokesman for the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, said such a high-profile event could keep the momentum of
welfare reform going among businesses.

       He said that is especially important when dwindling welfare rolls
become increasingly concentrated with people who have the hardest time
finding jobs--those with drug or alcohol problems, the lowest skills and
poor educations.

       "Many people think that welfare is over," Kharfen said. "So having
an
Oprah or a Whoopi or any celebrity who can lend their personality and their
interest, as well as to be able to draw attention, is helpful."

       Nationally, welfare rolls have declined 35 percent since Clinton
signed the law in August 1996, according to the latest figures.

       But in Illinois, for instance, nearly as many recipients get dropped
from the caseloads every month for missing an appointment or not properly
filling out a form as the number who leave welfare for jobs.

       At least 20 percent of those who go to work are back on the rolls
within 12 months because they either quit or got fired. And many who have
found work are stuck in low-paying jobs with little room for advancement.

       Almost nothing is known about families who are said to "fall through
the cracks," those who leave the rolls but have no job.

       Meanwhile, overwhelmed and undertrained caseworkers often give
recipients erroneous information about child care and other benefits.

       But Gerald Greenwald, chairman of the Welfare to Work Partnership,
said the conference is a time to focus on successes, encourage businesses
to
keep hiring and exchange ideas about what works in different areas of the
country.


