     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:30-APR-1999 15:36:22.00

     SUBJECT:   weekly

     TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D93]ARMS234710638.136 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
     000.0000000010000003700000000000000001000003900000001000000FEFFFFFF000000003600
     OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFfFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
     FFFFFFFFFFECA5C1007100090400000012BF000000000000100000000000040000563100000EOO
"




                                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                              April 30, 1999                        Hex-Dump Conversion




    MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

    FROM:          Bruce Reed
                   Elena Kagan

    SUBJECT:       DPC Weekly Report


            Health Care -- Bicameral Democrats Meeting on Medicare Reform: On Wednesday,
    Congressman Gephardt hosted a meeting between House Democrats (e.g., Dingell, Rangell,
    Stark, Waxman, Pomeroy) and Senate moderate Democrats (e.g., Breaux, Conrad, Graham,
    Lieberman) to discuss Medicare reform. The Democratic Leadership arranged this meeting in .
    order for Members to understand the conflicting positions held by the Democrats in the Congress
    on Medicare reforms. Senator Daschle wanted to make certain the House Democrats understood
    the strongly held position in the Senate that a viable reform proposal needs to be crafted;
    Congressman Gephardt wanted Senate Democrats to understand what he and his Members feel
    are the political and policy implications of pursuing what they feel to be "flawed" Medicare
    policy. Although the meeting was a bit confrontational, it was viewed by most attendees as
    constructive. At the conclusion of the meeting and in response to a suggestion by Senator
    Lieberman, Congressman Gephardt proposed that key Democrats from both Houses start
    working together - along with the White House -- on some alternative competitive models for
    the program to determine if a consensus around one approach could be achieved. While
    encouraged by this development, we are still analyzing how to be responsive to the request
    without constraining your options and/or risking problematic leaks.

            Health Care -- New Older Women's League Report on Importance of Medicare to
    Women: On Monday, the Vice President will join the Older Women's League (OWL) in
    releasing a new report on the disproportionate dependence women have on the Medicare
    program. The report will document that three-fifths of the Medicare population at age 65 are
    women and, that by age 85, women outnumber men in the program by a two to one ratio. It will
    also highlight how much income older women spend on health care (27 percent of their income
    by age 85), the number of chronic illnesses older women face (three out of four have two or
    more chronic conditions), the degree to which they rely on prescription drugs (8 out of 10 are
    prescribed medications regularly and the majority oftheir costs are paid out-of-pocket.), and how
    much longer they live than men (79 versus 73). At the event, OWL will indicate its support for
    the approach the Administration is taking to address the challenges facing Medicare. In
    particular, they will commend you for your Medicare surplus dedication proposal, your
    commitment to expand access to affordable prescription drug coverage, and will strongly support
    your opposition to increasing the eligibility age without any policy that assures it does not lead to
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
more uninsured Americans. Along these lines, they will reiterate their support for your Medicare
buy-in proposal.

         Health Care -- First Lady Launches Asthma Screening Program at Local School:
On Tuesday, the First Lady will visit Draper Elementary School in Washington DC to participate
in the launch of a new asthma screening program being conducted by the American College of
Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. This new program will screen thousands of children
nationwide throughout the year to identify children with asthma and educate their parents about
the disease in order to ensure they receive treatment. The First Lady will also announce that the
Administration will submit to Congress legislation for a new, $68 million initiative to fight
childhood asthma. This initiative includes new efforts to: (1) implement school based programs
that teach children how to effectively manage their asthma; (2) invest in research to determine
environmental causes of asthma and to develop new strategies to reduce children's exposure to
asthma triggers; (3) provide funds to states and providers to help them implement effective
disease management strategies that will insure we lower hospitalizations, emergency room visits
and deaths from asthma; and (4) conduct a new public information campaign to reduce exposure
to dust mites and other asthma triggers, such as tobacco smoke.

         Health Care -- Senate Finance Committee Holds Hearing and Praises the CHIP
Program: On Thursday, the Senate Finance Committee held a hearing to discuss the progress
that HCFA has made in implementing the new Children's Health Insurance Program. The
feedback from members was extremely positive; Senator Roth opened the hearing by stating that
the members were there to "focus on a success story". In her testimony, Nancy Ann Min
DeParie stated that during the first year of implementation, the program has emolled almost 1
million children and is on target to emoll 2.5 million children in CHIP by the year 2000, a strong
first step towards our goal of covering an additional 5 million children through both Medicaid
and CHIP. She also noted that the new toll free number for children's health outreach, 1877
KIDS NOW, which you and the First Lady launched in February, has already received over
40,000 calls from families interested in learning about available free or low cost health insurance
options for their children. Witnesses from the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities and state
Medicaid departments also praised the Administration for its implementation of the program and
its interest in initiating and sustaining outreach efforts

    Drugs -- Arrestee Drug Use: On Thursday, the Department of Justice's National Institute of
Justice released its 1998 report on arrestee drug use patterns. Some of the key findings of the
study include:

   (1) Cocaine. Cocaine use declined among adult male arrestees, but remains the most
   commonly found drug for female arrestees. Though cocaine use appears to be stabilizing, in
   19 of the 35 ADAM sites, at least one-third of all adult males tested positive for cocaine.

   (2) Methamphetamine. High rates ofmethamphetarnine use remained largely confined to
   Western cities. In San Diego, Las Vegas, Spokane, and Sacramento, and Salt Lake City,
   over 20 percent of both male and female arrestees tested positive for meth.
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

   (3) Opiates. Opiate use remained stable and geographically widespread. Nearly 70 percent
   of confirmed heroin users also test positive for cocaine, indicating problem of abuse of
   multiple drugs.

   (4) Marijuana. Marijuana is the most commonly found drug in test results among male
   arrestees and its use is concentrated among younger arrestees, particularly young males.

   (5) Young offenders (ages 15-20). Marijuana is the primary drug used by juvenile arrestees.
   On average, more than half of juvenile "males tested positive for marijuana. While opiate use
   remains very low among juvenile arrestees, significant increases in heroin use were found in
   New Orleans, Philadelphia, and St. Louis.

        Civil Rights -- Asian American and Pacific Islander Executive Order: May is Asian
Pacific American Heritage Month. An Executive Order has been proposed that seeks to increase
the participation of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in Federal Programs particularly
health and human services programs. This Executive Order has been long-awaited and will be
well received by the Asian Pacific American community and particularly the Congressional
Asian Pacific American Caucus. A scheduling request for a signing ceremony is pending.

         Tobacco -- FDA Rule: This week the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) tobacco case. Arguments are expected to be heard this fall, with a
decision likely sometime next spring. As you will recall, in 1997 the district court upheld the
FDA's authority to regulate tobacco products, but found the statute did not permit the agency to
regulate tobacco advertising. Last August, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals struck down the
district court ruling, finding the FDA did not have authority to regulate tobacco products. The
Solicitor General filed a petition seeking Supreme Court review, arguing that Congress clearly
gave the FDA the authority to regulate drugs and devices and that based on scientific evidence.
presented in the rule, the FDA made a reasonable interpretation that tobacco products meet the
statutory definition of a product "intended to affect the structure or any function of the body."
Thirty-nine states filed an amicus brief supporting the Administration's position. On the day of
the Supreme Court announcement, we issued a statement praising the court decision and
reaffirming your commitment to the rule. While this matter is pending in the courts, only parts of
the rule are in effect. Retailers must check photo identification of any tobacco purchaser who
appears to be under the age of27 or risk fines. Not in effect are the rule's provisions designed to
limit minors' access to cigarettes sold in vending machines or the rules limits on advertising and
marketing which appeal to minors. In an unrelated event this week, The New York Times
announced it will no longer run advertisements for tobacco products, the first ban for a national
newspaper.

        Tobacco -- Recoupment Issue: On Thursday the Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids and
the American Heart Association issued a report we mentioned earlier highlighting how few states
are investing the tobacco state settlement into meaningful youth tobacco prevention programs.
The report found in recent months only four states have decided to use settlement funds to reduce
youth smoking, for a total of nine -- Califomia, Florida, Maryland, Massachusetts, Montana,
Oregon, Virginia, Washington. There are 25 states in which there is no proposal being seriously
considered to guarantee the use of a substantial portion of the settlement funds for programs to
                                                                       Alltomate'! "<',-r,   C"   ~;:: ""',,"   ·

                                                                                  He,..uurn~ ~unviliSlon
     reduce tobacco use among children. We issued a statement expressing disappointment that few
     states are devoting funds to youth tobacco prevention programs and citing the report as support
     for our recoupment position. Since the supplemental appropriations process has been delayed,
     governors seem to be increasingly nervous that the Hutchison-Bliley amendment won't be
     enacted, but have not yet been willing to support any alternatives. We are having quiet
     conversations with the states and on the Hill in an attempt to resolve this impasse.

              Education - School Construction: On Tuesday, Congressman Rangel plans to
     introduce his school construction legislation. The measure currently has about 85 Democratic
     co-sponsors. Rep. Gephardt's office has indicated that they would like to do some type of White
     House event with you on Tuesday to mark the introduction of this bill, however you are
     apparently scheduled for foreign travel on that day. Rangel's proposal -- which reflects your
     school modernization initiative -- would make nearly $25 billion in bonds available to states and
     districts over the next two years to build and modernize up to 6,000 public schools.

             Education - Class-Size Study. On April 29 at the National Press Club, Secretary Riley,
     Senator Patty Murray, the NEA, and other leaders announced the most recent findings of Project
     STAR -- the Tennessee study that has tracked the performance of a control group of students
     against others who were in smaller classes in grades K-3. Preliminary findings show that
     students who were in smaller classes in the early grades had better high-school graduation rates,
     higher grade point averages, and are more likely to attend college.

            Education -- Florida School Reform Bill.      [Hold for report based on Senate vote
     scheduled for late Thursday]


