  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-MAY-1999 15:55:00.00

  SUBJECT:   fyi - this is the article on the hate-culture that sid mentioned

  TO: Loretta M. Ucelli    ( CN=Loretta M. Ucelli/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Robert B. Johnson ( CN=Robert B. Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOwN

 TO: Paul D. Glastris     ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Sidney Blumenthal ( CN=Sidney Blumenthal/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Joshua S. Gottheimer ( CN=Joshua S. Gottheimer/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: June Shih ( CN=June Shih/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: markpenn ( markpenn @ ps-b.com @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Hitler youth?
                             What little we know of the Columbine
                             killers' motives points to the dangers
                             lurking in dark, Nazi-worshiping
                             corners of alienated youth culture.


                             BY JOE CONASON

                             May 4, 1999 I Cheap, easily
                             purchased firearms.
                             Bomb-making instructions on
                             the Internet. Ultraviolent
                             pop-culture images. Oppressive
                             teenage cliques. Stressed-out, neglectful parents.
                             Stressed-out, angry kids.

                             Nobody yet knows why Eric Harris and Dylan


                    Klebold murdered 12 classmates and a teacher
before
                    shooting themselves; and it's possible we never
will
                    know. Even more disturbing, nobody knows what we
                    should do if we are to avoid further tragedies of
this
                    kind.

                    On the other hand, it does seem rather obvious to
                    most people -- though not Charlton Heston or Bob
                    Barr -- that TEC-9 pistols and sawed-off shotguns
                    should not be available to children or to most
adults.
                    As for all the other prescriptions offered by
preachers,
                    pundits and sociologists in the tragedy's
aftermath, let's
                    just say that they will probably have as much
effect as
                    such exhortations usually do. It's tempting to
leave the
                    subject at that, move on to more intelligible
                    phenomena and wait for the inevitable depressing
                    sequel.

                    But Klebold and Harris did leave
                    behind a few tantalizing hints about
                    their state of mind as they plotted to
                    blow up their school and blow away
                    their classmates, hints that we would
                    be wise to consider. Documents seized
                    from the suspects' homes by Jefferson
                    County sheriff's investigators indicate
                    that they were obsessed with Adolf
                    Hitler and Nazi Germany. They seem
                    to have planned the assault to
                    commemorate the Nazi dictator's ilOth
                    birthday. Eyewitnesses say that they
                    purposely executed Isaiah Shoels, a
                    diminutive black football player, as well
                    as two girls who were known as devout
                    Christians.

                    The killers' fascination with Hitler and their
targeting
                    of Christians and blacks, combined with their
apparent
                    preoccupation with "industrial" music, together
suggest
                    the possible influence of a fascistic youth
subculture
                    that has inspired horrific violence elsewhere.
Clues
                    about what appeals to the "Trench Coat Mafia" and
                    other young alienated wannabes can be found in
                    publications like Hit List, a zine that covers
punk,
                    metal and other categories of the counterculture.
The


                      first issue, featuring a burning church on its
 cover,
                      came out last February with an almost eerily
 prescient
                      theme: "The Politics of Black Metal." The lead
 article
                      by Kevin Coogan, an expert investigator of the
  far
                      right, plunges into the dank milieu where
  screeching,
                      atonal bands with names like Mayhem, Morbid Angel,
                      Deicide and Darkthrone exploit Satanic, pagan and
                      Nazi imagery to create an atmosphere of shock.

                      Both the sound and the fascist fetishism date
 back to
                      the early days of punk rock, when Malcolm McLaren
                      marketed swastika accessories in his trendy London
                      boutique, Sex. Coogan identifies the early
 post-punk
                      group Throbbing Gristle, which glamorized the Nazi
                      SS and Goebbels' Ministry of Propaganda, as the
                      precursor of certain ugly elements in today's
                      "industrial" scene. A more current example is the
                      suddenly infamous Marilyn Manson, whose stage
                      name refers not only to the murders inspired by
                      imprisoned maniac Charles Manson, but to Manson's
                      ravings about race war and Satanic revolution,
 which
                      have long enjoyed an audience on the
 countercultural
                      fringe.

                      Offensive as this crap was (and is), most of it
                      represented nothing more troublesome than a few
                      twisted losers trying to outrage the liberal
 mainstream.
                      Cultural transgression has gotten more and more
                      difficult in recent decades, as material like the
 movies
                      of John Waters and now "South Park" have become
                      widely accepted. (The same problem is faced by
 radio
                      personalities, visual and performance artists,
 from
                      Howard Stern to Damien Hirst, who win attention by
                      promoting scatological and sadistic themes.)

                      "Black metal" is a smaller subset of industrial
 music,'
                      sometimes pervaded by strands of occultism,
                      Satanism, Nordic paganism and far-right,
 white-power
                      politics. Many if not most black metal bands are
                      simply poseurs concealing their lack of talent
 behind
                      ghoulish makeup and synthesized noise. But at
 another
                      level, this quasi-underground has provided an
                      environment where real live fascists can


  disseminate
                      hate literature and encourage serious violence
  among
                      vulnerable, disturbed young people.

                      The most notorious example of the latter was a
  wave
                      of church burnings in Norway and Sweden between
                      1993 and 1995 by black metal gangs. That outbreak
                      culminated in the stabbing murder of the leader
  of one
                      band by another; the killer, a Nazi pagan named
  Varg
                      Vikernes,   is now lionized in some black metal
  circles
                      as "the Manson of Norway." In 1996, a couple of
                      years after that Scandinavian crime spree, six
  Florida
                      teenagers torched a church, blew up a bottling
  plant
                      and fired a lethal shotgun blast in the face of a
  high
                      school band director. According to police, their
                      intended finale was to turn Disneyworld into a
  killing
                      field of black tourists. They called themselves
  the
                      "Lords of Chaos" -- a name memorialized in the
  title
                      of a recent popular book about the violent fringe
  of the
                      black metal scene by Michael Moynihan and Didrik
                      Soderlind.

                      Moynihan is much more than a mere chronicler of
                      black metal excesses. He is the leader of Blood
  Axis,
                      an American Nazi-Satanist band that toured Europe
                      last winter, and more importantly, a prominent
  figure
                      linking the music scene to fascist and occult
  circles.
                      Moynihan once said he rejected Holocaust
  revisionism
                      about the Nazi extermination of 6 million Jews
                      because "I'd prefer it to be true."

                      Before "Lords of Chaos," he published "Siege," a
                      collection of writings by former American Nazi
  Party
                      member James Mason, who admires David Duke and
                      regards hate crimes as "white self-defense." In
                      interviews with right-wing music zines, both
  Moynihan
                      and Mason have openly advocated lethal violence
                      against "the system" -- and they particularly
  admire
                      "lone wolves" like the Columbine killers.
  commenting
                      on Varg Vikernes in 1995, Mason said that


     "killing any
                         number of people and blowing up any number of
                         buildings" is "ultimate heroism." But, he added,
     "We
                         need a lot more of this simultaneously, not one
     here,
                         not one there, but in concert." (Incidentally, he
                         happens to reside in Denver, not all that distant
     from
                         Littleton. )

                         Of course, none of this proves that black metal
     mania
                         motivated Klebold and Harris, nor is it meant to
                         suggest that the suppression of Satanic or even
                         Nazi-oriented countercultures is warranted.
     Forbidding
                         such obnoxious expressions only makes them more
                         transgressive, and hence more attractive to
     adolescents
                         seeking to assert their rebellion. And the death
     lyrics of
                         metal music may even provide a harmless outlet for
                         kids who might otherwise find more destructive
                         diversions. Michael Moynihan himself once
                         complained about "cartoonish and stupid" music
     about
                         murder that was "just fantasy" by people who
     "would
                         never actually go out and do what they were
     talking
                         about." Yet it's also clear that the metal
     underground
                         may serve as a recruiting and propaganda
     instrument
                         for sinister political forces, much as white-power
                         music has both here and in Europe. For adults who
                         hope to prevent the next high school atrocity, it
     is a
                         phenomenon that deserves attention.
                         salon. com I May 4, 1999


