    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Sidney Blumenthal ( CN=Sidney Blumenthal/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1999 08:50:35.00

    SUBJECT:   Boston Globe article

    TO: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda rrr/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD 1
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
                         The violent game called TV news

                         By Derrick Z. Jackson, Globe Columnist, 05/07/99

                             t a Senate hearing Tuesday on violent youth
    entertainment, Kansas
                             Republican Sam Brownback railed against "movies
    that depict teens
                      killing their classmates; music with lyrics that glorify
    suicide, torture, and
                      murder; TV that trivializes the consequences of
    violence; and video games
                      that simulate real-life killing and give points for each
    death. ' ,

                       Utah's Orrin Hatch and Connecticut's Joseph Lieberman
    raised the idea of a
                       federal probe into the marketing of violent video games,
    movies, and music.
                       Lieberman said that senators do not want to resort to
    regulation, but if the
                       entertainment industry' 'continues to market death and
    degradation to our
                       children, and continues to pay no heed to the genuine
    bloodshed staining our
                       communities, then one way or the other, the government
    will act."

                         Former Education Secretary William Bennett showed clips
    of violent movies
                         that made some in the audience turn their heads. After
    the second clip,
                         Bennett asked:   "Had enough?"
'",'      '1




                            Have we "had enough"   of the marketing of death? I
       doubt it, since
                         meaningful gun control is still way off the table on
       Capitol Hill. I also doubt it
                         because while the question is being asked with
       refreshing force about our
                         fantasies and fiction, Littleton has not yet sparked a
       simultaneous tossing and
                         turn'ing in the medium that we get our real information
       from: The news.

                            In our family, we turned off the local TV news a decade
       ago. We refused to
                         be prisoners to "If it bleeds, it leads." This is
       humorous to television
                         executives, but it has led to a horrible distortion of
       the world we present to
                         our families.

                            A 1997 study by the University of Miami of local TV news
       in New York,
                         Los Angeles, Chicago, Miami, Indianapolis, Austin,
       Texas, Syracuse, N.Y.,
                         and Eugene, Ore., found that 29 percent of newscasts
       were about crime. A
                         study last year found that 33 percent of local TV news
       in Baltimore and
                         Philadelphia was on crime.

                         Crime received twice as much coverage than politics in
       the Miami study and
                         14 times more than education and 24 times more than race
       relations. Of
                         course, as a 1994 study of Chicago TV news found, news
       executives
                         degrade race relations by disproportionately singling
       out black criminals.

                         Princell Hair, news director at the NBC affiliate in
       Baltimore, said stations
                         sometimes purposely tie a real murder story to lead the
       late-night news right
                         after movies on the Mafia and shows like' 'Homicide."
       "Whenever we have
                         the opportunity to tie into a preceding program, we try
       to take advantage of
                         it, " Hair said.

                         In doing so, the news media cross the line into a
       ratings game that, no less
                         than a video game, gets points for every death. "What
       television seems to
                         cultivate is what we call the 'mean-world syndrome, '
       said longtime media
                         analyst George Gerbner of the Annenberg School of
       Communication at the
                         University of Pennsylvania. "If you're growing up in a
       heavy-viewing home,
                         for all practical purposes, you live in a meaner
~'-



      world. ' ,

                        There is plenty of evidence that constant exposure to
      mean worlds creates
                        meaner people, whether we are talking about aggressi'on
      after watching
                        "Power Rangers" or the rise of crime among nations and
      groups of people
                        as they watched more television.

                           There is so much evidence that there is no longer any
      excuse to present
                        news as one-third crime. Crime rates have fallen in most
      cities. There is no
                        excuse to report on violence with no context. A 1997
      study of 26 California
                        TV stations found that 84 percent of stories on violence
      covered just the act,
                        but no factors that led to or could have prevented the
      crime.

                           Everyone is angry about how innocence was stolen at
      Columbine High. TV
                           news steals innocence every night. The California study
      found that even
                           though less than one-half of 1 percent of youths 10 to17
      years old were
                        arrested for violent crimes in 1994, 55 percent of the
      television news stories
                        on youths involved violence.

                        It is no wonder, then, that despite the highly
      publicized national drop in
                        violent crime, a Gallup poll last fall showed that 56
      percent of Americans felt
                        there was more crime than five years ago, compared to 35
      percent who felt
                        there was less.

                          Had enough? The answer will be yes when Americans reject
      the distorted
                        reality that passes as news; when we reject not only the
      quantity of stories
                        about violence but also photos of dead bodies that do
      not add to stories;         .
                        and when we stop stripping people of their dignity. Do
      we need to see
                        mothers in primal screams at death scenes? Do we need to
      hear every 911
                        call?

                         The answer will be yes when we reject' 'news"  that
      becomes wallet photos
                         for gang members and Trenchcoat wannabes. The answer
      will be yes when
                         we stop feeding on a fear and paranoia that focuses us
      more on revenge and
                         the death penalty than the prevention of gun control.
      Had enough? We can
                         prove it by sending the news makers a loud and clear
ии

     message. Click.

                         Derrick Z. Jackson is a Globe columnist.

                         This story ran on page A31 of the Boston Globe on
     05/07/99.
                           Copyright 1999 Globe Newspaper Company.

                               [ Send this story to a friend   I   Easy-print version
     I   Add to Daily User 1
 ';'




