RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1999 17:48:40.00

SUBJECT:   weekly

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
WPC5
2B8JDZlxTimes New Roman  (TT)Arial  (TT)Times New Roman  (TT)XC\         P6QJ2PQ"C\
6Q2<KLphoenix XP\        P6Q                         May 7, 1999
       EOPEOP2llwheading 2heading 2C9 XX2PQ 00 XP\       P6Q Default Paragraph FoDef
ault Paragraph Font

footnote referencefootnote reference

Document MapDocument Map8. XX2PQ   XP\      P6Q



May 7, 1999

ODMEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:     Bruce Reed
DDX'     hp x (#'        hp x (#     Elena Kagan
DO'      hp x (#'        hp x (#
SUBJECT:      DPC Weekly Report

DO XP\   P6Q OCrime Federal Gun Prosecutions: DIn their response to our gun Ie
gislation, the NRA and certain Republicans have countered that greater enforcem
ent of existing firearms laws are needed instead of new laws pointing to a dec
reased number of federal firearms prosecutions under this Administration.  Whil
e it is accurate that more lower level gun cases were prosecuted under the Bush
 Administrations Operation Triggerlock, the number of federal prosecutions of
more serious gun offenders (persons serving sentences of over 5 years) during t
his Administration is up by nearly 30 percent (from 1049 to 1345).  In addition
, better federal coordination with state and local law enforcement has contribu
ted to a 25 percent increase in criminals sent to prison for state and federal
weapons offenses since 1992 (from 20,681 to 25,186). Nonetheless, our last two
 budget requests have called for additional resources to bolster our federal gu
n enforcement efforts, including funds to add over 280 new ATF agents and more
than 40 new federal prosecutors to help investigate, arrest, and prosecute more
 gun criminals in the federal system. XP\         P6Q
DO
DDDEducation Achieve, Inc.:   OAchieve, Inc.  a nonprofit group focused on educ
at ion reform announced that they will create a new challenging 8th grade math
test in response to poor U.S. student performance on the Third International Ma'
thematics and Science Study. At least 10 states have agreed to give the tests
once they are developed: Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,
New Hampshire, North Carolina, Vermont, Washington, and Wisconsin.  The math pa
rtnership, funded by the group, will give teachers training and lesson material


 to prepare students for their test. Achieve also announced that they would ho
Id a national summit September 300ctober 1. A statement was issued on your beh
alf applauding the groups effort to improve middle school math and help student
s reach world class standards.

DEducation Charter Schools Report: DThe Department of Education released the
third report in a fouryear study on the progress of the charter school movement
   The report found that the number of charter schools grew by more than 50% in
 1998 to about 1,100 schools in 34 states and the District of Columbia, servin
g about 160,000 students. For the most part, charter schools are being given fl
exibility to make independent decisions, but are being held accountable for res
ults. They tend to serve a diverse set of students, in relatively small school
s, and are in great demand. The top obstacle to charter schools continues to b
e lack of access to startup funding, underscoring the importance of the charter
 school startup fund you created, and for which you are proposing a 30% increas
e this year.

DEducation Charter School Regulation:D The Department of Education issued a n
otice of proposed rulemaking to ensure that new charter schools receive the fed
eral funding for which they are eligible within the first five months they are
open. This regulation implements provisions of the Charter School Expansion Ac
t of 1998, a bipartisan bill that you signed into law last year.   This provisio
n will help address the challenge cited by many charter schools, that their fed
eral funding is typically calculated on the basis of student enrollment the pre
vious year data not available for a school in its first year.    This proposed r
egulation will also ensure that charter schools·with expanding enrollment recei
ve the appropriate share of federal funding for additional students within five
 months.  Some state educational agencies may view this as administratively dif
ficult, but the proposed regulation is written to address some of these concern
s, while fulfilling the intent of the law by ensuring that students in charter
schools get their fair share of federal funding in a timely way.

 XP\     P6Q DHealth Care Stopping the Inappropriate Use of Physical Restraints    0
n the Mentally III in Institutional Settings: DThere have been a series of rep
orts of mentally ill children residing in psychiatric institutions dying after
being inappropriately restrained by facility staff.  In response, Senators Lieb
erman and Dodd have introduced legislation that prohibits hospitals participati
ng in the Medicare and Medicaid programs from using restraints in a manner that
 has the potential to harm patients. We have determined, however, that that we
 can act administratively to stop most of these abuses. We have requested that
 HCFA issue regulations prohibiting institutions participating in the Medicare
and Medicaid programs from imposing physical restraints except upon the written
 order of a physician and only when necessary to ensure the physical safety of
the patient or of other patients. Moving administratively in this area has the
support of Tipper Gore. However, she wants the Administration to release this
regulation before the June 7 White House Conference on Mental Health, so we don
't perpetuate the myth that all mentally ill individuals need to be physically
restrained.

DHealth Care Families USA to Release Report on The Decline in Medicaid Enrollm
ent: DOn May 13, Families USA is planning to release a study stating that welfa
re reform is primarily responsible for the recent decline in Medicaid enrollmen
t. The study states that 675,000 lowincome people became uninsured as a result
 of welfare reform, that children under age 19 made up the majority of people w
ho became uninsured as a result of welfare reform, and that the number of unins
ured people is likely to increase considerably as welfare reform is fully imple
mented. Although we have not seen the details, we think the study methodology
is problematic.  It basically compares peoples actual coverage with what would
have happened without welfare reform. Even using the most sophisticated micros
imulation model, it is extremely difficult to do this type of analysis. Moreove


r, we know that there have been larger, more complicated factors affecting heal
th insurance in the last few years.   The number of small firms with health insu
rance coverage has declined and the number of people who are poor and eligible
for Medicaid and the contributions that employers make for insurance has declin
ed making it hard for lowwage families, particularly those moving from welfare
 to work, to afford coverage. Regardless of our strong disagreement with both
the study methodology and Families US As presentation of the finding, it is like
ly that there will be a spate of negative press stories.   In any response to th
e study, we will reiterate your strong commitment to health coverage for this p
opulation, including your insistence on maintaining the Medicaid entitlement.
We will also emphasize that because of our efforts, states have more options th
an ever before to cover working families under Medicaid, including expanding Me
dicaid coverage under section 1931 to reach single and twoparent families who t
raditionally have earned too much to be eligible for Medicaid, allowing all sta
tes to provide Medicaid coverage to working, twoparent families who meet stateD
 Dincome eligibility requirements, and launching the Insure Kids Now campaign t
o identify and enroll eligible children in Medicaid and CHIP. XP\         P6Q

DTobacco Recoupment:D We are facing an uphill battle on tobacco recoupment in
the upcoming conference on the supplemental spending bill. Under the Senate ve
rsion of the Central America supplemental, states could keep all tobacco settle
ment funds without committing to spend any of them to prevent youth smoking, pr
omote public health, assist children, or protect tobacco farmers.     To date, few
 states are planning to devote funds to reducing youth smoking, the reason why
the lawsuits were brought in the first place. We believe that if we are to hav
e any hope of stripping the amendment out or amending it during the conference,
 we must express clearly our strong opposition to the tobacco provision.      If we
 are unable to remove the provision, we would recommend either: 1) allowing sta
tes to keep all the money with no strings for one to two years (FY 1999 and FY
2000), providing time for Congress to see whether states will fund tobacco prev
ention without a requirement and allowing the committees with jurisdiction over
 Medicaid to review the matter; or 2) ensuring each state has a basic antiyouth
 smoking program by requiring each state to spend funds equal to a certain perc
ent of their yearly settlement payments on such programs (a state could use tob
acco settlement funds or other revenues like state tobacco taxes which some st
ates currently use as the funding source).     We believe some governors would be
 willing to accept the second option if they are forced to compromise, but that
 the appropriators may prefer the first. However, the governors are extremely c
onfident that they will retain the original Hutchison provision intact.
DO
DDOImmigrationD 0 New Re·gulations:1l Over the next few weeks, the Department of
Justice (DOJ) is expected to promulgate three regulations concerning immigratio
n issues. The Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act of 1997 (N
ACARA) provided Nicaraguan and Cubans with a right to become lawful permanent r
esidence but did not provide similar benefits to Haitians and other Central Arne
ricans including Salvadorans and Guatemalans. In response to this inequity and
at the strong urging of the Administration, Congress enacted the Haitian Refuge
e Immigration Fairness Act of 1998 (HRIFA) to allow certain nationals of Haiti
to become lawful permanent residents.    On May 11,   DOJ will issue an interim ru
Ie to establish procedures to implement HRIFA. On May 20, DOJ plans to issue t
he final rule implementing the Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relie
f Act of 1997 (NACARA).   This final rule sought to address the inequities creat
ed by NACARA for Salvadorans and Guatemalans but DOJ was legally unable to addr
ess fully the inequities. As a result, we are preparing legislation that would
 provide parity to Salvadorans and Guatemalans.     Lastly, DOJ plans to issue a p
roposed rule to clarify that immigrants who receive Medicaid, Children Health I
nsurance Program (CHIP), and variety of other benefits will not face immigratio
n penalties. The Vice President is interested in announcing this proposed regu
lation later this month.
DO
-,
     DDDPolitical Reform Campaign Finance Reform:    DA group of moderate House Repub
     licans Wednesday extracted a commitment from Speaker Hastert to bring campaign
     finance reform legislation to the floor by the end of September. However, Hast
     ert's pledge may not hold off a split within the GOP over this contentious issu
     e. According to sources at the meeting, moderate Republicans made it clear to
     that they believe September is too late.   The discharge petition on the ShaysMe
     ehan bill has 191 Democratic signatures but no Republicans.

     DCommunity Empowerment Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC): :J235 Members of
      House of Representatives have now signed on as cosponsors of H.R. 175, the bil
     I to expand the LIHTC. This legislation, which mirrors your proposal, has achi
     eved wide bipartisan support. Of the 235 cosponsors, 96 are Republicans and 13
     9 are Democrats.   69% of the Members of the House Ways and Means committee are
     cosponsors of the bill. The companion bill in the Senate, Introduced by Senato
     rs Mack and Graham,'has 37 cosponsors. This includes 18 Republicans and 19 Dem
     ocrats.================== END ATTACHMENT    1 ==================


