RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]   )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1999 14:09:24.00

SUBJECT:   weekly report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00: 00: 00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D4]ARMS20055804R.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000003700000000000000001000003900000001000000FEFFFFFF000000003600
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion




                                            May 7, 1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                     Bruce Reed
                          Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:                  DPC Weekly Report

        Crime -- Federal Gun Prosecutions: In their response to our gun legislation, the NRA and
certain Republicans have countered that greater enforcement of existing firearms laws are needed
instead of new laws -- pointing to a decreased number of federal firearms prosecutions under this
Administration. While it is accurate that more lower level gun cases were prosecuted under the Bush
Administration's "Operation Triggerlock," the number offederal prosecutions of more serious gun
offenders (persons serving sentences of over 5 years) during this Administration is up by nearly 30
percent (from 1049 to 1345). In addition, better federal coordination with state and local law
enforcement has contributed to a 25 percent increase in criminals sent to prison for state and federal
weapons offenses since 1992 (from 20,681 to 25,186). Nonetheless, our last two budget requests
have called for additional resources to bolster our federal gun enforcement efforts, including funds to
add over 280 new ATF agents and more than 40 new federal prosecutors to help investigate, arrest,
and prosecute more gun criminals in the federal system.

        Education -- Achieve, Inc.: Achieve, Inc. -- a nonprofit group focused on education reform
-- announced that they will create a new challenging 8th grade math test in response to poor U.S.
student performance on the Third International Mathematics and Science Study. At least 10 states
have agreed to give the tests once they are developed: Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Massachusetts,
Michigan, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Vermont, Washington, and Wisconsin. The math
partnership, funded by the group, will give teachers training and lesson material to prepare students
for their test. Achieve also announced that they would hold a national summit September 30-
October 1. A statement was issued on your behalf applauding the group's effort to improve middle
school math and help students reach world class standards.

        Education -- Charter Schools Report: The Department of Education released the third
report in a four-year study on the progress ofthe charter school movement. The report found that the
number of charter schools grew by more than 50% in 1998 -- to about 1,100 schools in 34 states and
the District of Columbia, serving about 160,000 students. For the most part, charter schools are being
given flexibility to make independent decisions, but are being held accountable for results. They
tend to serve a diverse set of students, in relatively small schools, and are in great demand. The top
obstacle to charter schools continues to be lack of access to start-up funding, underscoring the
importance of the charter school start-up fund you created, and for which you are proposing a 30%
increase this year.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


        Education -- Charter School Regulation: The Department of Education issued a notice of
proposed rulemaking to ensure that new charter schools receive the federal funding for which they
are eligible within the first five months they are open. This regulation implements provisions ofthe
Charter School Expansion Act of 1998, a bipartisan bill that you signed into law last year. This
provision will help address the challenge cited by many charter schools, that their federal funding is
typically calculated on the basis of student enrollment the previous year -- data not available for a
school in its first year. This proposed regulation will also ensure that charter schools with expanding
enrollment receive the appropriate share of federal funding for additional students within five
months. Some state educational agencies may view this as administratively difficult, but the
proposed regulation is written to address some ofthese concerns, while fulfilling the intent ofthe law
by ensuring that students in charter schools get their fair share of federal funding in a timely way.

         Health Care -- Stopping the Inappropriate Use of Physical Restraints on the Mentally
III in Institutional Settings: There have been a series of reports of mentally ill children residing in
psychiatric institutions dying after being inappropriately restrained by facility staff. In response,
Senators Lieberman and Dodd have introduced legislation that prohibits hospitals participating in the
Medicare and Medicaid programs from using restraints in a manner that has the potential to harm
patients. We have determined, however, that that we can act administratively to stop most of these
abuses. We have requested that HCFA issue regulations prohibiting institutions participating in the
Medicare and Medicaid programs from imposing physical restraints except upon the written order of
a physician and only when necessary to ensure the physical safety ofthe patient or of other patients.
Moving administratively in this area has the support of Tipper Gore. However, she wants the
Administration to release this regulation before the June 7 White House Conference on Mental
Health, so we don't perpetuate the myth that all mentally ill individuals need to be physically
restrained.

         Health Care -- Families USA to Release Report on The Decline in Medicaid Enrollment:
On May 13, Families USA is planning to release a study stating that welfare reform is primarily
responsible for the recent decline in Medicaid enrollment. The study states that 675,000 low-income
people became uninsured as a result of welfare reform, that children under age 19 made up the
majority of people who became uninsured as a result of welfare reform, and that the number of
uninsured people is likely to increase considerably as welfare reform is fully implemented. Although
we have not seen the details, we think the study methodology is problematic. It basically compares
peoples' actual coverage with what would have happened without welfare reform. Even using the
most sophisticated micro-simulation model, it is extremely difficult to do this type of analysis.
Moreover, we know that there have been larger, more complicated factors affecting health insurance
in the last few years. The number of small firms with health insurance coverage has declined and the
number of people who are poor and eligible for Medicaid and the contributions that employers make
for insurance has declined -- making it hard for low-wage families, particularly those moving from
welfare to work, to afford coverage. Regardless of our strong disagreement with both the study
methodology and Families USA's presentation ofthe finding, it is likely that there will be a spate of
negative press stories. In any response to the study, we will reiterate your strong commitment to
health coverage for this population, including your insistence on maintaining the Medicaid
entitlement. We will also emphasize that because of our efforts, states have more options than ever
                                                                          Nex·l)wnp Conversion

before to cover working families under Medicaid, including expanding Medicaid coverage under
section 1931 to reach single and two-parent families who traditionally have earned too much to be
eligible for Medicaid, allowing all states to provide Medicaid coverage to working, two-parent
families who meet state income eligibility requirements, and launching the Insure Kids Now
campaign to identify and enroll eligible children in Medicaid and CHIP.

         Tobacco -- Recoupment: We are facing an uphill battle on tobacco recoupment in the
upcoming conference on the supplemental spending bill. Under the Senate version ofthe Central
America supplemental, states could keep all tobacco settlement funds without committing to spend
any of them to prevent youth smoking, promote public health, assist children, or protect tobacco
farmers. To date, few states are planning to devote funds to reducing youth smoking, the reason why
the lawsuits were brought in the first place. We believe that if we are to have any hope of stripping
the amendment out or amending it during the conference, we must express clearly our strong
opposition to the tobacco provision. Ifwe are unable to remove the provision, we would recommend
either: 1) allowing states to keep all the money with no strings for one to two years (FY 1999 and FY
2000), providing time for Congress to see whether states will fund tobacco prevention without a
requirement and allowing the committees with jurisdiction over Medicaid to review the matter; or 2)
ensuring each state has a basic anti-youth smoking program by requiring each state to spend funds
equal to a certain percent of their yearly settlement payments on such programs (a state could use
tobacco settlement funds or other revenues -- like state tobacco taxes which some states currently use
-- as the funding source). We believe some governors would be willing to accept the second option
if they are forced to compromise, but that the appropriators may prefer the first. However, the
governors are extremely confident that they will retain the original Hutchison provision intact.

        Immigration -- New Regulations: Over the next few weeks, the Department of lustice
(DOl) is expected to promulgate three regulations concerning immigration issues. The Nicaraguan
Adjustment and Central American Relief Act of 1997 (NACARA) provided Nicaraguan and Cubans
with a right to become lawful permanent residence but did not provide similar benefits to Haitians
and other Central Americans including Salvadorans and Guatemalans. In response to this inequity
and at the strong urging of the Administration, Congress enacted the Haitian Refugee Immigration
Fairness Act of 1998 (HRIFA) to allow certain nationals of Haiti to become lawful permanent
residents. On May 11, DOl will issue an interim rule to establish procedures to implement HRIF A.
 On May 20, DOl plans to issue the final rule implementing the Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central
American Relief Act of 1997 (NACARA). This final rule sought to address the inequities created by
NACARA for Salvadorans and Guatemalans but DOl was legally unable to address fully the
inequities. As a result, we are preparing legislation that would provide parity to Salvadorans and
Guatemalans. Lastly, DOl plans to issue a proposed rule to clarify that immigrants who receive
Medicaid, Children Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and variety of other benefits will not face
immigration penalties. The Vice President is interested in announcing this proposed regulation later
this month.

         Political Reform -- Campaign Finance Reform: A group of moderate House Republicans
Wednesday extracted a commitment from Speaker Hastert to bring campaign finance reform
legislation to the floor by the end of September. However, Hastert's pledge may not hold off a split
within the GOP over this contentious issue. According to sources at the meeting, moderate
                                                                             HIllt·Dump Conversion


    Republicans made it clear to that they believe September is too late. The discharge petition on the
    Shays-Meehan bill has 191 Democratic signatures but no Republicans.

           Community Empowerment - Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC): 235 Members
    of House of Representatives have now signed on as cosponsors ofH.R. 175, the bill to expand the
    LIHTC. This legislation, which mirrors your proposal, has achieved wide bipartisan support. Ofthe
    235 cosponsors, 96 are Republicans and 139 are Democrats. 69% of the Members of the House
    Ways and Means Committee are cosponsors of the bill. The companion bill in the Senate,
    Introduced by Senators Mack and Graham, has 37 cosponsors. This includes 18 Republicans and 19
    Democrats.


