RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Constance J. Bowers ( CN=Constance J. Bowers/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:14-MAY-1999 09:09:21.00

SUBJECT:   LRM CJB70 - - EDUCATION Fact Sheet on EDUCATION Draft Bill on Elementary a

TO: David J. Rivait    CN=David J. Rivait/OU=ONDCP/O=EOP [ ONDCP 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lisa J. Bruce ( CN=Lisa J. Bruce/OU=ONDCP/O=EOP [ ONDCP 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: tom.herlihy@ost.dot.gov@inet   ( tom.herlihy@ost.dot.gov@inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: James J. Jukes ( CN=James J. Jukes/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Pamula L. Simms ( CN=Pamula L. Simms/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Daniel J. Chenok ( CN=Daniel J. Chenok/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Robert G. Damus ( CN=Robert G. Damus/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Barbara A. Johnson ( CN=Barbara A. Johnson/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bethany Little ( CN=Bethany Little/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leslie S. Mustain ( CN=Leslie. S. Mustain/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Barry White   ( CN=Barry White/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: swallace ( swallace @ os.dhhs.gov @inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: ocl ( ocl @ ios.doi.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Constance J. Bowers ( CN=Constance J. Bowers/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB    1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Howard Dendurent   ( CN=Howard Dendurent/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )


READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Daniel I. Werfel   ( CN=Daniel I. Werfel/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB    1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rosalyn J. Rettman ( CN=Rosalyn J.   Rettman/OU~OMB/O=EOP@EOP    [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jeffrey L. Farrow ( CN=Jeffrey L. Farrow/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Wei-Min C. Wang ( CN=Wei-Min C. Wang/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Wayne Upshaw ( CN=Wayne Upshaw/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: lrm@os.dhhs.gov ( lrm@os.dhhs.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: dodlrs ( dodlrs @ osdgc.osd.mil @ inet   [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: justice.lrm ( justice.lrm @ usdoj.gov    @ inet   [UNKNOWN 1 )   (OA)
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Please provide comments on the attached Fact Sheet by 2:00 p.m.
Friday, May 14th. Since this bill will be transmitted shortly, this
deadline is firm.

 This material will also be placed on the following website shortly:

 http://tabula.ost.dot.gov/ed
Use the following identifying information:
username: LRM
password: text

 - ESEA Fact Sheet.doc

---------------------- Forwarded by Constance J. Bowers/OMB/EOP on
05/13/99 10:22 PM ---------------------------
LRM ID: CJB70
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

Thursday, May 13, 1999



LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

TO:                     Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution
below
FROM:           Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for
Legislative Reference
OMB CONTACT:    Constance J. Bowers
                                PHONE: (202)395-3803 FAX: (202)395-6148
SUBJECT:        EDUCATION Fact Sheet on EDUCATION Draft Bill on
Elementary and Secondary Education Act Reauthorization

DEADLINE:               2:00 p.m.  Friday, May 14, 1999
In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
program of the President.  Please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-AS-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

COMMENTS: This draft Fact Sheet will accompany the transmittal of the ESEA
draft bill. Since the bill will be transmitted shortly, this deadline is
firm.  This material will be placed on the following web site shortly.

http://tabula.ost.dot.gov/ed
Use the following identifying information:
username: LRM
password: text


DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:
61-JUSTICE - Jon P. Jennings - (202) 514-2141
59-INTERIOR - Jane Lyder - (202) 208-4371
29-DEFENSE - Samuel T. Brick Jr. - (703) 697-1305
89-0ffice of National Drug Control Policy - John Carnevale - (202) 395-6736
52-HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES - Sondra S. Wallace - (202) 690-7760

EOP:
Barbara Chow
Barry White
Wayne Upshaw
Leslie S. Mustain
Wei-Min C. Wang
Bruce N. Reed
Elena Kagan
Jonathan H. Schnur
Tanya E. Martin
Bethany Little
Neera Tanden
Broderick Johnson
Jeffrey L. Farrow
Robert G. Damus
Rosalyn J. Rettman
Daniel J. Chenok
Daniel I. Werfel
Pamula L. Simms
Howard Dendurent
Janet R. Forsgren
James J. Jukes


LRM ID: CJB70   SUBJECT:   EDUCATION Fact Sheet on EDUCATION Draft
Bill on Elementary and Secondary Education Act Reauthorization

RESPONSE TO
LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
MEMORANDUM

If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's line) to leave a
message with a legislative assistant.

You may also respond by:
         (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
         (2) sending us a memo or letter
Please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


TO:                  Constance J. Bowers Phone:   395-3803   Fax:  395-6148
                     Office of Management and Budget
                     Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant) :
395-7362

FROM:                                                         (Date)

                                                              (Name)

                                                              (Agency)

                                                              (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:

                    Concur

           ______ No Objection

           ______ No Comment

                    See proposed edits on pages

                    Other:
           ------
                    FAX RETURN of _____ pages, attached to this response sheet

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D18]ARMS26469774H.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000006D00000000000000001000006F00000001000000FEFFFFFF000000006COO
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF


FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

             Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999
                                           FACT SHEET

The President today sent to the Congress the "Educational Excellence for All Children Act of
1999," his proposal to reauthorize the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965
(ESEA). This legislation reaffirms the critical role of the Federal Government in working with
schools, school districts, and States to promote educational excellence for all children. Every
child, every parent, every grandparent, and every taxpayer deserves high quality public schools
in their communities.

More specifically, the proposal would build on the 1994 ESEA reauthorization, which
established as a core principle the idea that disadvantaged children should achieve to the same
challenging academic standards as their more fortunate peers, by helping States, communities,
school districts, and teachers get high standards into the classroom.

Background

In 1994, Congress and the Clinton Administration began the transformation of the Federal role in
education by passing the Improving America's Schools Act, which reauthorized the ESEA, and
the Goals 2000: Educate America Act, which supported State and local school reform efforts
based on challenging academic standards and assessments linked to those standards. Prior to
1994, our education system had for too long condoned low expectations and low standards for
poor children, and Federal programs often reflected those expectations. The 1994 laws
established the clear expectation that all children-including disadvantaged and minority
children--can and should reach high standards.

The two laws were built on the principle that students and schools rise to the expectations and
standards we set for them. Therefore, Federal resources were focused on helping States to
develop and implement challenging State standards for all children and to use those standards to
improve leaming through a coherent and aligned system of curricula and assessments.

The 1994 laws complemented and accelerated reforms already underway in many States and
school districts, while providing a catalyst for change in States that had not yet begun setting
high academic standards. In fact, in a recent study by the General Accounting Office, many
States reported that Goals 2000 has been a significant factor in promoting their education reform
efforts. Similarly, according to the National Assessment of Title I, about half of poor school
districts across the Nation report that Title I is "driving standards-based reform in the district as a
whole." With 48 States, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia having completed the
development of State content standards for all children, it is clear that higher standards are taking
hold nationwide.

More importantly, there is strong evidence that where States have implemented standards-based
reform over a period of time-together with accountability mechanisms linked to those
standards-students have benefited. For example, North Carolina and Texas made greater gains
in math and reading on the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) than any other


                                                   1
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

State between 1992 and 1996. Texas also showed significant progress in closing the
achievement gap between minority and white students. A recent study by RAND researchers
concluded that the most plausible explanation for these gains is the effort by both States to align
their systems of standards, curriculum, and assessments, and to hold schools accountable for the
improvement of all students.

In developing its 1999 ESEA reauthorization proposal, the Administration drew on the
experience of implementing the 1994 Act, efforts to measure program performance under the
Government Performance and Results Act, and a review of Congressionally mandated
evaluations of Title I and other programs. These efforts also were informed and enriched by
conversations with hundreds of teachers, principals, parents, community activists, and State and
local officials nationwide. Four themes emerged again and again during this process, and these
same themes are found throughout the Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:
(1) a firm commitment to high standards in every classroom, (2) improving teacher and principal
quality to ensure quality instruction for all children, (3) strengthening accountability for results
coupled with flexibility, and, (4) ensuring safe, healthy, disciplined, and drug-free school
environments where all children feel connected, motivated, and challenged to learn and where
parents are welcomed and involved.


High Standards in Every Classroom

The next step in education improvement is to take the high standards set at the Statehouse and
move them to schools and classrooms. The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999
renews the Federal commitment to high standards for all children and promotes this next stage of
standards-based reform by helping States, districts, schools, and teachers use challenging State
standards to guide classroom instruction and student assessment. The bill also supports high
standards by helping children to read well and by providing extra resources to help all students
succeed. The proposal would:

   Raise student performance by increasing academic standards. The proposal would support
    implementation of challenging standards and aligned assessments in every State. Title I of
    the ESEA would continue to focus on high expectations for all children, retaining the current
    statutory requirement that States establish content standards, student performance standards,
    and assessments aligned with the standards by the 2000-01 school year. Title II includes a
    specific authorization to help States and school districts align instruction, curriculum,
    assessments, and professional development to challenging academic standards.

   Implement continuous improvement and accountability based on challenging standards.
    States will hold all school districts accountable, and school districts will hold schools
    accountable, for continuous and substantial gains in overall student performance and in the
    performance of the lowest-performing students.

   Provide teachers with up-to-date training and support through a new Teaching to High
    Standards initiative. States have made great strides in developing standards, but only
    36 percent of teachers report that they feel very well prepared to teach to high standards. The



                                                 2
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

    Teaching to High Standards initiative would help schools and school districts give teachers
    the tools and training they need to help students reach high standards.

   Put useful technology into schools and classrooms to help teachers teach to high standards.
    The Technology for Education initiative would help teachers, particularly in high-poverty
    districts, use technology to better teach students to challenging State standards, for instance
    by using distance learning to get challenging subject matter into all classrooms.

   Strengthen the teaching of reading and reduce class size. The bill would continue the Class-
    Size Reduction initiative, which seeks to reduce class size in the first through third grades to
    a nationwide average of 18 students, to ensure that all students receive the individual
    attention they need to read well and independently by the end of the third grade. It would
    continue the Reading Excellence Act, which focuses on professional development, extended
    leaming time, and family literacy. Improvements in the Even Start family literacy program
    would increase the intensity and quality of family literacy services, while a new initiative in
    Title II would provide professional development for early childhood educators.

   Emphasize math and science education by earmarking the first $300 million of the Teaching
    to High Standards grants under Title II for professional development in those subjects. In
    particularly, these funds would help States and school districts take full advantage of new
    research and curricular materials aimed at improving the teaching and learning of         .
    mathematics. The bill also would reauthorize the Eisenhower National Clearinghouse for
    Mathematics and Science Education and the Eisenhower Regional Mathematics and Science
    Education Consortia.

   Improve foreign language instruction by setting a national goal that 25 percent of all public
    elementary schools offer high-quality, standards-based foreign language programs by the
    year 2005, rising to 50 percent by 2010. The bill would help States and districts meet this
    goal by supporting the development offoreign language standards and assessments,
    expanding the pool of elementary school foreign language teachers through improved
    recruitment and professional development efforts, and encouraging the use of educational
    technology in foreign language instruction.

   Focus on promoting equity, excellence, and public school choice options for all students.
    Recognizing that no one school or program can meet the unique needs of every student,
    public school choice provides students with the flexibility to choose among public schools
    and programs that differ with respect to educational settings, pedagogy, and academic
    emphasis. Title V will support programs that can enhance options for students and parents,
    including the Magnet Schools Program, the Public Charter Schools Program, and a new
    authority that will fund innovative options for public school choice.


Strengthen Teacher and Principal Quality

Qualified teachers are critical to improving student achievement, yet too many teachers are not
provided with on-going high-quality professional development to help them improve and build


                                                 3
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

on their teaching skills. In addition, many teachers leave the profession in their first three years,
and far too many teachers are teaching in a field in which they were not trained. In Title I
schools, an increasing number of unqualified teacher aides are providing direct instruction
without supervision by a certified teacher. To address these problems and help ensure that every
child in America has a talented and dedicated teacher who is prepared to help all children reach
high standards, the President's bill would:

   Help teachers teach to high standards. The Title II Teaching to High Standards
    initiative would support State and local efforts to: (1) help teachers and principals
    align curricula and assessments with challenging State and local content standards;
    (2) provide teachers with sustained and intensive high-quality professional
    development in core academic content areas; (3) support new teachers during their
    first three years in the classroom; and, (4) help ensure that all teachers are proficient
    in content knowledge and teaching skills. This new initiative takes the place of and
    incorporates the most successful elements of three current State grant programs:
    Goals 2000, Eisenhower Professional Development, and Title VI Innovative
    Education Program Strategies.

   Expand recruitment and retention efforts to help meet the need for 2.2 million new teachers
    over the next decade. The Teaching to High Standards initiative would support State and
    local efforts to recruit and retain high-quality teachers in high-need areas. These efforts
    would include, for example, the creation of a national job bank and encouraging portability
    oflicensure and other teaching credentials. The Teaching to High Standards initiative also
    would include a priority for school districts that support teachers in their first three years of
    teaching, a period when many good teachers leave the classroom. The Transition to
    Teaching initiative would expand the existing Troops to Teachers program to help non-
    military (as well as military) mid-career professionals become teachers, particularly in high-
    poverty school districts and high-need subject areas.

   Require certification for new teachers in Title I schools. Our proposal would require all new
    teachers in programs supported with Title I funds to be fully certified in the subject they
    teach. Two years after enactment of the bill, paraprofessionals with less than two years of
    college would be limited to non-instructional duties, while those with two or more years of
    college could provide instructional support and tutoring only under the supervision of a
    certified teacher. A new set-aside for professional development in Title I would help create a
    career-long professional learning environment for teachers in Title I schools.

   Strengthen the State teacher certification process. States would be required to ensure that,
    within four years, at least 95 percent of their teachers are either (1) fully certified,
    (2) working toward full certification through an alternative route, or (3) fully certified in
    another State and working toward meeting any State-specific requirements. States will also
    be required to ensure that at least 95 percent of secondary school teachers have academic
    training or demonstrated competence in the subject area in which they teach.

   Help future teachers use advanced technology to improve classroom instruction. The
    Technology Literacy Challenge Fund would support sustained and intensive high quality


                                                  4
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

    professional development in school districts to increase teacher capacity to create improved
    learning environments through the integration of technology into instruction. The Preparing
    Tomorrow's Teachers to Use Technology initiative would support consortia of public and
    private entities to train new teachers to use technology to prepare students to achieve to
    challenging State and local standards.

   Train early childhood educators to prepare disadvantaged students for school. This Title II
    proposal would provide grants to partnerships of professional development providers,
    community-based early childhood programs, and school districts to provide high-quality
    professional development to early childhood providers. The emphasis would be on research-
    based approaches to professional development in language acquisition, literacy, and reading
    development.

   Train classroom teachers to teach students with limited English proficiency (LEP). Because
    LEP students are found in more and more classrooms, the reauthorized Title VII Bilingual
    Education program would support teacher education programs that develop the ability of
    regular classroom teachers to teach LEP students.


Strengthen Accountability for Student Performance

The 1994 laws provided States and districts with increased flexibility to coordinate, modify, and
combine program funding and activities in exchange for greater accountability for improved
educational achievement. States, districts, and schools have begun to take advantage of this
increased flexibility, but too often without the necessary implementation of effective
accountability mechanisms. Early research suggests, however, that it is precisely those States
with the most comprehensive and effective accountability systems that are making the most
progress in increasing expectations and standards for students and schools and improving student
achievement.

The President's reauthorization proposal would retain the ESEA flexibility provisions included
in the 1994 law, including the expansion of schoolwide programs, consolidation of
administrative funds, and waiver procedures for regulatory and statutory provisions that stand in
the way of innovative reform efforts. The bill also would retain and update the provisions of the
Education Flexibility Act of 1999, which expanded eligibility for ED-Flex authority to all States.

To help ensure that this enhanced flexibility leads to improved student achievement, the
President is proposing several new accountability measures:
                                        .;



   Strengthen accountability for districts and schools. Our proposal would encourage States to
    develop one rigorous accountability system for all schools, including Title I schools, that
    requires them to make annual, substantial gains in student performance until every student is
    mastering challenging standards. States will be provided with flexibility by being able to use
    either a model outlined in the statute or an alternative that is at least as rigorous and effective.
    States without a single statewide accountability system would be required to develop one for
    its Title I schools.


                                                   5
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


    Increase accountability to parents and the public through school report cards. States and
     school districts receiving ESEA funds would be required to produce and distribute annual
     report cards for each school, school district, and State. The report cards would include
     information on student achievement, teacher qualifications, class size, school safety,
     attendance, and graduation rates. Where appropriate, student achievement data would be
     broken out by demographic groups to identify any gaps between disadvantaged students and
     their peers.

    End the traditional practices of social promotion and retention, after a four-year transition
     perioc! during which States would put in place educational practices targeting students who
     need additional help to meet State promotion standards. Such practices include early
     identification and intervention strategies, smaller classes with well-prepared teachers, high-
     quality professional development, greater family involvement, and extended learning time.
     Following the transition period, States and districts would require students to meet academic
     performance standards before being promoted at key transition points (e.g., fourth and eighth
     grade) or graduating from high school. State policies would use multiple measures,
     including an assessment valid for these purposes, to determine if a student has met the
     standards.

     Tum around low-performing schools. School districts would be required to identify publicly
      the lowest-performing schools that have not improved over two years and to implement
      interventions and provide technical assistance in these schools. Initial interventions could
    . include implementing extended learning opportunities, proven school reform models, and
      extensive teacher training. If there is no satisfactory improvement in student performance
      within three years, districts would be required to take corrective actions, such as
      reconstituting the school by making wholesale staff changes or closing the school down
      entirely and reopening it with new staff or as a charter school. States would be required to
      reserve 2.5 percent of their Title I LEA Grant funds (increasing to 3.5 percent in fiscal year
      2003) to support interventions in failing schools, and would provide 70 percent of these
      funds to school districts to help them tum around low-performing schools.


Support Safe, Healthy, Disciplined, and Drug-Free Learning Environments

A critical prerequisite for achieving quality and excellence in education is a safe, healthy,
disciplined, and drug-free learning environment that provides ample opportunities for each
student to make connections with caring adults that support learning and personal development.
Notwithstanding the recent tragedy at Columbine High School in Littleton, survey data show that
schools continue to be safe places in America's communities. However, similar survey data
show that drug and alcohol use remain disturbingly high in middle and high school, discipline
appears to be a growing problem, and more and more children are leading lifestyles involving
little or no physical exercise.




                                                  6
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

Parents playa critical role in creating and maintaining a healthy learning environment, and the
Educational Excellence for all Children Act of 1999 would retain and strengthen the emphasis on
parent involvement first established by the 1994 Act.

The following provisions would support State and local efforts to create safe, healthy,
disciplined, and drug-free learning environments in all of our schools:

   Help support and expand the connections between adults and students that are necessary for
    effective learning and healthy personal development through a Secondary School Reform
    initiative. This new initiative would provide resources to help transform 5,000 high schools
    into places where students receive individual attention, are motivated to learn, are provided
    with challenging courses, and are encouraged to develop and pursue long-term higher
    education and career goals. Participating schools would serve as models to guide reform in
    all secondary schools.

   Require every school district and school to have a sound discipline policy. Our proposal will
    require States to hold school districts and schools accountable for having discipline policies
    that focus on prevention, are consistent and fair, and are developed with the participation of
    the school community.

   Emphasize parent involvement policies at the school and district levels and continue
    implementation of parent-school compacts.

   Improve the Parent Information and Resource Centers by focusing on high-poverty
    communities, encouraging the use of research-based models for increasing parent
    involvement, and emphasizing early literacy development.

   Expanding access to information through technology by supporting community technology
    centers that make online education and training resources available to parents and other
    community members in high-poverty areas.

   Strengthen the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act by concentrating funds on
    districts which have significant need for drug- and violence-prevention and which are
    developing and implementing research-based prevention programs of proven effectiveness.

   Create a new School Emergency Response to Violence program (Project SERV) that would
    provide rapid assistance to school districts that have experienced violence or other trauma
    that disrupts the learning environment.

   Modify the Gun-Free Schools Act to require an assessment of any student who brings a gun
    to school to determine if the student poses an imminent threat of harm and, in the case of
    students who are suspended or expelled from school, provide for appropriate supervision,
    counseling, and educational services.

   Promote physical fitness and lifelong healthy habits through demonstration projects.
    Exemplary physical education programs can promote life-long healthy habits, provide


                                                7



                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

     opportunities for students to connect to school, and become an important component of after-
     school programs.




                                                8


