RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice    ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:14-MAY-1999 15:38:14.00

SUBJECT:   California making progress to statewide child support system

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP on 05/14/99
03:39 PM ---------------------------




Andrea Kane
05/14/99 03:22:20 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      J. Eric Gould/OPD/EOP, Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP,   Eugenia
Chough/OPD/EOP, Michele Ahern/OMB/EOP
cc:
Subject:         CA child support

In case you haven't seen this yet (it's in today's HHS clips)

Copyright 1999 Times Mirror Company
Los Angeles Times May 14, 1999, Friday

SENATE MOVES TO END D.A.S' ROLE IN CHILD SUPPORT     BYLINE: GREG KRIKORIAN
and NICHOLAS RICCARDI, TIMES STAFF WRITERS

   In a stunning bipartisan rebuke, the state Senate on Thursday
overwhelmingly approved a bill to strip California's district attorneys of
their responsibility for collecting child support.

   The bill by   president Pro Tern John Burton and Sen. Adam Schiff
(D-Burbank) to   create a new statewide network of child support offices
passed 29 to 1   after an emotional speech on the Senate floor in which
Burton accused   district attorneys of scuttling past reforms.

   Calling the current system "a disgrace," Burton argued that if
lawmakers treated district attorneys as if they were "a county coroner,
tax collector or a county dogcatcher, we would take their responsibilities
away from them in a heartbeat."

   "As crazy as it sounds," Burton said later, "right now district
attorneys are getting extra money for not accomplishing what they're
supposed to in collecting child support."

   Though it may have the toughest laws in the nation, California is
(.        ,.

     considered to have one of the worst child support systems, with as much as
     $ 8 billion owed to single-parent families. And with 3 million children,
     most of them on welfare, relying on the program, it affects more children
     than any state program but public schools.

        Critics say a key problem is that district attorneys collect child
     support at the county level, creating a fragmented network in which it can
     take months to get money from a debtor parent in one county to a family in
     another.

        But prosecutors, who argue that collections are steadily improving and
     that they should keep the mammoth program--and the millions of dollars in
     federal grants that come with it--vowed to fight on to retain
     jurisdiction.

        "It is important to bear in mind that the process is not over," said
     Larry Brown, executive director of the California District Attorneys Assn.

        A spokesman for Los Angeles County Dist. Atty. Gil Garcetti, whose
     office runs the state's largest and, by most standards, worst child
     support program, said Garcetti believes prosecutors "can do this job
     better than anyone else."

        Jim Provenza, a lobbyist for the district attorney, added, "But if the
     state wants to set up a separate county agency, Garcetti will not stand in
     the way."

        As a parallel Assembly bill steamed toward a floor vote, the district
     attorneys association this week took what it acknowledged was an
     unprecedented step and hired former Assemblyman Phil Isenberg as lobbyist.
     Isenberg, who will be paid $ 8,000 a month plus expenses, is close to Gov.
     Gray Davis, who has not taken a formal position on the child support
     bills.

        Davis' office did not return a call for comment Thursday, but
     Democratic leaders say they believe the governor recognizes the problems
     in the system. Yet some advocates remain wary of the district attorneys'
     political clout.

        "The real work is just beginning," said Leora Gershenzon of the
     National Center for Youth Law. "The closer we get, the harder the fight is
     going to be."

        But Schiff, the coauthor of the Senate bill, said he believes momentum
     is on the side of reform.

         "I don't underestimate the influence the D.A.s have with the
     Legislature, but by the same token, I don't underestimate the profound
     dissatisfaction of the public," Schiff said. "I frankly think those voices
     are a whole lot louder than the district attorneys, and those are the
     voices I am listening to and the ones, I believe, the governor will listen
     to. 11

        Added Nora O'Brien of the Assn. of Children for the Enforcement of
     Support: "There's more families owed support than there are D.A.s."

       Low Rate of Collections

        The influential California District Attorneys Assn. for years has
     killed efforts to remove child support from prosecutors' offices. But
     ,-
after a Times report last year showed how Los Angeles' program was both
the state's largest and its worst, failing to collect money nine times out
of 10 and annually billing thousands of men erroneously, legislators
pledged wide reform.

   Those efforts have leapt onto the fast track in Sacramento, as
lawmakers have tried to outmaneuver district attorneys and restructure the
program to lay the foundation for the state's third stab at building a
statewide child support computer.

   Two previous efforts to build the federally mandated system failed,
with some critics blaming prosecutors for refusing to unify behind a
single design. Federal penalties that began accruing this year could reach
$ 4.7 billion, and legislators argue that building a unified computer
first requires an overhaul of the state's fragmented child support
network.

   Burton has been pushing hard for his bill, killing an alternative
proposal to keep the program with district attorneys and moving his
proposal to the floor Thursday morning with surprising speed.


   An Assembly bill by Assemblywoman Sheila Kuehl (D-Santa Monica) that
would also strip child support from prosecutors cleared its final
committee Wednesday and backers are optimistic·that it will pass the lower
house next week.

   "The bad news for the district attorneys of California is that there is
absolutely no support for them keeping the program, except from
themselves," Kuehl said.

   She added that she believed prosecutors are trying to make an
unworkable system work. "It's not just a critique of Gil" Garcetti, she
said.

   Assembly Speaker Antonio Villaraigosa (D-Los Angeles), who is
supporting Kuehl's bill, said Thursday that he believes the differences
between the Assembly and Senate bills can be ironed out.

   Both bills call for the creation of a state department to oversee child
support, and for offices to be established in each county, though it has
not been finalized whether those offices would be run by the state or the
counties. District attorneys would still prosecute debtor parents who fail
to pay support--now a last-ditch collection strategy.

   A blizzard of other child support measures, which would do everything
from creating a way to appeal a child support billing to making it easier
for erroneously billed parents to clear their cases, are also moving
through the Legislature. But the restructuring bills have generated the
most attention.

   On the Senate floor, Burton called the district attorneys' performance
in collecting child support "embarrassing and a disgrace," claiming that
"they get money for not accomplishing anything."

   He was joined by a parade of lawmakers from both parties who heaped
criticism on the state's child support program. Although prosecutors have
been lobbying aggressively to kill the bill, no speaker defended their
performance.
     N




   Some even specified their complaints. "Los Angeles County is the
biggest disaster," state Sen. Cathie Wright (R-Simi Valley) said.

   Ten senators either abstained or skipped the vote, and the only "no"
vote was cast by Sen. William Morrow (R-Oceanside), who said he feared the
bill could worsen the child support problem by creating a new bureaucracy.

   Soon after becoming one of eight Republicans to vote for the bill, GOP
floor leader Sen. Ross Johnson (R-Irvine) said that child support is a
bipartisan issue.

   "I support the district attorneys in a great many areas, but I think
there's a sense of frustration," Johnson said. "It's not a Democratic or
Republican issue."

   Times staff writer Carl Ingram in Sacramento contributed to this story.


