         RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

         CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO I )

         CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-MAY-1999 17:06:21.00

         SUBJECT:   Complete Weekly Report 5/14

         TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TEXT:
         ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
         ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

         TEXT:
         WPC-
         2B8JDZlxTimes New Roman  (TT)Arial  (TT)Times New Roman  (TT)XC\         P6QJ2PQ"C\
         6Q2<KLphoenix XP\        P6Q                         May 15, 1999
                EOPEOP25llwheading 2heading 2C9 XX2PQ DD XP\      P6Q Default Paragraph FoDe
         fault Paragraph Font

         footnote reference footnote reference

         Document MapDocument MapS. XX2PQ XP\     P6Q 2g%IStyleOStyleOS. XX2PQ XP\           P6Q
         ody Text 2Body Text 2$
         DDfooterfooterX'        hp x (# (# (# X'        hp x (#page numberpage number

          1!2x' xdd footerX'    hp x (# (# page number"page number"X'     hp x (# (#
         footer (# '    hp x (#_
         StyleO XX2PQ XP\        P6Q
         StyleO

         StyleO XX2PQ XP\         P6Q May 14, 1999
         StyleO
         DOMEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

         FROM:     Bruce Reed
         DDX'     hp x (#'        hp x (#    Elena Kagan
         DO'      hp x (#'        hp x (#
         SUBJECT:      DPC Weekly Report

         DDDCrime Juvenile Crime/Guns:D As part of its consideration of juvenile crime
          legislation, the Senate voted on a number gunrelated amendments:

                 hp x (#'        hp x (#(1) Gun shows:  The Senate narrowly passed two amendm
         ling with gun shows this week. After voting to table the Lautenberg amendment
         to require background checks at all gun shows (5147), the Senate passed a Craig
          amendment establishing a system of voluntary background checks for unlicensed
         sellers at gun shows. After considerable criticism, Republicans tried to stren
         gthen their gun shows amendment the next day by making background checks mandat
         ory for some gun sales at gun shows. However, the Republicans' revised amendme
         nt would remains problematic. Here is why:

                 hp x (#'        hp x (#(a) It continue to exempt some gun sellers or a new
          "special licensees" created by the amendment from mandatory background checks


         (b) It would roll back current law to exempt pawnshops from conducting backgrou
         nd checks on redeemed firearms.  It is worth noting that person who redeem fire
/.


     arms at pawnshops are more than 3 times as likely to be a prohibited purchaser
     under law.

     (c) It would undermine federal law enforcement by not requiring a new class of
     persons allowed to conduct background checks or "special registrants" to assi
     st law enforcement in tracing firearms, and by not allowing federal law enforce
     ment to require gun show sellers to certify that they are in compliance with st
     ate and local gun laws.

     (d) It would weaken the Brady Law by requiring background checks at gun shows t
     o take place within a 24hour period (not a business day). Under the Brady Law,
      the FBI has up to 3 business days if necessary to clarify arrest records, and
     it requires additional time in about 20 to 30 percent of the background checks.
      Thus, a background check conducted Saturday morning at a gun show would have t
     o be completed by Sunday morning, even though the state court officer where ma
     ny criminal records are kept would be closed.

             hp x (#'        hp x (#Despite these problems, the Republican gun shows fix
     y a 4847 vote (with 4 Democrats not voting).  This amendment also included $50
     million for enhanced federal firearms prosecutions, increased penalties for cri
     minals who use firearms, a watered down version of juvenile Brady, and an expan
     sion of the Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative.

     (2) Assault weapons: The Senate passed versions of two proposals included in t
     he Administration's gun legislation. The Senate passed an Ashcroft amendment t
     o bar juvenile possession of assault rifles and large capacity ammunition clips
        Unlike the Administration's proposal, however, the Ashcroft ban contains num
     erous exemptions that track those for handguns in the Youth Handgun Safety Act
     (e.g., hunting, ranching, etc.), and it only bans possession through age 18. T
     he Administration's. bill would have banned assault weapons and clips in every i
     nstance and for all persons under the age of 21.   The Senate also passed the Fe
     instein amendment to bar the importation of all large capacity ammunition magaz
     ines.

     (3) Internet sales:   The Senate voted down a Schumer amendment to require backg
     round checks for firearms sold on the Internet.

     Body Text 200' hp x (#'          hp x (#Although the Senate is expected to resume con
     eration of the juvenile crime bill and other gun amendments next week, the bill
      may be taken off the floor if Republicans and Democrats do not reach any agree
     ment on how to limit the number of outstanding amendments.
     "Body Text 2"
     OOOCrime 1998 FBI Crime DataO:    On Sunday, the FBI will release the preliminar
     y 1998 Uniform Crime Report, which shows that overall crime fell by 7 percent f
     rom 1997. Between 1997 and 1998, both violent and property crime decreased by
     7 percent. Violent crime: murder dropped by 8 percent, rape and assault fell
     by 5 percent each, and robbery fell by 11 percent. Property crime:    larceny the
     ft fell 6 percent, burglary and arson down 7 percent each, and motor vehicle th
     eft declined by 10 percent. Crime decreased in all regions, with the West repo
     rting the largest drops in violent crime (9 percent) and the Midwest reporting
     the smallest decreases (4 percent). Serious crime fell in cities of all sizes,
      with large cities (populations from 250,000999,999) and suburban cities (50,00
     o to 99,999) reporting the largest decreases (8 percent each) and smaller citie
     s with populations of less than 10,000 reporting the smallest decreases (4 perc
     ent) .
     00
     StyleD XX2PQ 00 XP\       P6Q OTobacco Recoupment:O As you know, we faced a diffic
     ult battle on tobacco recoupment during the conference on the supplemental spen
     ding bill. Regardless of our clear opposition to this proposal negotiators acc
     epted a provision in the Senate bill to let states keep all tobacco settlement
/.



     funds without any commitment to spend funds to reduce youth smoking.   Despite 0
     ur requests, none of our allies offered a simple alternative along the lines of
      a proposal we were discussing with Democratic governors ensuring each state h
     as a basic antiyouth smoking program by requiring each state to spend funds equ
     al to a certain percent of their yearly settlement payments on such programs.
     Senator Specter offered an all or nothing motion to drop the Senate provision a
     ltogether; which failed.  Later, Representative Obey offered a complicated amen
     dment requiring that 40 percent of the settlement be spent on health care and t
     obacco prevention, which also failed.  We do, however, believe that the major p
     ublic health groups know how hard we fought to get this provision out.   If we a
     re unsuccessful in removing this provision from the final bill, we believe that
      in any bill signing statement you may want to either 1) voice your continued 0
     pposition to this provision and pledge to keep working for federal legislation
     that ensures every state funds a program to prevent youth smoking; or 2) focus
     attention on the states, urging them to use their new flexibility to ensure a n
     ew generation does not take up smoking, perhaps vowing to seek legislation in t
     he future if states fail to act.   XP\   P6Q We may also want to take the opport
     unity to urge congress to appropriate $20 million in your FY 2000 budget for a
     federal tobacco lawsuit. XP\     P6Q

     StyleOOOOTobacco International:O Secretary Shalala is participating in a meet
     ing of the World Health Assembly in Geneva next week, pledging U.S. support for
      the World Health Organizations plans to develop a framework convention on toba
     cco control. This convention would establish a multilateral framework to reduc
     e tobacco use worldwide. The framework is expected to take several years to de
     velop and ratify and may be followed by negotiated protocols which would addres
     s specific obligations. The State Department has authorized HHS to lead the ne
     gotiating team for the framework convention which would include representatives
      from the State Department and other interested agencies.  We will operate an i
     nteragency process to coordinate these efforts.  You may recall that during las
     t years consideration of the McCain legislation, some members of Congress wante
     d to include provisions which would have imposed U.S. laws overseas, which the
     State Department and USTR strongly opposed and which was removed from the bill
     at our urging.

     00 XP\   P6Q OHealth Care Fraud and Abuse Update in Florida: DOn Monday, Senat
     or Graham and Florida State Attorney General Bob Butterworth will join represen
     tatives of HHS and DOJ to announce $2 million for a new mUltiagency enforcement
      facility in the state of Florida.  The facility will be used to house multidis
     ciplinary case teams to jointly review the reams of records necessary to identi
     fy and root out fraud, waste, and abuse in the Medicare program.  Notably, for
     the first time ever, the actuaries have reported a decrease in Medicare spendin
     g as a result of our aggressive fraud and abuse prevention activities.  Not onl
     y have enforcement activities achieved awards and settlements for the program,
     bur our practices are apparently affecting provider behavior in the long run.
     Since 1993, the Administrations multidisciplinary efforts have saved taxpayers
     more than $38 billion, with health care fraud convictions increasing by more th
     an 240 percent, and clearly demonstrates that collaboration between law enforce
     ment officials and health care providers is essential to effective fraud fighti
     ng efforts.

     OHealth Care Innovative Nutrition/Lifestyles Demonstration Approved:    JWe have
      informed Dean Ornish that the Health Care Financing Administration, pending fi
     nal and expected OMB clearance, will be setting up a Medicare demonstration for
      his nutrition/lifestyle program.  It will be designed exclusively for benefici
     aries who have heart disease, which government researchers and the advocates of
      this program believe would best measure the cost effectiveness of this program
     . The only remaining issue is determining appropriate reimbursement rates for t
     he program. However, this is not expected to be a major hurdle and the demo sh
     ould be up and running by late summer.



OHealth Care Closing Loopholes in the KennedyKassenbaum Health Insurance Porta
bility and Accountability Act (HIPAA): OWe continue to receive reports that in
dividuals moving from the group to the individual insurance market who are elig
ible for the HIPAA protections are subject to significant increases in premiums
  sometimes up to 400 percent of the standard rate. Although this is currently
 permissible under the statute, it clearly causes significant access problems a
nd certainly undermines the spirit of the law.  In order to address this issue,
 we have been working with HHS, DOL, and Treasury to develop a legislative prop
osal to limit the premium rates charged to HIPAA eligibles to 150 percent of th
e standard rate of insurance.  Although the insurance industry would no doubt 0
ppose this measure, charging that it will lead to significant premium increases
, our actuaries estimate that the increase in premiums will be no more than thr
ee to five percent. This legislation would also include provisions to ensure t
hat workers losing their insurance are informed of their rights under HIPAA in
enough time to insure that they have the opportunity to enroll in insurance bef
ore they lose their eligibility for the HIPAA protections. We are also contemp
lating administrative actions designed to improve consumers understanding of th
eir rights under HIPAA and how best to access insurance.  We have been informed
 that GAO is likely to be releasing a report on HIPAA implementation and enforc
ement issues in early June, which validates the need for additional efforts to
educate beneficiaries about their rights under HIPAA.  If you are interested in
 pursuing these options, which are expected to have strong consumer support, fi
11 a clear hole in.the HIPAA legislation, and receive widespread attention, we
may want to contemplate holding an event on this legislation in early June.

OHealth Care Market Oriented Approaches to Medicare are being Rejected by Insu
rers and Providers:O In 1997, the Administration successfully secured demonstr
ation authority to test market oriented approaches to purchase health care in t
he Medicare program.  Specifically, we were given the authority to engage in co
mpetitive bidding for managed care, durable medical equipment, and other limite
d services provided by the program.   Having received this authority, we worked
with HHS to set up demonstrations in Florida, Arizona, and Kansas.    Ironically,
 the same industry representatives and members of Congress who frequently criti
que the program as being inefficient strongly oppose this demonstration authori
ty.  In every case, providers have balked and done everything possible to stop
these demonstrations, either by lobbying Congress to urge HCFA to delay or with
draw their plans, or through appealing to the courts to block our efforts.    Hea
Ith policy analysts have largely validated our efforts.   On Friday, the Wall St
reet Journal quoted Ira Loss, a leading equities researcher, as saying that Med
icare providers are interested in the free market only if it means that the go
vernment is getting away from bothering them. But when it comes to the governm
ent actually forcing them to compete for business, they are unhappy about it. T
his development points to the challenge we will have to enacting more nationall
y oriented competitive purchasing mechanisms as we unveil our Medicare reform p
roposal.
DO XP\   P6Q
DO XP\   P6Q DChildren and Families Foster Care:O On Thursday, Representatives
 Nancy Johnson (RCT) and Ben Cardin (DMD) introduced legislation to provide enh
anced support to the approximately 20,000 young people who age out of the fost
er care system each year. Like your budget request, the Foster Care Independen
ce Act of 1999 includes significant new investments to provide these young peop
Ie with access to the health care, skills, and education they need to prepare f
or life on their own.  You issued a statement lauding the bill as an important
step forward.  Rep. Tom Delay (RTX) , a foster parent, has pledged to ensure spe
edy passage of the legislation, which is expected to clear the House Ways and M
eans Committee by the end of May.   Senators Chafee and Rockefeller are expected
 to champion this issue in the Senate, and we remain optimistic that we will ac
hieve bipartisan legislation for you to sign this year. XP\       P6Q
DO
(0




     OImmigrationO ONew Regulations: 0 Over the next few weeks, the Department of J
     ustice (DOJ) is expected to promulgate three regulations concerning immigration
      issues.  The Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act of 1997 (NA
     CARA) provided Nicaraguan and Cubans with a right to become lawful permanent re
     sidence but did not provide similar benefits to Haitians and other Central Amer
     icans including Salvadorans and Guatemalans.   In response to this inequity and
      at the strong urging of the Administration, Congress enacted the Haitian Refug
     ee Immigration Fairness Act of 1998 (HRIFA) to allow certain nationals of Haiti
      to become lawful permanent residents. On May 11, DOJ issued an interim rule
     to establish procedures to implement HRIFA. On May 20, DOJ plans to issue the
     final rule implementing NACARA. This final rule sought to address the inequiti
     es created by NACARA for Salvadorans and Guatemalans but DOJ was legally unable
      to address fully the inequities in this regulation. Consistent with your stat
     ements during your recent trip to Central America, we are preparing legislation
      that would address these inequities. Lastly, DOJ plans to issue a proposed ru
     Ie to clarify that immigrants who receive Medicaid, Children Health Insurance P
     rogram (CHIP), and a variety of other benefits will not face immigration penalt
     ies. The Vice President is interested in announcing this proposed regulation I
     ater this month.

     StyleO XX2PQ DO XP\      P6Q OWelfare Transportation Grants:O Last week the Vice
     President released the first round of grants funded under your Access to Jobs i
     nitiative which was enacted as part of last years transportation bill. A total
      of $71 million will go to 179 urban, suburban and rural communities in 42 stat
     es to help welfare recipients and other lowincome workers get to where the jobs
      are. The Indianapolis Public Transit agency received a $500,00 grant on behal
     f of a consortium of transportation providers including the organization that e
     mployed Elaine Kinslow, the welfare to work success story you praised in last y
     ears State of the Union.

     OWelfare Linking WelfaretoWork and CensusO 02000: 0 On Friday, the Department
     of Labor announced the availability of $20 million in WelfaretoWork funds for a
      competitive project to employ welfare recipients as Census 2000 enumerators an
     d ~o connect these individuals with permanent jobs once the Census work ends.
     This collaborative effort between Labor and Commerce builds on the Census Burea
     us success in hiring over 4,700 welfare recipients. This initiative will provi
     de approximately 10,000 welfare recipients with wellpaying, flexible temporary
     employment near their homes, while helping to improve the Census count in low-i
     ncome neighborhoods.  We plan to explore announcement opportunities when a gran
     tee is selected this summer.

     OWelfare Guide for Using TANF Funds: 0 HHS has released a helpful guide Helpi
     ng Families Achieve SelfSufficiency: A Guide on Funding Services for Children a
     nd Families Through the TANF Program to illustrate how states may use TANF fun
     ds to support working families and address the needs of families with the great
     est challenges. We believe that the flexibility provided in the TANF rule you
     announced on April 10th and the additional examples in this guidance will inspi
     re states and communities to use TANF funds in creative and constructive ways t
     o promote work and responsibility.
     StyleOOO
     OCommunity Empowerment Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC): 0279 Members of
     House of Representatives have now signed on as cosponsors of H.R. 175, the bill
      to expand the LIHTC.  This legislation, which mirrors your proposal, has achie
     ved wide bipartisan support. The companion bill in the Senate, introduced by S
     enators Mack and Graham, has 45 cosponsors. We expect both bills will have str
     onger bipartisan support, in terms of cosponsors, than any other tax issue.  Th
     e Senate and House are expected to take up tax legislati~n in July.  We are wor
     king to insure that this bill is included in any final package, including the p
     ossibility of getting the proposal included in the Chairmans mark in the Senate
        The biggest roadblock remains Chairman Archer of the House Ways and Means Co


mmittee, who tried to sunset the LIHTC in 1995 and last year kept the LIHTC out
 of the Ways and Means tax bill. However, his opposition may not be as great a
s in past years.;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; END ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;


