RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Constance J. Bowers ( CN=Constance J. Bowers/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:14-MAY-1999 18:44:42.00

SUBJECT:   Friday p.m. version of ESEA revised transmittal Letter

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:

I am pleased to transmit today for your immediate consideration the 0&
Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999,08 the AdministrationD,s
proposal for reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act
of 1965 (ESEA) and other elementary and secondary education programs.

My proposal builds on the positive trends achieved under current law.   The
Improving America=s Schools Act of 1994, which reauthorized the ESEA five
years ago, and the Goals 2000: Educate America Act gave States and school
districts a framework for integrating Federal resources in support of
State and local reforms based on high academic standards.   In response, 48
States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have adopted State-level
standards.   Recent results of the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP) show improved performance for the economically
disadvantaged and other at-risk students who are the primary focus of ESEA
programs. NAEP reading scores for nine-year olds in high-poverty schools
have improved significantly since 1992, while mathematics achievement has
also increased nationally. Students in high-poverty schools and the
lowest-performing studentsO*the specific target populations for the ESEA
Title I programO*have registered gains in both reading and math
achievement.

I am encouraged by these positive trends, but educational results for many
children remain far below what they should be. My proposal to reauthorize
the ESEA is based on four crosscutting themes reflecting both lessons from
research and the experience of implementing the 1994 Act.

First, we would continue to focus on high academic standards for all
children. The underlying purpose of every program within the ESEA is to
help all children reach challenging State and local academic standards.
States have largely completed the first stage of standards-based reform by
developing content standards for all children.   My bill would support the
next stage of reform by helping States, districts, schools, and teachers
use these standards to guide classroom instruction and assessment.

        My proposal for reauthorizing Title I, for example, would require
States to hold districts and schools accountable for student performance
against State standards, including helping the lowest-performing students
continually improve. The bill also would continue to target Federal
elementary and secondary education resources on those students furthest
from meeting State and local standards, with a particular emphasis on
narrowing the gap in achievement between disadvantaged students and their
more fortunate peers.  In this regard, my proposal would also phase-in
equal treatment of Puerto Rico in ESEA funding formulas, so that poor
children in Puerto Rico are treated the same as those in the rest of the
country for the purpose of formula allocations.


Second, my proposal responds to research showing that while qualified
teachers are critical to improving student achievement, far too many
teachers are not prepared to teach to high standards. Teacher quality is
a particular problem in high-poverty schools, and the problem is often
exacerbated by the use of paraprofessionals in instructional roles.

My bill addresses teacher quality by holding States accountable for
stronger enforcement of their own certification and licensure
requirements, while at the same time providing substantial support for
State and local professional development efforts.  The Teaching to High
Standards initiative in Title II would help move challenging educational
standards into every classroom by providing teachers with sustained and
intensive high-quality professional development in core academic subjects,
supporting new teachers during their first three years in the classroom,
and ensuring that all teachers are proficient in relevant content
knowledge and teaching skills.

The Technology for Education initiative under Title III would expand the
availability of educational technology as a tool to help teachers
implement high standards in the classroom, particularly in high-poverty
schools. The bill also would extend, over the next seven years, the
Class-Size Reduction initiative, which aims to reduce class sizes in the
early grades by helping districts to hire and train 100,000 teachers.   And
the Title VII Bilingual Education proposal would help ensure that all
teachers are well trained to teach limited English proficient students,
who are found in more and more classrooms with each passing
year.

        Third, my bill would increase support for safe, healthy,
disciplined, and drug-free learning environments for all students.   The
recent tragedy at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, reminds us
that we must be ever vigilan't against the risks of violence and other
dangerous behaviors in our schools.   Our reauthorization bill includes
several measures to help mitigate these risks.

        We would strengthen the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities
Act by concentrating funds on districts with the greatest need for drug-
and violence-prevention programs, and by emphasizing the use of
research-based programs of proven effectiveness.  Moreover, this proposal
would require schools to refer students who bring weapons to schools to a
mental health professional for assessment and require counseling for those
who pose an imminent threat to themselves or others, allow funding for
programs that educate students about the risks associated with guns,
expand character education programs, and promote alternative schools and
second chance programs. A new School Emergency Response to Violence
program would provide rapid assistance to school districts that have
experienced violence or other trauma that disrupts the learning
environment.

My High School Reform initiative would support innovative reforms to
improve student achievement in high schools, such as expanding the
connections between adults and students that are necessary for effective
learning and healthy personal development.  This new initiative would
provide resources to help transform 5,000 high schools into places where
students receive individual attention, are motivated to learn, are
provided with challenging courses, and are encouraged to develop and
pursue long-term educational and career goals.

Fourth, in response to clear evidence that standards-based reforms work
best when States have strong accountability systems in place, my proposal


would encourage each State to establish a single, rigorous accountability
system for all schools. The bill also would require States to end social
promotion and traditional retention practices, to phase out the use of
teachers with emergency certificates and the practice of assigning
teachers D&out-of-field,D8 and to implement sound discipline policies in
every school.  Finally, the bill would give parents an important new
accountability tool by requiring State, district, and school-level report
cards that will help them evaluate the quality of the schools their
children attend.

        The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 provides a
solid foundationD*based on high standards for all students, high-quality
professional development for teachers, safe and disciplined learning
environments, and accountability to parents and taxpayersD*for raising
student achievement and narrowing the achievement gap between
disadvantaged students and their more advantaged peers. More importantly,
it will help prepare all of our children, and thus the Nation, for the
challenges of the 21st century.  I urge the Congress to take prompt and
favorable action on this proposal.



THE WHITE HOUSE.
.. -
(         ../


