RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-MAY-1999 18:46:39.00

SUBJECT:   kasich

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN;Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Note that we already opposed this ....

                 Kasich Wants to End Racial Profiling

                     By John Mccarthy
                     Associated Press Writer
                     Monday, May 17, 1999; 6:25 p.m. EDT

                     COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP)   -- Rep. John Kasich brought his
campaign for the
                     Republican presidential nomination home today, telling a
civil rights group
                     that police should never detain peop+e simply because of
their race.

                     Kasich, chairman of the House Budget Committee, said the
practice known
                     as "racial profiling"    should stop.

                     " I think it is an insidious action that has gone on in
too many parts of
                  America, " Kasich said at a news conference before
delivering a speech at
                  the Columbus Urban League's annual awards luncheon.
"Those kinds of
                  actions that divide this country have to be ended. ' ,

                     The Justice Department has been investigating complaints
by blacks and
                     Hispanics that they are more likely to be targeted by
police and customs
                     inspectors for traffic stops and searches.

                  New Jersey Gov. Christine Todd Whitman, also a
Republican, recently
                  acknowledged that state troopers treated blacks and
Hispanics more
                  aggressively than whites during traffic stops on the New
Jersey Turnpike.
                  Similar accusations have been made in Florida, Maryland,
Connecticut and
                  elsewhere along the Interstate 95 corridor.

                  President Clinton called for an end to the practice
during a radio speech in


                     March.

                  " I t almost gets to be a matter of guilty until proven
innocent and that's just
                  not the way America should be, " Kasich said.

                     The Ohio congressman said he is against racial quotas
being forced on
                     employers, but supports aggressive recruiting of people
of all backgrounds
                     by the business world.

                     "Affirmative action should not be an effort to treat us
like so many beans
                  and should be an effort to unify this country, "       he
said. " I don't think people
                  in America see the value in quotas today."

                     Kasich has formed an exploratory committee looking into
a run for the
                     Republican presidential nomination and has been
campaigning in New
                     Hampshire, Iowa and California. He drew 1 percent
support among
                  Republicans in a national CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll
released early this
                  month.


