 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Constance J. Bowers ( CN=Constance J. Bowers/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:18-MAY-1999 12:56:07.00

 SUBJECT:   Final ESEA Transmittal Letter and Fact Sheet

 TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Leslie S. Mustain ( CN=Leslie S. Mustain/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Wayne Upshaw ( CN=Wayne Upshaw/ou=oMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: James J. Jukes ( CN=James J. Jukes/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
. READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Barry White   ( CN=Barry White/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Wei-Min C. wang ( CN=Wei-Min C. Wang/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Attached are the subject documents as modified by ED to reflect changes
 you provided.  ED (per Ann O'Leary) advises that the bill will be
 transmitted by the President Friday; however, the Fact Sheet and
 Prospectus will be "rolled out" tomorrow.   If this is accurate, please let
 me know as promptly as possible this afternoon if you have any changes
 that must be made to the Fact Sheet.

 ---------------------- Forwarded by Constance J. Bowers/OMB/EOP on
 05/18/99 12:51 PM ---------------------------



         "Cordes, Bill" cBill_Cordes@ed.gov>
         05/18/99 12:32:45 PM
 Record Type: Record

 To: Constance J. Bowers/OMB/EOP, "O'Leary, Ann" cAnn_O'Leary@ed.gov>
 cc: "Kristy, Jack" cJack_Kristy@ed.gov>
 Subject: Final ESEA Transmittal Letter and Fact Sheet




 Attached are what I hope will be our final versions of the transmittal


letter and fact sheet. Both documents incorporate all changes
requested/made by OMB, and Mike Cohen has signed off on them.  The only new
language is in the concluding paragraph, and I hope it will sound familiar
enough to avoid any further changes.

I will carry a diskette with both documents, which are in Word 97 format,
to
Jack Kristy.

 첛inal ESEA Transmittal Letter.doc    첛inal ESEA Fact Sheet.doc

 - Final ESEA Transmittal Letter.doc
 - Final ESEA Fact Sheet.doc



==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable tq convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D78]ARMS21315405K.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000003100000000000000001000003300000001000000FEFFFFFF000000003000
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                               Hex-Dump ConversIOn
                                   Office of the Press Secretary


For Immediate Release                                                                 May 21, 1999


TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:

       I am pleased to transmit today for your immediate consideration the "Educational
Excellence for All Children Act of 1999," the Administration's proposal for reauthorization of
the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA) and other elementary and
secondary education programs.

        My proposal builds on the positive trends achieved under current law. The Improving
America's Schools Act of 1994, which reauthorized the ESEA five years ago, and the Goals
2000: Educate America Act gave States and school districts a framework for integrating Federal
resources in support of State and local reforms based on high academic standards. In response,
48 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have adopted State-level standards. Recent
results of the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) show improved performance
for the economically disadvantaged and other at-risk students who are the primary focus of
ESEA
programs. NAEP reading scores for nine-year olds in high-poverty schools have improved
significantly since 1992, while mathematics achievement has also increased nationally. Students
in high-poverty schools and the lowest-performing students-the specific target populations for
the ESEA Title I prograru--have registered gains in both reading and math achievement.

       I am encouraged by these positive trends, but educational results for many children
remain far below what they should be. My proposal to reauthorize the ESEA is based on four
crosscutting themes reflecting both lessons from research and the experience of implementing
the 1994 Act.

        First, we would continue to focus on high academic standards for all children. The
underlying purpose of every program within the ESEA is to help all children reach challenging
State and local academic standards. States have largely completed the first stage of standards-
based reform by developing content standards for all children. My bill would support the next
stage of reform by helping States, districts, schools, and teachers use these standards to guide
classroom instruction and assessment.

        My proposal for reauthorizing Title I, for example, would require States to hold districts
and schools accountable for student performance against State standards, including helping the
lowest-performing students continually improve. The bill also would continue to target Federal
elementary and secondary education resources on those students furthest from meeting State and
local standards, with a particular emphasis on narrowing the gap in achievement between .
disadvantaged students and their more fortunate peers. In this regard, my proposal would also
phase-in equal treatment of Puerto Rico in ESEA funding formulas, so that poor children in
                                                 2                                Hex-Dump Conversion


Puerto Rico are treated the same as those in the rest of the country for the purpose of formula
allocations.                                                               .

         Second, my proposal responds to research showing that while qualified teachers are
critical to improving student achievement, far too many teachers are not prepared to teach to high
standards. Teacher quality is a particular problem in high-poverty schools, and the problem is
often exacerbated by the use of paraprofessionals in instructional roles.

        My bill addresses teacher quality by holding States accountable for stronger enforcement
of their own certification and licensure requirements, while at the same time providing
substantial support for State and local professional development efforts. The Teaching to High
Standards initiative in Title II would help move challenging educational standards into every
classroom by providing teachers with sustained and intensive high-quality professional
development in core academic subjects, supporting new teachers during their first three years in
the classroom, and ensuring that all teachers are proficient in relevant content knowledge and
teaching skills.

         The Technology for Education initiative under Title III would expand the availability of
educational technology as a tool to help teachers implement high standards in the classroom,
particularly in high-poverty schools. The bill also would extend, over the next seven years, the
Class-Size Reduction initiative, which aims to reduce class sizes in the early grades by helping
districts to hire and train 100,000 teachers. And the Title VII Bilingual Education proposal
would help ensure that all teachers are well trained to teach limited English proficient students,
who are found in more and more classrooms with each passing year.

        Third, my bill would increase support for safe, healthy, disciplined, and drug-free
learning environments for all students. The recent tragedy at Columbine High School in
Littleton, Colorado, reminds us that we must be ever vigilant against the risks of violence and
other dangerous behaviors in our schools. Our reauthorization bill includes several measures to
help mitigate these risks.

        We would strengthen the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act by
concentrating funds on districts with the greatest need for drug- and violence-prevention
programs, and by emphasizing the use of research-based programs of proven effectiveness.
Moreover, this proposal would require schools to refer students who bring weapons to schools to
a mental health professional for assessment and require counseling for those who pose an
imminent threat to themselves or others, allow funding for programs that educate students about
the risks associated with guns, expand character education programs, and promote alternative
schools and second chance programs. A new School Emergency Response to Violence program
would provide rapid assistance to school districts that have experienced violence or other trauma
that disrupts the learning environment.

       My High School Reform initiative would support innovative reforms to improve student
achievement in high schools, such as expanding the connections between adults and students that
are necessary for effective learning and healthy personal development. This new initiative would
provide resources to help transform 5,000 high schools into places where students receive
                                                 3                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


individual attention, are motivated to learn, are provided with challenging courses, and are
encouraged to develop and pursue long-term educational and career goals.

        Fourth, in response to clear evidence that standards-based reforms work best when States
have strong accountability systems in place, my proposal would encourage each State to
establish a single, rigorous accountability system for all schools. The bill also would require
States to end social promotion and traditional retention practices, to phase out the use of teachers
with emergency certificates and the practice of assigning teachers "out-of-field," and to
implement sound discipline policies in every school. Finally, the bill would give parents an
important new accountability tool by requiring State, district, and school-level report cards that
will help them evaluate the quality ofthe schools their children attend.

        The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999 provides a solid
foundation-based on high standards for all students, high-quality professional development for
teachers, safe and disciplined learning environments, and accountability to parents and
taxpayers--for raising student achievement and narrowing the achievement gap between
disadvantaged students and their more advantaged peers. More importantly, it will help prepare
all of our children, and thus the Nation, for the challenges of the 21st century. I urge the
Congress to take prompt and favorable action on this proposal.



                                              WILLIAM J. CLINTON

THE WHITE HOUSE
     May 19,1999
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


            "Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999"
                                           FACT SHEET

The President today sent to the Congress the "Educational Excellence for All Children Act of
1999," his proposal to reauthorize the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965
(ESEA). This legislation reaffirms the critical role of the Federal Government in working with
schools, school districts, and States to promote educational excellence for all children. Every
child, parent, grandparent, and taxpayer deserves high quality public schools in their
communities.

More specifically, the proposal would build on the 1994 ESEA reauthorization, which
established the core principle that disadvantaged children should achieve to the same challenging
academic standards as their more fortunate peers, by helping States, districts, schools, and .
teachers use these standards to guide classroom instruction and assessment.

Background

In 1994, the Clinton Administration and Congress began the transformation of the Federal role in
education by passing the Improving America's Schools Act, which reauthorized the ESEA, and
the Goals 2000: Educate America Act, which supported State and local school reform efforts
based on challenging academic standards and assessments linked to those standards. Prior to
1994, our education system had for too long condoned low expectations and low standards for
disadvantaged children, and Federal programs often reflected those expectations. The 1994 laws
established the clear expectation that all children can and should reach high standards.

The two laws were built on the principle that students and schools rise to the expectations and
standards we set for them. Therefore, Federal resources were focused on helping States to
develop and implement challenging State standards for all children and to use those standards to
improve learning through a coherent and aligned system of curricula and assessments.

The 1994 laws complemented and accelerated reforms already underway in many States and
school districts, while providing a catalyst for change in States that had not yet begun setting
high academic standards. In fact, in a recent study by the General Accounting Office, many
States reported that Goals 2000 has been a significant factor in promoting their education reform
efforts. Similarly, according to the National Assessment of Title I, about half of poor school
districts across the Nation report that Title I is "driving standards-based reform in the district as a
whole." With 48 States, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia having completed the
development of State content standards for all children, it is clear that higher standards are taking
hold nationwide.

More importantly, there is strong evidence that where States have implemented standards-based
reform over a period of time-together with accountability mechanisms linked to those
standards-students have benefited. For example, North Carolina and Texas made greater gains
in math and reading on the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) than any other
State between 1992 and 1996. Texas also showed significant progress in closing the
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

achievement gap between minority and white students. A recent study by RAND researchers
concluded that the most plausible explanation for these gains is the effort by both States to align
their systems of standards, curriculum, and assessments, and to hold schools accountable for the
improvement of all students.

In developing its 1999 ESEA reauthorization proposal, the Administration drew on the
experience of implementing the 1994 Act, efforts to measure program performance under the
Government Performance and Results Act, and a review of Congressionally mandated
evaluations of Title I and other programs. These efforts also were informed and enriched by
conversations with hundreds of teachers, principals, parents, community activists, and State and
local officials nationwide. Four themes emerged again and again during this process, and these
same themes are found throughout the Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999:
(1) a firm commitment to high standards in every classroom, (2) improving teacher and principal
quality to ensure quality instruction for all children, (3) strengthening accountability for results
coupled with flexibility, and, (4) ensuring safe, healthy, disciplined, and drug-free school
environments where all children feel connected, motivated, and challenged to learn and where
parents are welcomed and involved. To ensure that States adopt policies and practices that
promote high quality education for all children, ESEA requires States receiving grants under the
Act to adopt policies and programs incorporating these important themes.

High Standards in Every Classroom

The next step in education improvement is to take the high standards set at the Statehouse and
move them to schools and classrooms. The Educational Excellence for All Children Act of 1999
renews the Federal commitment to high standards for all children and promotes this next stage of
standards-based reform by helping States, districts, schools, and teachers use challenging State
standards to guide classroom instruction and student assessment. The bill also supports high
standards by helping children to read well and by providing extra resources to help all students
succeed. The proposal would:

   Raise student performance by increasing academic standards. The proposal would support
    implementation of challenging standards and aligned assessments in every State. Title I of
    the ESEA would continue to focus on high expectations for all children, retaining the current
    statutory requirement that States establish content standards, student performance standards,
    and assessments aligned with the standards by the 2000-01 school year. Title II includes a
    specific authorization to help States and school districts align instruction, curriculum,
    assessments, and professional development to challenging academic standards.

   Implement continuous improvement and accountability based on challenging standards.
    States will hold all school districts accountable, and school districts will hold schools
    accountable, for continuous and substantial gains in overall student performance and in the
    performance of the lowest-performing students.

   Provide teachers with up-to-date training and support through a new Teaching to High
    Standards initiative. States have made great strides in developing standards, but only
    36 percent ofteachers report that they feel very well prepared to teach to high standards. The


                                                 2
                                                                                 .         '_, .,co~ ~. ,anagement System
                                                                                         '~t-UUITIP   Conversion


    Title II Teaching to High Standards initiative would help schools and school districts give
    teachers the tools and training they need to help students reach high standards.

   Put useful technology into schools and classrooms to help teachers teach to high standards.
    The Technology for Education initiative would help teachers, particularly in high-poverty
    districts, use technology to teach students to challenging State standards, for instance by
    using distance learning to get challenging subject matter into all classrooms.

   Strengthen the teaching of reading and reduce class size. The bill would continue the Class-
    Size Reduction initiative, which seeks to reduce class size in the first through third grades to
    a nationwide average of 18 students, to ensure that all students receive the individual
    attention they need to read well and independently by the end of the third grade. It would
    continue the Reading Excellence Act, which focuses on professional development, extended
    learning time, and family literacy. Improvements in the Even Start family literacy program
    would increase the intensity and quality of family literacy services, while a new initiative in
    Title II would provide professional development for early childhood educators.

   Emphasize math and science education by earmarking the first $300 million of the Teaching
    to High Standards grants under Title II for professional development in those subjects. In
    particular, these funds would help States and school districts take full advantage of new
    research and curricular materials aimed at improving the teaching and learning of
    mathematics. The bill also would reauthorize the Eisenhower National Clearinghouse for
    Mathematics and Science Education and the Eisenhower Regional Mathematics and Science
    Education Consortia.

   Improve foreign language instruction by setting a national goal that 25 percent of all public
    elementary schools offer high-quality, standards-based foreign language programs by the
    year 2005, rising to 50 percent by 2010. The bill would help States and districts meet this
    goal by supporting the development of foreign language standards and assessments,
    expanding the pool of elementary school foreign language teachers through improved
    recruitment and professional development efforts, and encouraging the use of educational
    technology in foreign language instruction.

   Focus on promoting equity, excellence, and public school choice options for all students.
    Recognizing that no one school or program can meet the unique needs of every student,
    public school choice provides students with the flexibility to choose among public schools
    and programs that differ with respect to educational settings, pedagogy, and academic
    emphasis. Title V will support programs that can enhance options for students and parents,
    including the Magnet Schools Program, the Public Charter Schools Program, and a new
    authority that will fund innovative options for public school choice.

   Continue to target education resources on areas of need. The bill also would continue to
    target Federal elementary and secondary education resources on those students furthest from
    meeting State and local standards, with a particular emphasis on narrowing the gap in
    achievement between disadvantaged students and their more fortunate peers. In this regard,
    the bill would also phase in equal treatment of Puerto Rico in ESEA funding formulas, so


                                                 3
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

    that poor children in Puerto Rico are treated the same as those in the rest of the country for
    the purpose of fonnula allocations.

Strengthen Teacher and Principal Quality

Qualified teachers are critical to improving student achievement, yet too many teachers are not
provided with on-going, high-quality professional development to help them improve and build
on their teaching skills. In addition, many teachers leave the profession in their first three years,
and far too many teachers are teaching in a field in which they were not trained. In Title I
schools, an increasing number of unqualified teacher aides are providing direct instruction
without supervision by a certified teacher. To address these problems and help ensure that every
child in America has a talented and dedicated teacher who is prepared to help all children reach
high standards, the President's bill would:

   Help teachers teach to high standards. The Title II Teaching to High Standards
    initiative would support State and local efforts to: (1) help teachers and principals
    align curricula and assessments with challenging State and local content standards;
    (2) provide teachers with sustained and intensive high-quality professional
    development in core academic content areas; (3) support new teachers during their
    first three years in the classroom; and, (4) help ensure that all teachers are proficient
    in content knowledge and teaching skills. This new initiative takes the place of, and
    incorporates the most successful elements of, three current State grant programs:
    Goals 2000, Eisenhower Professional Development, and ESEA Title VI Innovative
    Education Program Strategies.

   Expand recruitment and retention efforts to help meet the need for 2.2 million new teachers
    over the next decade. The Teaching to High Standards initiative would support State and
    local efforts to recruit and retain high-quality teachers in high-need areas. These efforts
    would include, for example, the creation of a national job bank and encouraging portability
    oflicensure and other teaching credentials. The Teaching to High Standards initiative also
    would include a priority for school districts that support tcachers in their first three years of
    teaching, a period when many good teachers leave the classroom. The Transition to
    Teaching initiative would expand the existing Troops to Teachers program to help non-
    military (as well as military) mid-career professionals become teachers, particularly in high-
    poverty school districts and high-need subject areas.

   Require certification for new teachers in Title I schools. Our proposal would require all new
    teachers in programs supported with Title I funds to be fully certified in the subject they
    teach. Two years after enactment of the bill, paraprofessionals with less than two years of
    college would be limited to non-instructional duties, while those with two or more years of
    college could provide instructional support and tutoring only under the supervision of a
    certified teacher. A new set-aside for professional development in Title I would help create a
    career-long professionalleaming environment for teachers in Title I schools.

   Strengthen the State teacher certification process. States would be required to ensure that,
    within four years, at least 95 percent of their teachers are either (1) fully certified,


                                                  4
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

    (2) working toward full certification through an alternative route, or (3) fully certified in
    another State and working toward meeting any State-specific requirements. States will also
    be required to ensure that at least 95 percent of secondary school teachers have academic
    training or demonstrated competence in the subject area in which they teach.

   Help future teachers use advanced technology to improve classroom instruction. The
    Technology Literacy Challenge Fund would support sustained and intensive high quality
    professional development in school districts to increase teacher capacity to create improved
    learning environments through the integration of technology into instruction. The Preparing
    Tomorrow's Teachers to Use Technology initiative would support consortia of public and
    private entities to train new teachers to use technology to prepare students to achieve to
    challenging State and local standards.

   Train early childhood educators to prepare disadvantaged students for school. This Title II
    proposal would provide grants to partnerships of professional development providers,
    community-based early childhood programs, and school districts to provide high-quality
    professional development to early childhood providers. The emphasis would be on research-
    based approaches to professional development in language acquisition, literacy, and reading
    development.

   Train classroom teachers to teach students with limited English proficiency (LEP). Because
    LEP students are found in more and more classrooms, the proposed amended Title VII
    Bilingual Education program would support teacher education programs that develop the
    ability of regular classroom teachers to teach LEP students.

Strengthen Accountability for Student Performance

The 1994 laws provided States and districts with increased flexibility to coordinate, modify, and
combine program funding and activities in exchange for greater accountability for improved
educational achievement. States, districts, and schools have begun to take advantage of this
increased flexibility, but too often without the necessary implementation of effective
accountability mechanisms. Early research suggests, however, that it is precisely those States
with the most comprehensive and effective accountability systems that are making the most
progress in increasing expectations and standards for students and schools and improving student
achievement.

The President's reauthorization proposal would retain the ESEA flexibility provisions included
in the 1994 law, including the expansion of schoolwide programs, consolidation of
administrative funds, and waiver procedures for regulatory and statutory provisions that stand in
the way of innovative reform efforts. The bill also would retain and update the provisions of the
Education Flexibility Partnerships Act of 1999, which expanded eligibility for ED-Flex authority
to all States.

To help ensure that this enhanced flexibility leads to improved student achievement, the
President is proposing several new accountability measures:



                                                5
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


   Strengthen accountability for districts and schools. Our proposal would encourage States to
    develop one rigorous accountability system for all schools, including Title I schools, that
    requires them to make annual, substantial gains in student performance until every student is
    mastering challenging standards. States will be provided with flexibility by being able to use
    either the model outlined in the statute or an alternative that is at least as rigorous and
    effective. States without a single State-wide accountability system would be required to
    develop one for their Title I schools.

   Increase accountability to parents and the public through school report cards. States and
    school districts receiving ESEA funds would be required to produce and distribute annual
    report cards for each school, the school district, and the State. The report cards would
    include information on student achievement, teacher qualifications, class size, school safety,
    attendance, and graduation rates. Where appropriate, student achievement data would be
    broken out by demographic groups to identify any gaps between disadvantaged students and
    their peers.

   End the traditional practices of social promotion and retention, after a four-year transition
    period during which States would put into place educational practices targeting students who
    need additional help to meet State promotion standards. Such practices include early
    identification and intervention strategies, smaller classes with well-prepared teachers, high-
    quality professional development, greater family involvement, and extended learning time.
    Following the transition period, States and districts would require students to meet academic
    performance standards before being promoted at key transition points (e.g., fourth and eighth
    grade) or graduating from high school. State policies would use multiple measures,
    including an assessment valid for these purposes, to determine if a student has met the
    standards.

   Tum around low-performing schools. School districts would be required to identify publicly
    the lowest-performing schools that have not improved over two years and to implement
    interventions and provide technical assistance in these schools. Initial interventions could
    include implementing extended learning opportunities, proven school reform models; and
    extensive teacher training. If there is no satisfactory improvement in student performance
    within three years, districts would be required to take corrective actions, such as
    reconstituting the school by making wholesale staff changes or closing the school entirely
    and reopening it with new staff or as a charter school. States would be required to reserve
    2.5 percent of their Title I LEA Grant funds (increasing to 3.5 percent in fiscal year 2003) to
    support interventions in failing schools, and would provide 70 percent of these funds to
    school districts to help them tum around low-performing schools.

Support Safe, Healthy, Disciplined, and Drug-Free Learning Environments

A critical prerequisite for achieving quality and excellence in education is a safe, healthy,
disciplined, and drug-free learning environment that provides ample opportunities for each
student to make connections with caring adults that support learning and personal development.
Notwithstanding the recent tragedy at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, survey
data show that schools continue to be safe places in America's communities. Similar survey


                                                 6
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

data, however, show that drug and alcohol use remain disturbingly high in middle and high
schools, discipline appears to be a growing problem, and more and more children are leading
lifestyles involving little or no physical exercise.

Parents playa critical role in creating and maintaining a healthy learning environment, and the
Educational Excellence for all Children Act of 1999 would retain and strengthen the emphasis on
parental involvement first established by the 1994 Act.

The following provisions would support State and local efforts to create safe, healthy,
disciplined, and drug-free learning environments in all of our schools:

   Help support and expand the connections between adults and students that are necessary for
    effective learning and healthy personal development through a High School Reform
    initiative. This new initiative would provide resources to help transform 5,000 high schools
    into places where students receive individual attention, are motivated to learn, are provided
    with challenging courses, and are encouraged to develop and pursue long-term higher
    education and career goals. Participating schools would serve as models to guide reform in
    all secondary schools.

   Require every school district and school to have a sound discipline policy. Our proposal will
    require States to hold school districts and schools accountable for having discipline policies
    that focus on prevention, are consistent and fair, and are developed with the participation of
    the school community.

   Emphasize parent involvement policies at the school and district levels and continue
    implementation of parent-school compacts.

   Improve the Parent Information and Resource Centers by focusing on high-poverty
    communities, encouraging the use of research-based models for increasing parent
    involvement, and emphasizing early literacy development.

   Expand access to information through technology by supporting community technology
    centers that make online education and training resources available to parents and other
    community members in high-poverty areas.

   Strengthen the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act by concentrating funds on
    districts that have a significant need for drug- and violence-prevention and that are
    developing and implementing research-based prevention programs of proven effectiveness.

   Create a new School Emergency Response to Violence program (Project SERV) that would
    provide rapid assistance to school districts that have experienced violence or other trauma
    that disrupts the learning environment.




                                                7
                                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

        Modify the Gun-Free Schools Act to require an assessment of any student who brings a
         firearm to school to determine if the student poses an imminent threat of harm and, in the
         case of students who are suspended or expelled from school, provide for appropriate
         supervision, counseling, and educational services.

        Promote physical fitness and lifelong healthy habits through demonstration projects .
         Exemplary physical education programs can promote life-long healthy habits, provide
         opportunities for students to connect to school, and become an important component of after-
         school programs.

     Educational Excellence for All Children

     The 1994 ESEA reauthorization marked a fundamental change in the Federal role in education
     by establishing the clear expectation that all children can and should reach high standards. Early
     results suggest that standards-based reform is a powerful tool for raising student achievement
     and for closing the achievement gap between economically disadvantaged students in high
     poverty schools and their more fortunate peers. The Educational Excellence for All Children Act
     of 1999 would build on this early success by reinforcing State and local efforts in key areas like
     bringing high standards into every classroom, strengthening teacher and principal quality,
     increasing accountability for student performance, and supporting safe, healthy, disciplined, and
     drug-free learning environments. The bill provides Congress a tremendous opportunity to
     support the changes needed to help all of our children reach high academic standards and to keep
     America strong and prosperous in the 21 st century.




                                                     8


