RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 18-MAY-1999 18:50:00.00

SUBJECT:     guns ap

TO: Elena Kagan        CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD I   )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
                       Hastert Getting Tough on Gun Control

                       By David Espo
                       Associated Press Writer
                       Tuesday, May 18, 1999; 6:47 p.m. EDT

                       WASHINGTON (AP)   -- Entering the fierce debate over gun
control,
                       House Speaker Dennis Hastert suggested Tuesday raising
the age of
                  possession from 18 to 21 for handguns and requiring
background checks for
                  all sales at gun shows.

                  " I think there needs to be uniformity in what they do
at gun shows and what
                  they do in a retail business,"  Hastert, R-Ill., said in
an interview in his
                  Capitol office a month after a shooting at a Colorado
high school shocked
                  the nation.

                  Similarly, he said, "I'm just saying 21 is basically a
standard of adulthood,
                  and there's probably a uniformity that fits there."
President Clinton hailed
                  the speaker's remarks.

                  Hastert made his comments shortly before the
Republican-controlled Senate
                  voted, 78-20, to require the sale of "secure gun
storage or safety devices"
                  with handguns. The provision also provides liability
protections for a gun
                  owner who uses a safety lock and whose gun is stolen and
used in a crime.

                       Hastert emphasized that he was speaking for himself and
not attempting to
                  dictate the provisions of legislation. In fact, he said,
the entire issue of gun
                  control will have to be vetted thoroughly within the GOP
rank and file.

                       Still, the comments by the top Republican in the House,


a foe of previous
                    gun control legislation, coupled with a recent series of
votes in the
                  GOP-controlled Senate, underscored how the political
ground has shifted in
                  the month since two student-gunmen at Columbine High
School in Littleton,                  .
                  Colo., killed 12 students and a teacher before turning
their guns on
                  themselves.

                  In a statement, Clinton praised the Senate vote, and
thanked Hastert "for
                  agreeing that we should close the gun show loophole and
raise the age of
                  handgun ownership from 18 to 21."  Clinton said the
Senate "should likewise
                  put progress over politics and give its strong backing
to these reasonable
                  measures to keep guns out of the hands of children and
criminals. ' ,

                  Hastert said he and House Democratic leader Dick
Gephardt of Missouri
                  had agreed to see whether the two parties could work
together on the
                  outlines of a response to the Littleton shootings,
including a look at the
                  cultural issues involved in teen violence.

                  Hastert didn't provide any additional specifics. Laura
Nichols, an aide to
                  Gephardt, said, "We're going to propose it include
everything, that it include
                  guns as well as issues related to school violence.' ,

                    Hastert, who represents a district outside Chicago,
voted against the
                   so-called Brady law in 1993, which instituted a
three-day waiting period for
                   handgun purchasers and established the system of instant
background
                   checks that supplanted it. He also voted against 1994
legislation to ban
                   certain types of assault weapons.

                    This year, he said, he expects gun control to reach the
House floor
                  eventually as part of legislation to stiffen prosecution
of juvenile offenders,
                  just as a bill pending in the Senate.

                  There, Republicans and Democrats spent the day
struggling over gun
                  control issues as part of a debate on legislation to
stiffen prosecution of
                  juvenile offenders.

                    The gun lock proposal was crafted by Sens. Orrin Hatch,
R-Utah, and Herb


                     Kohl, D-Wis., and embraced by Handgun Control, a gun
control advocacy
                     organization.

                  In other votes, the Senate agreed to provisions to
stiffen penalties for
                  offenses committed by gang members, and for crimes
committed by
                  offenders wearing body armor.

                  Majority Leader Trent Lott criticized Democrats for
refusing to agree to an
                  expedited plan for a final vote. " I want this ... bill
done, " the Mississippi
                  Republican said.

                  Democrats countered that Republicans were attempting to
usher the bill into
                  oblivion without accepting blame for scuttling a gun
control bill in the
                  aftermath of the shooting in Littleton.

                  "The majority leader wants this bill to fade away
without a roar or a
                  whimper and without any Republican blame, " said Sen.
Patrick Leahy of
                  Vermont, senior Democrat on the Judiciary Committee.

                     Senate Republicans last week first approved a provision
for voluntary
                     background checks in certain instances at gun shows.
They then
                  backtracked and muscled through a proposal they said
would require checks
                  for all sales.

                  Democrats said the plan was riddled with loopholes,
though, and additional
                  votes were expected on the politically charged issue.

                  The result has been a public relations nightmare for
Republicans, GOP aides
                  concede, with lawmakers reversing course while Democrats
accuse them
                  of doing the bidding of the National Rifle Association.

                     Gun shows, in particular, have emerged as a flashpoint
during the Senate
                     gun debate. Current law requires all federally licensed
dealers to conduct
                  background checks, just as they are required to do in
their retail outlets. But
                  other, private dealers may sell guns without verifying
the background of
                  their customers.

                  In his comments, Hastert offered a suggestion that
seemed to track the
                  Democratic proposal in the Senate.


                  His own view, he said, is   some ... parallel with what
we do in stores and
                  what we do in gun shows as far as waiting periods and
those types of
                  things."  The waiting period has given way to an instant
background check in
                  current law.

                     As for the age of possession of handguns, Hastert said,
-'I think also the
                  situation where you have kids who can't buy alcohol till
they're 21 years of
                  age but they can go out and buy a handgun, and I beli~ve
there needs to be
                  some conformity to those types of things."

                     States currently regulate liquor possession, but Hastert
said he wasn't
                     suggesting 50 different laws for handgun possession.

                  "I'm just saying 21 is basically a standard of
adulthood and saying there's
                  probably a uniformity that fits here" in the gun
debate, he said.


