 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Kenneth S. Apfel ( CN=Kenneth S. Apfel/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:ll-MAR-1997 14:08:58.00

 SUBJECT:     Voluntary Workfare

 TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 MEMORANDUM TO:     Bruce Reed
                                     Elena Kagan
                                     Diana Fortuna
                                     Cynthia Rice

 FROM:      Ken Apfel

 RE:                Allowable Work Programs for Individuals Subject to the
 Food Stamp                 Time Limit

 USDA has contacted my staff regarding three policy issues regarding the
 current law provision to limit food stamps for three months for childless
 able bodied adults between the ages of 18-50. This memo describes each
 issue briefly and provides my recommendations.   I would like your input
 and assistance in providing feedback to the Department.   WeD,ll need to
 resolve these issues quickly.   Secretary Glickman is giving a speech to
 Public voice on Thursday where he may announce several of these issues
 contrary to my recommendations.

 Should USDA increase the level of "public fanfare" associated with the
 waivers it provides to States?   States can seek waivers from the time
 limit for areas within the State which have high unemployment or
 insufficient jobs. About half the States have sought waivers and USDA has
 generally been approving them or working with the States to make the waiver
 s permissible. The Office of the Secretary is very interested in starting
 big press events for each new waiver it approves -- in particular they
 would like to do one for D.C.  I understand they may even be holding
 waiver approvals until this issue is resolved.

 I have advised strongly against such a decision since the welfare
 implementation group has wanted to keep a low profile on the waivers.
 States and advocates know the Administration is working hard to assist
 them with waivers.  Large press events probably will only earn the
 Administration and USDA attacks from opponents of the waiver policy -- who
 to date have been very quiet.  I would recommend Diana call Greg Fraiser,
 USDAD,s Chief of Staff,  and provide him with guidance on how to handle
 approval of the waivers and urge on-going press coordinate with the
 welfare reform implementation group.


 Should food stamp recipients subject to the 3 month time limit (18-50's)
 be able to stay on the program if they are participating in a voluntary
 workfare program? Under the current restriction, childless adults between
 the ages of 18-50 cannot receive food stamps for more than 3 months in any
 36 month period unless s/he is:
         -working 20 hours per week or more
           participating in a work or training program 20 hours per week or
 more
           participating in workfare (no hour restriction), or
         - otherwise exempt from the regular employment and training program

 Workfare is defined as any program authorized under Section 20 of the Food
 Stamp Act or a comparable State program. According to the implementing
 regulations, there are two types of workfare programs: voluntary and
 mandatory. There are a couple of differences between mandatory and
 voluntary workfare:
                                 Mandatory                       Voluntary
 Sanctions for non-
 compliance                        Yes                               No

 Required Hours           Generally, benefits                 negotiated
 between
                                                divided by the min.
 wage.   the individual and the
                                   Can't exceed 30 per. wk.
 organization providing
                                                                           the
 workfare slot.   Can't
                                                                           exceed
 30 hr. per wk.

 FLSA Applies               Yes                                 Yes


 Who Runs It?    A State or a political                  Same.
                         subdivision
 Let me first describe how I had thought the time limit would interact with
 workfare under current law.  Some States would make an effort to provide
 workfare slots to individuals who hit the time limit.  If an individual
 hit their 3 month mark, the State might offer them the opportunity to
 sweep the floors of a local church. The number of hours the individual
 would have to work at the church each month would equal their benefits/the
 min. wage or some standardized amount close to but not in excess of that am
 ount. That is about 5 to 7 hours per week if just the food stamp benefit
 for a single individual is being worked off -- significantly less than the
 20 hour requirement for other activities: As long as the individual keeps
 showing up to sweep, she keeps getting benefits.

 If the individual doesn't show up for workfare, the church would report
 her non-compliance to the State. The State would terminate her benefits
 for the next month and put her in sanction.  So even if the individual
 went out and got a job for 20 hours per week, she could not regain
 eligibility until the sanction period was over. This period could range
 from 3 months to a lifetime period depending on the number of previous
 sanctions and the State's choice. The sanction may seem like adding
 insult to injury but there is a certain logic.  Compare this woman with a
 man who was not offered a workfare slot and who loses his benefits after
 the 3 month period expired. He would not receive a sanction.   In fact, if
 he were able to find a job right away, he could regain eligibility
 immediately.  Since he played by the rules, his change in work behavior


 would be rewarded while the individual who did not comply with the work
 requirements is punished.

 The States and advocates have suggested that since voluntary workfare is
 authorized under Section 20, it would be an allowable activity at the end
 of the three month period.   The main differences between voluntary and
 mandatory workfare is the number of hours required and the sanction
 policy. An individual can work 1 hour a week and still be in voluntary
 workfare.  Also, if they fail to comply they are not subject to sanction.
 USDA thinks that since voluntary workfare is described in their own
 regulations as allowable under Section 20, they have to allow it as an
 acceptable activity for. the 18-50 group.  I agree that they have a
 compelling argument, but disagree that voluntary workfare is a must under
 current authorities.

 USDA could interpret the new statute as only permitting mandatory
 workfare.   They could make an administrative declaration that only
 mandatory workfare is allowed and follow up with regulations.  In
 addition, USDA has the authority to turn down the voluntary workfare
 programs now.  The current regulations say that if the Secretary can show
 that the benefits of the voluntary workfare program do not exceed the
 costs, they don't have to approve it. Given that the voluntary workfare
 option would only cost money, the Department could turn them down,
 although it would be a rather touchy approach to the problem.

 Even if we agree with the DepartmentD,s position, USDA can clamp down on
 voluntary workfare.  They could require that voluntary workfare use the
 same hours requirement as mandatory workfare -- the benefit divided by the
 minimum wage.  They could also require that States require that the
 voluntary agency provide some proof that the individual actually came by
 to set up a placement before continuing the fourth month of benefits.

 My staff has informed USDA that my position is the current policy and
 regulations should be changed.  States should no longer able to provide
 voluntary workfare to the 18-50 group. This Administration has a solid
 tradition of supporting tough work requirements.  While the structure of
 the food stamp time limit is unnecessarily harsh, I do not believe that we
 can allow something as unstructured and loose as voluntary workfare.  I s
 uspect USDA will want to discuss this issue further and may involve
 outside advocacy groups.

 Finally, USDA also wants to publicly announce their proposed policy on
 voluntary workfare. Consistent with my first recommendation, I would
 strongly recommend against this strategy. The Administration should
 continue its quiet and very effective method of working with States and
 advocates.

 Please contact me quickly so that we can discuss these issues.


