RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-MAY-1999 16:06:20.00

SUBJECT:   HOW THE GOVERNMENT TRACES GUNS,    200,000 TIMES A YEAR

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
fyi. .. j c3
---------------------- Forwarded by Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP on 05/19/99
04:07 PM ---------------------------



        SHlMABUKUR L @ Al
        05/19/99 03:32:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Leanne A. Shimabukuro, Jose Cerda III
cc:
Subject: HOW THE GOVERNMENT TRACES GUNS, 200,000 TIMES A YEAR

Date: 05/19/99 Time: 15:18
THow the government traces guns, 200,000 times a year

     FALLING WATERS, W.Va. (AP)   The call came in to the nondescript
building in the rolling hills of West Virginia in late afternoon
an urgent request for help tracing the guns used in the Littleton,
Colo., high school shootings . .
    As night fell, two workers began calling manufacturers and
poring over paper records and microfilm rolls in a laborious
process propelled by a serial number. Computers were no help.
    The next day, they could report some results: Two of the four
guns wielded by two students to kill 12 fellow students and one
teacher before committing suicide had once been sold at Denver area
stores. Then the trail went cold. It was up to police in the field
to track those guns the rest of the way to the shooters    and to
find sources for the other two guns.
    The process    repeated 200,000 times a year   is an example of
how the nation's gun laws actually work in practice, both in their
power and their limitations.
    Despite the difficulties, federal agents at the Bureau of
Alcohol,' Tobacco and Firearms, spurred by the Clinton
administration, have dramatically increased the number of traces
done on guns confiscated at crime scenes. The nearly sevenfold
increase, up from just 30,000 a decade ago, is part of an effort to
solve crimes and to find patterns of illegal trafficking.
    But agents must walk a political tightrope, taking care not to
trample gun owners' rights under strict limits set by Congress,
including a blanket prohibition against any computerized master
list of gun owners.
    The issue is at the heart of the current gun debate in Congress,
as lawmakers try to balance the goals of keeping firearms from


criminals and other illegal users while keeping them accessible to
law-abiding people.
    The National Rifle Association, fighting some proposals for
further restrictions on guns, says it supports efforts to crack
down on illegal traffickers but questions why that hasn't led to
more federal prosecutions.
    "If enhanced gun-tracing efforts allow them to target
traffickers, we support that,"     said James Baker, the NRA's chief
lobbyist. "But you'd figure if they were doing more
investigations, it should result in more prosecutions, not less."
    The Clinton administration says ATF increasingly shares its
tracing data with local police who pursue more prosecutions under
state laws.
    What agents can trace is limited. They start with a gun's make
and serial number, moving forward from the manufacturer to a
wholesaler and distributor to the first retail sale by a federally
licensed gun dealer. All sales by licensed dealers must be
recorded, and those records must be provided to ATF if it asks.
    After that, however, any sales by individuals or by collectors
at gun shows, for example, are considered private and exempt from
recording requirements. That is where ATF's Littleton trail ended.
    The lack of high-technology also limits the tracing. Licensed
dealers' records are usually handwritten, sent to ATF in dusty
boxes when a dealer goes out of business. Workers sitting in front
of screens search fuzzy microfilmed copies for a serial number that
might be duplicated 10 times by different manufacturers.
    The center manages to trace a gun to its first retail sale about
52 percent of the time, according to the agent in charge, Forest
Webb.
    Each time it does, agents enter the information into a database
that is the backbone of the center's second function      to help
police look for patterns of suspicious gun sales.
    Using such tracing data from 27 cities, for example, ATF
discovered earlier this year· that one-third to one-half of the guns
juveniles used in crimes were bought from licensed dealers by
someone acting as a "straw"      intermediary, such as a girlfriend or
trafficker. Only 35 percent had been stolen, puncturing a
long-standing belief.
    ATF agents increasingly work with police in cities such as New
York, Dallas, Washington, Boston and Los Angeles to seek such
patterns to solve specific crimes or look for bad dealers, said
Scott Pickett, the center's deputy chief.
    In one recent case, a gun at a Baltimore murder scene was traced
to a sale in Ohio. The man who had bought the gun, whose name was
in the dealer's records, was living in the Baltimore home of the
main murder suspect. Police had no physical evidence tying the
suspect to the murder scene until they traced the gun to his
tenant.
    In another case, hundreds of guns seized in drug and other
crimes were traced to a dealer who had just opened a store, said
Rich Young, an ATF agent who used to work in Baltimore and now
trains other agents. Detectives examining his books realized many
sales hadn't been recorded. He was convicted of illegal
trafficking, was sent to jail for a year and lost his license.
    For years, police focused on trying to reduce violent crime by
fighting drug trafficking, Pickett said.
    Now they realize, "If you trace every gun (used in a crime), in
six months you'll start seeing crime drop,"     Pickett said. "That's
the core of what we do here. ' ,
APNP-05-19-99 1521EDT
.     "

