RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-MAY-1999 10:38:02.00

SUBJECT:   UI/Family Medical Leave

TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO]           )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I wanted you to have a copy of a memo I sent to Jack last night regarding
UI and FMLA. OMB does not have a formal position on this yet but as I
indicated to you, my preference is for Option 3 for the reasons set forth
in this memo.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D4]ARMS266094258.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043A70D0000010A02010000000205000000B461000000020000F3A414F99208FE86066B15
F15A0197A4F18E1C3508986F319D3AE8EE15BE2F060425D52C79A8C9CB4989139C9B3DOE970C6B
F670221592A61DB22892DB22383F511EB207E428B4A8CD9400A88E9FDD43FD1D7E789C5D353381
MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

FROM:                      Barbara Chow

SUBJECT:                  UI and Paid Family and Medical Leave


We have spoken briefly about the idea of using the unemployment insurance (UI) system to pay
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) benefits. DPC is now pushing for a decision on this
issue due to the President's upcoming speech at Grambling University on Monday. Below is the
background on this issue as well as the policy, operational, budgetary and regulatory questions
regarding this proposal.

Background on Paid Parental Leave and State UI Proposals.

The idea of paid parental leave was discussed the last two years as a possible budget initiative,
but did not make it through the process in either year. As it was developed in 1997, the
Administration's paid parental leave proposal would have provided eligible new parents $200 a
week in paid leave, funded by the Federal government, for up to six weeks. Eligibility was
based on income and time in the workforce. This initiative would have used the UI system ~
deliver the leave payments, but would not have used UI funds!QJmY for these benefits. The
policy goal was to offer persons who cannot afford to take leave after the birth or adoption of a
child an option to stay at home, versus child care. It was estimated to cost $1 billion annually.

DOL raised the issue again recently because of interest by the Hill, specifically Sen. Kennedy, in
the Administration's position on paid parental leave. Four states have introduced legislation that
would allow use ofUI trust funds to pay individuals some form offamily and medical leave
(Vermont, Massachusetts, Maryland, and Washington). DOL has opposed this proposed use in
the past because the individuals receiving the benefit are not available for work -- a fundamental
requirement of the UI program known as the "availability test." Federal law does not contain an
explicit requirement that UI claimants be available for work, and DOL has relied for many years
on the legislative history of the UI program to enforce its availability interpretation.

Absent a change in its long-standing interpretation, DOL would declare any State law using UI
trust funds for family and medical leave to be "out of conformity" with Federal requirements.

DPC is currently running a policy process to determine if States should have the flexibility to
use UI funds for paid family and medical leave. The options for implementing this policy are
laid out later in this memo (see DPC Options).

Policy Ouestions

What is the size o/the problem that we are trying to address with this policy? The data on the
need for or use of paid parental leave are scant and were collected very soon after FMLA was
passed. We do not have data on recent experience. I understand that a survey conducted by the
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


Commission on Family and Medical Leave found that 3.4 percent of respondents did not take
unpaid leave when needed. Of those 64 percent (or 2 percent of the overall sample) cited
affordability as the main reason they did not take advantage of unpaid leave when they needed it.
 Of the respondents who stated they did not take unpaid leave for birth or adoption of a child,
100 percent (0.2 percent ofthe overall sample) cited affordability as the main reason. By
offering paid leave, the Administration could try to address this problem. It is also important to
note that while the policy under consideration may be characterized as a paid parental leave
proposal, only 17% of those who took FMLA covered leave did so for maternity leave ..

Is there a substitution effect? If States implement this proposal, employers may decide to offset
their costs by decreasing current benefits such as annual leave, paid parental leave, or even
lowering wages. In addition, employers may lobby States to modify their state workers
compensation programs to only allow for maternity disability after the UI benefit is exhausted.
At one of the meetings, CEA raised the possibility that this policy could result in increasing
hiring discrimination against women in the child bearing years.

What are the implications for the UI program? The UI system is designed to pay benefits only
to workers who lose ajob through no fault of their own and who continue to be unemployed
because no other work is available. The major concern of DOL is that a change in the
Department's long-standing position on availability -- because it is not in Federal law -- would
create a "slippery slope" for other aspects of the UI program. States might decide to pay benefits
to other people not available for work because of vacations, sick leave, sabbaticals, or retirement.
 In addition, DOL believes that employers may push to tum UI into a mean-tested program to
reduce costs. DOL also fears that any attempt to create limited State flexibility in using UI
funds for family and medical leave will end up eliminating any DOL control over State UI
programs except for provisions explicitly in Federal law.

Will this be seen as circumventing the legislative process in order to expand FMLA coverage?
The Administration has tried to lower the current 50 employee threshold for coverage under
FMLA to 25. Administration support for paid leave may undercut support for expansion of
unpaid leave under FMLA. Given UI covers all employers regardless of size, with limited
exceptions, employees not currently covered by FMLA could receive paid leave benefits.

Operational Ouestions.

The following questions must be addressed in designing a program for paid family and medical
leave. These questions can be left to individual States to answer as they design their own family
and medical leave programs or they can be addressed through Federal policy guidance or model
legislation. However, if we decided to issue guidance or regulations, it is unclear whether we
have the legal authority to compel States to follow these guidelines.

Should this benefit be universal or targeted to lower income persons? UI is a non-means tested
program - it is insurance against w'age loss when involuntarily unemployed regardless of current
family income or assets. The FMLA proposals discussed in 1997 and 1998 would have limited
the benefit to those with incomes below a certain amount - as initially discussed the limit was a·
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

family income of$50,000, then it was $36,000. An income test could be interpreted as the first
step to welfarizing VI. This may be preferable from a policy perspective, but is inconsistent
with VI policy.

What should the length of benefits be? Currently, FMLA provides job-protected unpaid leave
for 12 weeks. VI benefits are available for up to 26 weeks. The State proposals we have seen
would have chosen the shorter duration but there is no particular reason to adopt that duration.

What type of leave will be covered? The Administration's budget initiatives were focused on
paid parental leave. Some ofthe State proposals (including Massachusetts) cover all family and
medical leave under State law, which is much broader than parental leave - including leave for
the person's own health or to care for a sick parent or child. Of those who took FMLA covered
leave in 1995, 60 percent did .so due to personal illness. VI coverage for intermittent leave may
be very difficult to administer and enforce.

Should the individual be required to exhaust current leave options first prior to seeking UI
benefits? Currently, most employees receive annual and sick leave from their employers.
FMLA does not require the individual to exhaust other avenues prior to taking advantage of
unpaid leave. Any requirement that individuals use all of the leave available to them for this
purpose prior to seeking the VI benefit would be difficult to track and enforce.

Budgetary and Regulatory Questions.

What would the proposed program cost the Federal Government? The options under
consideration are designed to permit interested States to provide paid family and medical leave;
there will be no Federal mandate. Because there will be no Federal legislation, there will be no
legislative P AYGO requirements. The intended effect of these options is to increase spending
from the Unemployment Trust Fund, which is on budget. But State VI taxes will increase over
time in response to the higher benefit outlays, so over the longer term paid family and medical
leave will be deficit neutral. We are trying estimate the effects of this policy on a year by year
basis but the estimate will be very soft and difficult to construct.

Only rough estimates of potential program costs are available. If paid family and medical leave
were implemented in every State with the current Federal thresholds, DOL estimates that the
costs would be $2-$9 billion a year, compared with current UI benefits of $23 billion a year.
The low end assumes no behavioral changes; the high end assumes behavioral changes by
workers and employers, including shifts from currently paid leave to the new program. For the
Massachusetts proposal, which covered all family and medical leave for all sizes of firms for 12
weeks, three independent estimates concluded costs would be about $200 million a year,
compared with current VI benefit payments of$750 million in that State. We would anticipate
that over time States would increase taxes, so over the years the program would be deficit
neutral.

Would this be subject to Congressional review under the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement
Fairness Act (SBREFA)? Yes. If DOL issued either a program letter or a proposed regulation,
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

it would be subject to Congressional review.

DPC Options.

 DPC is currently developing three options. All are permissive, not mandates, and would rely
on State legislation to change State VI laws.

1. Instruct DOL to Issue New Program Guidance (interpretative rule).

Pros:                 Guarantees a specific policy outcome.

                      Could be done quickly and does not require public comment.

                      Could include Federal parameters on the structure of the program.


Cons:                        Compromises DOL's "availability" standard.

                      More susceptible to legal challenge and therefore could be easily
                      overturned.

                      SUbject to Congressional review under SBREFA and would likely be
                      categorized as "major."

                      More susceptible to future policy changes.

                      Could provoke an appropriations rider or other legislative action.

2. Instruct DOL to Issue New Regulations.

Pros:                 Creates a sounder legal basis and is less susceptible to legal challenge.

                      Provides for public comment.

                      Offers time for "fine tuning" Federal guidance on the parameters ofUI
                      coverage of family and medical leave.

                      Less susceptible to future policy changes.


Cons:                        Compromises DOL's "availability" standard.

                      Could result in changes to the policy based on public comment.

                     Regulations require more time - delays State adoption of program and
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


                       allows opposition to mobilize.

                       Subject to Congressional review under SBREFA and would likely be
                       categorized as "major."

                       Could provoke an appropriations rider or other legislative action.

3. Instruct DOL to Produce Model State Legislation for Separate UI-FMLA Fund. States could
create a separate State tax to fund parental leave (that would not be part of the UI trust fund) and
could reduce their State UI taxes to make this new program revenue-neutral for employers.
Several States have already established separate taxes for training or for employment security
administration. DOL could use the UI system to administer this new program.

Pros:                  Achieves States objective of providing paid leave.

                       Provides assistance to States without compromising DOL's "availability"
                       standard.

                       Easier because no Federal administrative actions are necessary.

                       Designing model legislation could be done relatively quickly.


Cons:                          Appears less pro-active.

                       Less responsive to State initiatives in this area.

                       Less attractive to States due to the requirement of a new tax.

Recommendation. I recommend Option 3. By supporting this option, the Administration can
show its strong support for paid parental leave without compromising the fundamental
requirements of the UI program. In addition, other alternatives should be explored such as
creation of a new tax credit, use of State temporary disability programs, or creation of a Federal
program of paid parentalleave like the 1997 proposal.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 051 - FOLDER -007


[05/20/1999]
