RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul D. Glastris   ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]   )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-MAY-1999 11:51:01.00

SUBJECT:   latest grambling draft

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]        )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Carolyn T. WU ( CN=Carolyn T. Wu/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]      )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]        )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 5/20/99 11:45 am
Glastris/Shih

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
D&NEW TOOLS FOR PARENTS IN THE NEW ECONOMYDB
COMMENCEMENT ADDRESS
GRAMBLING STATE UNIVERSITY
GRAMBLING, LOUISIANA
MAY 23, 1999

        When I heard that ID,d been invited to Grambling State University,
there wasnD,t much discussion about whether or not I would be here today.
I told my staff in Washington, a place where everybody thinks theyD,re
somebody, that I wanted to go to a D&Place where Everybody is Somebody.DB
school motto) And I was not about to miss a chance to see the D&Best Band
in the LandDB -- the Grambling State Marching Tigers -- play without having
to buy a ticket to the Super Bowl [they have played in four] .

        It is an honor to join the last Grambling class of the 20th
Century on this very important day in your lives.  In so many ways, the
story of this fine institution embodies the African American experience in
our 20th century.  In 1901, not a single school in this part of Louisiana
would welcome an African-American student into its classrooms.   But the
visionary farmers of this community -- the children and grandchildren of


slaves -- were determined to give their children the education, the pride,
and the power to rise above bigotry and injustice. They raised some money
for a school - - .and wrote to Booker T. Washington, asking him to send a
teacher from the Tuskeegee Institute to establish it.

        Out of that determination and vision, Grambling has grown into a
university for the 21st Century. This beautiful campus has nurtured some
of AmericaO,s best educators and lawyers, pastors and public servants,
nurses and business leaders. Of course the NFL recruits here -- a legacy
of your legendary coach Eddie Robinson and his successor, Superbowl MVP
Doug Williams. AmericaO,s top technology firms do too, because Grambling
State is first among all four-year colleges in conferring Computer and
Information Science degrees to African-Americans.

        You join in a proud tradition and I congratulate each of you on
your achievement.  This day marks years of hard work, long hours and late
nights.  The friends youO,ve made will be your friends for life.  The
knowledge you have gained will enrich you for life. The possibilities
before you are limited only by your dreams.

-- some of you joining your parents and grandparents, others of you the
first in your families to earn a college degree.

        And I congratulate and honor your parents, who should be proud not
only of you, but of themselves.  I understand that one of the most beloved
Presidents of Grambling, Ralph Waldo Emerson Jones would often say to his
students, O&When you go home, be sure to kiss everybody, including the
mule. Because the mule is the one who pulls the plow and keeps the family
going.OS Well, 10,m not asking you to kiss any mules today, but I am asking
each of you to thank the people who kept your families going.

         To raise a child from infancy to college graduation is no small
feat.  Every parent has a story -- a story of sacrifice, of love, of late
night worries and silent hopes.    Joyce Gaines of Vallejo, California, who
took on two extra jobs so that her daughter Tieaesha could go to
college.    Even though she was suffering from five ruptured disks, Ms.
Gaines commuted 100 miles each way to work for a company in Sacramento.
It was worth it.   Today Tieaesha is graduating with a degree in Sociology
and plans to open a home for abused children [Tk other heroic stories of
Grambling parents ... a husband and wife who worked double shifts; a 0&
sandwich generationOS parent caring for both children and elderly
relatives.]   Today, the burdens of parents are often doubled, as they care
not only for growing children but for aging parents. We must do more to
lighten their load and help parents succeed at home and at work --
especially now, as we face the new challenges of the new economy.

        This spring, in commencement addresses to the class of   ·+99, I
will be speaking about how a bold new economy is transforming virtually
every facet of our lives. Next month, at the University of Chicago, I
will talk about how we must put a human face on the dynamic but sometimes
disruptive international marketplace.  And today, I want to talk about how
we as a nation must respond to the new challenges facing families in the
new economy. We must reshape our institutions in ways that give parents
more time at home. No government can raise a child. Mothers and fathers
do.  But we have a duty to help parents -- to give them the tools they
need to meet their responsibilities at home and work; and to pass on their
values to their children.

       The class of 0+99 is entering an era of unparalleled opportunity
and possibility. We all know that 'this is the strongest peacetime economy


in American history.  We all know that it is an economy driven by
information and fast-paced technological change.   But what we are now
beginning to understand is that the best may be yet to come. A
productivity explosion, powered by technology' ,) from the E-mail that links
offices around the world to the computers used to track warehouse
inventory 0) is now being fully felt throughout the economy. America has a
tremendous capacity for more growth, greater investment, higher salaries,
and even faster technological innovation.   With your diplomas in hand,
you will have the opportunity to help shape these times, and to lead lives
of greater accomplishment and affluence than your parents ever dreamed of.

        But as your parents can attest, we still have far to go before we
have fully adapted to the demands of this new era.  In our modern economy,
companies compete not just with others down the street, but with firms
across the globe. To stay competitive, they have had to produce more with
fewer employees -- and the pace of work has picked up.   Jobs today feel
like two jobs. And to make ends meet, many people have had to take on yet
another job.   Working parents are feeling enormous stress -- and they are
bringing that stress home with them.

         This will only get worse as the Class of 0+99 moves through its
careers.   It may seem a million years away to those of you graduating
today, but soon, many of you will become parents -- some of you may
already be parents. Working at nine at night may seem routine to you now,
but soon enough, you will want to be home at nine at night, putting your
children to bed. We must have an economy that allows you to do that.

          Last year, I asked the PresidentO,s Council of Economic Advisers
to study the sweeping changes the new economy has brought to our
families.   It has been said that if every economist on Earth were laid end
to end they still wouldnO,t reach a conclusion.   But on this question a
team of the nationO,s top economists has reached a conclusion, one that
confirms our common sense and common experience.   They found that because
more and more parents are working outside the home, they have less time
for their children.    The percentage of married mothers in the workforce
has nearly doubled in a generation, from 38 percent in 1969 to 68 percent
in 1996.    To African Americans, that is nothing new. African American
mothers have always had to work outside the home. Today, all of America
is experiencing challenges African Americans have always known.

        Because more mothers are working outside the home, and because the
number of single parent families has grown, parents in the average family
have 22 fewer hours per week to spend at home.

        The vast majority of todayO,s parents are doing everything they can
to give their children whole and happy childhoods. But no matter how hard
they try, they worry that it is still not enough. They worry that waking
up early and staying up late to make time for a child might not be enough,
when that child still has to go home alone to an empty house after
school. They worry that all those Sunday morning sermons about a world of
love might not be enough, when the movies their children watch, the music
they listen to, the video games they play show a world of hate and
violence. They worry that all those nights working overtime to buy a
computer so that a child can visit some of the worldO,s finest libraries on
the Internet migh~ not be enough, when that same Internet can also lead
them to recipes for pipe bombs and explosives.  These challenges to
parents will soon become challenges to the Class of 1999, as you start
your own families. We will have to find ways of solving these challenges,
and history will call upon you to be part of the solution.


         America has experienced sweeping technological and wrenching
social change before --'change that called our government to act to
protect families.   In the previous century, America moved from farm to
factory.  Families migrated to cities, husbands went to work in factories,
and wives were left alone in cramped apartments, their children roaming
the streets or, worse, toiling in dangerous factories. Alarmed by the
condition in the cities, America responded with big, practical solutions
    labor unions, settlement houses, child labor laws, and universal
elementary education.   One hundred years ago, America made the industrial
age safe for families.   Today, we must make the information age safe for
families.

       The modern economy has created four great challenges for families.

        The greatest and most obvious of these is time.  In our round-the
world, round-the-clock economy, there just donO,t seem to be enough hours
in the day for,parents to do everything they need to at home and at work.
I am proud that the first bill I ever signed into law was the Family and
Medical Leave Act.  Since 1993, millions of Americans have used it to take
up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave to care for a newborn or sick relative
without losing their jobs. But the current law meets just a fraction of
the need.  Too many people and too many family obligations are not covered
by this law. And nearly two-thirds of all eligible workers do not take
advantage of family leave because they simply cannot survive without their
paychecks.

        We must think bigger.  In 1935, the federal government created the
national unemployment insurance system, which has kept tens of millions of
families from losing their homes or falling into poverty when their
breadwinners are between jobs.   Another example tk. Today, we must set a
goal that every working American can take the time they need to care for
their families without losing the income they need to support their
families.   In the 21st Century, American working people deserve paid
family leave.

        Today, using my executive authority as President, I am taking
important steps toward that vision. Just as the federal government was
the first major employer to desegregate its workplaces, federal agencies
can blaze the path towards paid family leave. That is why I am directing
the Office of Personnel Management to allow all federal workers to use the
sick leave they have earned for themselves to take time off to care for
their sick family members.  Currently, the most sick leave a worker can
take in these cases is 13 days. With the new policy I am proposing today,
federal employees will be able to take up to 12 weeks paid sick leave to
nurse an ailing child or parent back to health.

        I believe the private sector should do the same.  If every
company in America that offers sick leave to its workers adopted the
policy we are adopting today, TK percent of all American families would
have this important benefit.

        We must find other creative new ways to help more Americans use
benefits they have earned to finance the time off they need for their
families.  Several states have asked the federal government for permission
to try a bold experiment: allow employees to tap the unemployment
insurance balances they have accumulated so that they can have some income
while they are on family leave. This is a promising experiment and today,
I am taking the first steps toward granting states that permission.
[precise action TKJ


         I also challenge Congress to do its part.   I have proposed
expanding family leave to cover more workers and more parental
responsibilities.  And I call on Congress to act.  Parents should not have
to fear a bossO, wrath because they left work to take a child to the doctor
D) or call in sick to attend a parent teacher conference or volunteer in a
school.

        Americans believe in hard work.  They put in long hours to get
their jobs done -- and theyD,re proud of it. This work ethic is the reason
our economy is one of strongest in the history of the world.  But, we
clearly need to find new ways to give workers more time off families.

         The second challenge parents face in the modern economy is
finding affordable, high-quality child care.  Today, low-income families
spend up to a quarter of their income on child care, and studies show that
the quality of that care is usually mediocre.  When parents are lucky
enough to locate affordable and nurturing care for their children, they
face waiting lists that take weeks and months to move.  I am supporting
child care subsidies and tax credits, better training for caregivers and
higher standards of care. And I challenge businesses to do their part by
helping their own workers find and afford quality child care.

        Today, millions of working parents start eyeing the clock every
day at three in the afternoon, wondering if their children have made it
safely back from school, and wondering how they will fare, at home alone.
The hours after the schoolbell rings and before parents come home from
work are a perilous time for children, the time they are most tempted to
try drugs and alcohol, and most likely to become victims of a crime.
That is why I have called for tripling our investment in quality after
school care. Too often, the safest, best equipped buildings for children
are kept locked and shuttered in the afternoon.   I challenge school
districts all across America to unlock these empty classrooms and fill
them with the sounds of children playing and reciting their multiplication
tables.

        The third challenge parents face in the modern economy is that
they are physically separated from their children for longer and longer
periods of time.  We can close that distance by bringing back an old idea:
that children can be with parents when they work.   I have experienced the
benefits of this myself. When I was a boy, living with my widowed mother
and her parents in Hope, Arkansas,   I spent many happy hours in my
grandfatherD,s tiny grocery store.   ID,d watch him with his customers, black
and white, and usually poor.   HeD,d give credit to whoever needed it, and
they always paid him back.   In that little family business, I absorbed
lessons and values that have stayed with me all my life.

         As a father, I have had the privilege of living, as it were, 0&
above the store,DB first in the GovernorD,s Mansion, then in the White
House.   I can D&commuteDB from my office to the family dinner table in about
three minutes when the lights are with me. So I challenge more of ArnericaD,
s employers to bring workers and their children closer together during the
day, by allowing employees to telecommute -- that is, work from home with
a modem.    I challenge employers to opening more on-site child care
centers. And I challenge them to team up with school districts to build
public schools at worksites.   Dozens of companies have already built such
innovative public schools and I have called for a new federal program to
encourage more of them.   Employees who enroll their children at these
workplace schools can spend more time with their children -- they can
commute to work together in the mornings and do homework on the ride home
at night. Workplace schools can bring parents and children closer


together.

        The fourth great challenge that parents face in the modern economy
is cultural. The new economy has enriched our lives with lower-priced
electronic gear and a growing variety of medial entertainment. But too
often, TV, radio, and the Internet bombard our children with images and
ideas that no parent would ever want them to see or learn.   We need tools
that can protect free speech but also give parents more control over what
their children see and read and hear.  We are creating these tools.  Soon,
half of all TV sets sold in America will come with V-chips: devices
parents can use to screen out sex, violence, or any program they donD,t
want their children to see. And soon, with just the click of a mouse, 95
percent of all Internet users will be able to make offensive web-sites
off-limits to their children.

        Creating these kinds of tools is the responsibility of
government. But the entertainment industry must do its part.   I challenge
the industry to stop showing guns in any ads children might see, to
enforce more strictly their movie rating systems; and to determine whether
that system is allowing children to see too much gratuitous violence.

        If we provide these tools -- to screen out bad influences, to
bring home and work closer, to improve child care, to spend more time at
home -- we can help working parents succeed at the most important job of
all: the job of raising children.

        It is the responsibility of government to make these tools
available. But is the responsibility of parents to use them. More working
parents must take advantage of tools already available, such as family
leave. And all across American society, we must get serious about putting
our children first.

         In a few years, many of you graduating today will be parents, and
some of you already are.    To raise your children well, you will have to
make many sacrifices. But then, your parents made many sacrifices for
you. I want all of you to take a minute to think of how you got to this
day.  How many of you would have made it if it werenn,t for your families?
If it werenO,t for the precious hours your mom or dad found between shifts
to help you with your homework, or read you a story.     If it werem;, t for
mornings your mother rose at the crack of dawn to go to work so that she
could be home when you got back from school.   If it werenO,t for the hugs
and home-cooked meals that conveyed more powerfully than words,
unconditional love, support and faith.   Ask your parents today: D&Was it
worth it?O,

        Until you watch your own child graduate from school, you may
never know just how proud your parents are today.  But let me just add
that all America is proud today. Congratulations.


