RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Eli G. Attie ( CN=Eli G. Attie/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-MAY-1999 12:20:14.00

SUBJECT:     Faith draft

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ : UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena -- keep in mind that I have shown this to no one yet, and in fact,
you can help me make sure it is coherent and makes the right
arguments . . . many thanks, as always ...


7

REMARKS BY VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE
ON FAITH ~ FAITH-BASED ORGANIZATIONS
Monday, May 24, 1999

I. SET-UP:    FAITH AND AMERICAD,S COMMON VALUES

        Today, I want to talk about one of AmericaD,s greatest strengths:
the faith and religious values of our people.

This is a subj ect that has weighed on my mind since. the awful events at
Columbine High School, and the senseless shooting at heritage High School
just four days ago. We must create in all of GodD,s children D) even those
who feel despised and rejected -- a clean heart, and a right spirit
within. We must make it easier for all Americans to live and express
their own faith D) to strengthen the common values we share.

That is in the best tradition of our nation. George Washington once said
that Americans have D&abundant reason to rejoice that in this land, every
person may worship God according to the dictates of his own heart.DB
Religious freedom is AmericaD,s first freedom. We have been proud to press
for it around the world.

        From the beginning of our history, refugees from religious
persecution have come here for safety. My motherD,s family, the Lafons,
were French Huguenots, driven from their homeland because of their
religious faith, Protestantism. They found a new home here in America. My
family has never taken our freedom to worship for granted.

As AmericaO,s faith traditions have flourished, they have both shaped and
strengthened our common values: honesty and discipline. Character and
community.  Belief in the family.  Belief in responsibility D) and in
responding to the needs of others.

Today, faith is showing a new and vital power at the grassroots.
Community by community, a growing movement of faith- and values-based
organizations are helping to meet some of our most intractable social
problems D) challenges that had confounded us for decades: turning around
the drug-addicted; moving people from welfare to work; breaking up
dangerous teen gangs.  In many of these efforts, faith is the leaven that
rises the bread D) the unique and transformative ingredient that enables
people to turn their lives around.



That is why I have chosen to address this subject tOday.  At a time when
our spiritual needs have never been greater D) at a time when too many
children and families want moral sustenance and strength D) faith can play
a powerful role for those who choose it.

I believe America must do more to strengthen and sustain our faith-based
values D) in ways that also strengthen the core freedoms enshrined in our
constitution.

II. THE NEW POWER OF FAITH-BASED APPROACHES TO SOCIAL PROBLEMS

We should start by recognizing that today, faith is at the heart of a new
movement for social action in America.

It is a movement I first encountered through the annual D&Family ReunionDB
policy conferenes' Tipper and I hold each summer D) where we learned how a
higher example can help reconnect children with fathers who had abandoned
them.  In many cases, nothing else had worked -- until faith was added to
the equation.

I have also seen the transformative power of faith-based approaches
through the national Coalition I have led to help people move successfully
from welfare to work D) the Coalition to Sustain Success.

In San Antonio, I met a woman named Herlinda Flores. Lilly had given .up
on finding work, and had gone on welfare.   She had so many challenges to
face.  English was her second language.   She didnD,t think she had the
skills to hold a job. And she had begun to conclude that maybe she did~i,t
deserve one. Then she signed up for job training at the Christian WomenU,s
Job Corps.

Through the Job Corps, she met a woman who mentored through prayer and
bible study, and she soon began to regain her self-confidence.  Faith gave
her a new feeling of self-worth, of purpose D) something no other program
could give her.  When I met her, she told me that for the first time in
years, she had applied for a position at Wal-Mart.  Then she looked me in
the eye; and said with pride, 0&1 know 10,11 get the job.DB She did.   She was
recently honored as employee of the month.

        In San Francisco, I met a woman named vicki Van Fossen.   Because
of a severe drug addiction, she had lost custody of her two children, lost
her job, and gone on welfare.   The only way back was to beat her
addiction, and nothing seemed to work.   Then she joined a faith-based
program that was part of our Coalition to Sustain Success, and finally
gained the inner strength to become clean.   She regained custody of her
children. And she has kept a full-time job. When I asked what she could
do for others in the same bind, she said, D&unfortunately, nothing --
unless they want to change first.DB   For Vicki, it was faith that enabled
her to pry open the vise grip of drug addiction.

        That is why, as part of the National Drug Control Strategy I
announced earlier this year, we are now doing special outreach to the
faith community, to enlist them in our war against drugs.

My wife Tipper sees the power of faith through her work with the homeless
at Christ House, in Washington, D.C. Many at Christ House are struggling
with substance abuse and mental health issues -- but there is often a
spiritual void as well.  So Christ House does more than provide shelter
and medical care.  It creates a loving, trusting atmosphere that helps


address the issues that led to homelessness in the first place. Its
founder tells the story of a reporter who spent a week there, interviewing
the patients. At the end of her time, she said: D&What amazed me is that
for all of the medical treatment, I didnD,t hear anyone talking about
putting on bandages, or taking medication.DB  Instead, they talk of O&a much
deeper type of healing.OB

Then there is Reverend Eugene Rivers, who has been hailed for helping to
take back the worst neighborhoods of Boston through faith. He remembers a
hardened gangster telling him: o&Io,m there when Johnny goes out for a loaf
of bread for mama.  Io,m there, youO,re not.  I win, you lose.  ItO,s all
about being there.oB But Reverend Rivers resolved that he would be there,
too.  He was, and he faced down the gangs. He did for the children of
Boston what no other program had done -- what it sometimes takes Godo,s
help for all of us to manage: he loved them, no matter how beaten down,
how hopeless, how despairing.

Partly because of his work, Boston went 18 months without losing a single
child to gun violence. Even BostonO,s most hard-boiled police and prison
wardens have been surprised to see the difference that faith makes.

O&You couldnO,.t function effectively without ministers in Boston,oB says
William Bratton, BostonO,s former police commissioner.

BostonO,s Mayor, Thomas Menino,   says of faith leaders: O&They have a
mission. They get it done.OB

Ron Corbett of the StateD,s Probation Department says, O&We went through a
phase where we were pretty skittish about dealing with religious
organizations.oB Based on their success in turning around the toughest
prisoners, he had to admit: o&we were wrong.oB

I believe the lesson for our nation is clear: in those specific instances
where the unique power of faith can help us meet crushing social
challenges that are otherwise impossible to meet D) such as drug addiction
and gang violence D) we should explore carefully-tailored partnerships with
our faith community, so we can use the approaches that are working best to
meet our urgent needs.

In that way, we can allow faith and religious values to playa greater
role in our hardest-pressed communities, in ways that benefit us all.

III. ALLOWING FAITH IN OUR SCHOOLS, IN OUR WORKPLACE,   AND IN OUR NATION

        We need to do more to allow faith and values to flourish not just
in our hard-pressed communities, but also in our schools, in our
workplaces, and in our society at large. And I believe we can and must do
so in ways that do not erode the separation of church and state.

        Leto,s consider our schools.  In Jefferson County, Colorado, I met
and embraced the parents of Cassie Bernal, who died at Columbine.  Her
last words, as she started into the barrel of a loaded gun, were: o&yes, I
do believe in God.oB

       Her faith made her strong.

        When the shooting began, she was quietly reading her Bible in the
Columbine library.  She knew she did not have to leave her faith at the
schoolhouse door.


Today, in too any communities, children and teachers are still not aware
of their right to
voluntarily practice their religious beliefs -- including prayer in school
-- and to pursue religious activities on school grounds.

Yet studies show that children who are involved in religious activities
are much less likely to use drugs. And common sense tells us that in a
culture of chaotic values, children are more likely to stay out of trouble
if they are spiritually grounded.

        That is why, in 1995 and again last year, our Department of
Education issued clear guidelines to clear up the confusion about the
kinds of religious activity that are permissible in public schools ~} and
we gave those guidelines to every school district in America.

        Here is what they say: students have the right to pray privately
and individually in school. They have the right to say grace at
lunchtime.  They have the right to meet in religious groups on school
grounds and to use school facilities, just like any other club.  They have
the right to read the Bible or any religious text during study hall or
free class time.  They also have the right to be free from coercion to
participate in any kind of religious activity in school.

        There are some who believe we need a Constitutional Amendment to
allow prayer in our schools. As our guidelines demonstrate, we already
have one.  ItO,s called the First Amendment.

        since we issued these guidelines, appropriate religious activity
has flourished in our schools, and there has been a substantial decline in
the debate and litigation that has accompanied this issue for too long.

Two years ago, we applied the same approach to the federal workplace.   We
clarified that federal employees may engage in personal religious
expression to the greatest extent possible, consistent with workplace
efficiency and the requirements of law.

We clarified that federal employers may not discriminate in employment on
the basis of religion.  And we clarified that an agency must reasonably
accommodate its employeesO, religious practices.

We have also fought hard to protect and strengthen religious freedom in
our nation at large.  Nine years ago, a supreme Court case called Oregon
v. Smith diminished AmericaO,s long-standing commitment to the free
exercise of religion.

Those whose religion forbid autopsies had been subjected to mandatory
autopsies. Those who wanted churches close to where they lived had seen
churches zoned out of residential areas.  Those who wanted the freedom to
design their churches had seen local governments dictate the configuration
of their buildings. And they could not find relief in our courts.

That is why we passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, to restore
freedom of religion.   I was disappointed that the Court struck down parts
of the act two years ago, but its provisions still apply to federal
agencies and institutions.

IV. DRAWING A CLEAR LINE: THE SEPARATION OF CHURCH AND STATE

The question now is, how do we move forward? How do we strengthen the
faith and religious values that build character and community, while


protecting the First Amendment freedoms that are so essential to religious
freedom itself?

Let me be clear: I believe very strongly in the separation of church and
state 0) and the careful balance that has served us well since our
founding.

        Our founders knew history.   They could look back on centuries of
religious war in Europe that tore nations apart.   They resolved that
religious war should never tear this nation apart 0) and the only way to do
that was to allow religious freedom.   The history of the United States has
proven their wisdom.

        But our founders also believed deeply in faith.  They created the
Bill of Rights in large measure to protect its free expression.

        The separation of church and state has been good for all concerned
0) good for religion, good for government, good for those who choose not to
worship at all.  It is our freedom from persecution, our absolute and
unassailable choice of how to worship, that keeps religion strong.

But it is our religious values that help keep our nation strong.  That is
why we must always reexamine that crucial balance.  Have we gone too far
in discouraging faith in our public discourse and personal lives? Have we
gone too far in promoting faith and religious values?

In our foundersD, day, the greatest need was to protect the unbeliever from
religious coercion. Today, we also need to ensure that believers of all
faiths are free to engage in our national dialogue and our pressing social
challenges -- without feeling that they must hide their religious beliefs.

V. FOUR PRINCIPLES FOR GOVERNMENT ACTIONS

        I want to suggest four simple principles to strengthen and sustain
faith and religious values in America, while holding fast to our cherished
Constitutional freedoms.

        First, our laws and institutions should not impede or hinder, but
rather should protect and preserve our fundamental religious liberties.

        Second, the government should be held to a very high level of
proof before it interferes with someoneO,s free exercise of religion.

        Third, whenever possible, we should help to explain and clarify
the fullest allowable expression of religious beliefs that is consistent
with our Constitution.

        Fourth, we must consider special measures 0) consistent with the
Constitution -- when faith proves a unique and effective role in meeting
our most intractable social problems.

VI. NEW POLICY PROPOSALS

        Today, I would like to propose several concrete actions we can
take to strengthen and promote faith-based values and approaches in our
nation.

The first deals with the role of faith-based organizations. The 1996
welfare reform law contained a little-known provision called D&Charitable
Choice.DS It says, simply, that states can enlist faith-based


organizations to provide basic welfare services, and help move people from
welfare to work.

As long as there is always a secular alternative for anyone who wants one,
faith-based organizations can provide jobs and job training, counseling
and mentoring, food and basic medical care 0) with public funds U) and
without having to alter the religious character that is so often the key
to their effectiveness.

I believe we should explore a similar, carefully-tailored exception for
other vital services where faith plays a unique and effective role 0) such
as drug treatment, homelessless, and youth violence prevention.

This extension must be accompanied by clear and strict safeguards:
government must never promote a particular religious view, or force anyone
to receive faith.  We must ensure that there is always a high-quality
secular choice available. We must prohibit direct proselytizing as part
of any publicly-funded efforts. And we must establish clear
accountability for results.

But we must not be afraid to embrace faith-based solutions that advance
our shared values as Americans.

Next, it is currently common practice for employees at an average company
to contribute to a wide range of charities, and have their donations
matched by the company up to an annual limit.  But rarely are faith-based
programs approved for such matches, perhaps because we are just starting
to realize the role they are playing.  I calIon the corporations of
America to encourage and match contributions to faith- and values-based
organizations. We need to make sure their efforts are recognized and
supported, across America.

Finally, I believe we must reintroduce the Religious Freedom Restoration
Act, redrafted to meet the courtO,s objections.

VII. CONCLUSION

AmericaO,s national identity is not shaped solely by Catholic, Protestant,
Jewish, Muslim or Hindu traditions.  But we are a people who believe that
these and other faith traditions contribute to the formation of values
with which we agree to live out our common lives together.

Religion helps to give our people the character without which a democracy
cannot survive.

I am a Baptist. My faith has always sustained me; I believe in serving
God and trying to understand and obey GodO,s will for our lives.  That
belief is what led me to explore my own faith in Divinity School when I
returned from Vietnam. And throughout my life, it has called me to try to
deepen my understanding of the human soul, and bring my actions, thoughts,
and feelings into harmony with GodD,s will.

        I want to create the kind of America where people can practice
their faith, and use religious insights to illuminate all the questions
our society is asking: how do we respect one another and live in peace and
safety in our neighborhoods? How do we preserve and strengthen our
families? How do we teach our children to live together? How do we give
hope to the hopeless, and help to the helpless? How do we protect the
weak 0) and teach restraint to the strong?


Mother Theresa once said, o&Plant the act, reap the habits.  Plant the
habits, reap the virtue.  Plant the virtue, reap the character.  Plant the
character, reap the destiny.oB

Religion helps to give our people the character without which a democracy
cannot survive.

Through our faith and our best values, we can become what we are meant to
be. We can become an America that is not just better off, but better.

        In so doing, we can serve as I believe God meant us to -- as a
light to this ever-shrinking world.  Thank you.
