RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-MAY-1999 09:40:46.00

SUBJECT:     Discipline allowed under the IDEA

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a memo prepared by my staff regarding the Ashcroft/Frist
provision. We will send you a copy of the letter shortly.
---------------------- Forwarded by Barbara Chow/OMB/EOP on OS/20/99 09:38
AM ---------------------------




           David Rowe

           05/12/99 11:31:07 AM

Record Type: Record

To: Barbara Chow/OMB/EOP@EOP
cc: Barry White/OMB/EOP@EOP, Wayne Upshaw/OMB/EOP@EOP, Katrina A.
McDonald/OMB/EOP@EOP, Daniel I. Werfel/OMB/EOP@EOP
Subject: Discipline allowed under the IDEA


Barbara, as you requested last night, below is a summary Danny Werfel and
I put together on what a school can do to a regular ed student who brings
a gun to school, compared to what a school can do to a special ed student
who brings a gun or threatens to bring a gun. Again, we believe that what
schools can do under current law should be the focus of any letter ED
sends to the Hill opposing the Ashcroft amendment.                    .

What a School Can Do to a Regular Ed Student Who Brings a Gun to School

The Gun Free Schools Act requires States receiving federal education funds
to have a law requiring a one year expulsion of a student who brings
firearms to school (these one year suspensions can be shortened at the
local level, by the school district's chief administrative officer).
During this suspension, the school is not required by federal law to
provide services to that student.

The Gun Free Schools Act does not provide a similar punishment for other
weapons, or for students who threaten to bring a gun to school. The
Ashcroft amendment, on the other hand, would allow a school to suspend a
disabled student indefinitely if the student brings a weapon to school, or
threatens to bring a weapon.


What a School Can Do to a Disabled Student Who Brings a Weapon to School,
Or Threatens to Bring a Weapon



Under the IDEA, a student can be removed from their current placement for
disciplinary reasons for the same length of time as if the student was not
disabled.  However, under IDEA, the school would be required to ensure
that: (a) certain services are provided during the removal, and (b)
certain due process opportunities are provided for parents to challenge
the disciplinary action.

Length of Removals

The IDEA contains a set of "45-day provisions," which allow schools to
suspend for up to 45 days a student who brings a gun, other weapon, or
illegal drugs to school. Moreover, a hearing officer can suspend a
student under the same "45-day provisions" if the hearing officer
determines that a student is likely to cause harm to himself or others.

If after the 45 day placement, school officials believe that it would be
dangerous to return the child to their regular placement because the child
would be substantially likely to injure himself or others in the regular
placement, they can ask a hearing officer to order that the child remain
in an alternative setting for an additional 45 days.  Hearing officers can
continue to order that the student remain in an interim educational
setting as long this hearing and finding is provided after each 45 day
period. Thus, the IDEA would not prevent a student from being removed
from an original placement in perpetuity, so long as the student continues
to receive services.

In addition, additional suspensions of up to 45 school days at a time may
be provided for separate incidences of weapons or drug related
misconduct.  If a disabled student threatens to bring a weapon to school,
the school could suspend that student under the "45 day likely to injure"
provision.


Services Required Under the 45 Day Provisions

Because under the IDEA "change of placement" services kick in after 10
consecutive days of a removal or suspension, a disabled student removed
under the 45 day provisions receives change of placement services after
the 10th day of the student's suspension.  These services are as follows:

Educational Services: The IEP meets to determine what educational services·
are needed to allow the student to meet the goals of his or her IEP.
(These services could include, for instance, sending homework to the
student, or providing tutoring services to the student in their interim
educational placement.)

Behavioral Services: The IEP team needs to implement a behavioral
assessment plan for the student, which provides a framework for addressing
the student's behavior. This is an proactive intervention measure
designed to address behavior problems ensure that the disabled student
does not exhibit disruptive behavior again.

Manifestation Determination: The school is required to conduct a
manifestation determination, in order to assess whether the behavior was a
manifestation of the disability.  However, under the 45 day provisions,
even if the behavior is found to be a manifestation of the student's
disability, the school can keep the student in the interim educational
setting until the expiration of the 45 day period. Afterwards, a hearing
officer can order the student to remain in the interim setting for another


45 days, as noted above.


Due Process Requirements under the IDEA

The IDEA provides specific due process procedures to students with
disabilities that are in addition to the due process nondisabled students
receive.

If a child possess a weapon or drugs at school, school officials are
allowed to remove that student immediately for up to 45 days.  If there
was no weapon or drug related offense, but school personnel believe that a
child is likely to harm himself or others, they are allowed to remove that
student immediately for less than 10 consecutive days, but would have to
get a hearing officer to rule on whether the 45 day provisions apply under
the circumstances.

Under both cases, the child's parent is allowed to appeal a 45 day
suspension or removal at any point. During this appeal, the child remains
in the alternate placement for the full period of suspension unless the
parents can convince a State level hearing officer that the 45 day
provisions should not apply.

After the first 45 day suspension is completed, the school can continue
the suspension for another 45 days if a hearing officer determines that
the child, at that point, is likely to injure himself or others.   In
similar manner as above, the child's parents can challenge the second and
subsequent suspensions. Again, the child remains in the alternate
placement for the full period of suspension unless the parents can
convince a State level hearing officer that the 45 day provisions should
not apply.


Other Notable Points

If a disabled student brings a weapon to school or threatens to bring a
weapon, nothing in the IDEA prohibits the school from notifying
authorities about the student's action, or prevents law enforcement and
judicial authorities from carrying out their responsibilities.  In other
words, a disabled student who breaks federal or state laws can still be
arrested, and perhaps incarcerated, for their crimes.

As part of the ED-Flex Conference Committee negotiations, the committee
had considered amending IDEA to provide the same 45 day provisions as
above if a disabled student "possesses a weapon at school;" the language
in current law only refers to cases when the student "carries a weapon to
school." The Ashcroft amendment would achieve the same clarification as
the proposed Ed-Flex amendment, among other things.  But, note that ED has
issued nonregulatory policy guidance on this issue, where they
specifically state that it is the Department's position that the 45 day
provisions apply in both cases under current law.


