RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul D. Glastris   ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]       )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-MAY-19.99 14:23:42.00

SUBJECT:    latest Grambling draft

TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]      )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]      )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cathy R. Mays   ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joshua S. Gottheimer ( CN=Joshua S. Gottheimer/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]       )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: June Shih ( CN=June Shih/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 5/20/99 2:00 pm
Glastris/Shih

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
D&NEW TOOLS FOR PARENTS IN THE NEW ECONOMYDS
COMMENCEMENT ADDRESS
GRAMBLING STATE UNIVERSITY
GRAMBLING, LOUISIANA
MAY 23, 1999

        When I heard that ID,d been invited to Grambling State University,
there wasnD,t much discussion about whether or not I would be here today.
I told my staff in Washington, a place where everYbody thinks theyD,re
somebody, that I wanted to go to D&A Place Where Everybody is Somebody.DS
school motto] And I was not about to miss a chance to see the D&Best Band
in the LandDS -- the Grambling State Marching Tigers -- play without having
to buy a ticket to the Super Bowl [they have played in four] .

        It is an honor to join the last Grambling class of the 20th
Century on this very important day in your lives.   In so many ways, the
story of this fine institution embodies the African American experience in
our 20th century.   In 1901, not a single school in this part of Louisiana
would welcome an African-American student into its classrooms.    But the
visionary farmers of this community -- the children and grandchildren of
slaves -- were determined to give their children the education, the pride,
and the power to rise above bigotry and injustice.   They raised some money
-- and wrote to Booker T. Washington, asking him to send a teacher to help
establish a school.

          Out of that determination and vision Grambling has grown into a
      j.




university for the 21st Century. This beautiful campus has nurtured some
of AmericaO,s best educators and lawyers, pastors and public servants,
nurses and business leaders. Of course the NFL recruits here -- a legacy
of your legendary coach Eddie Robinson and his successor, Superbowl MVP
Doug Williams. AmericaO,s top technology firms do too, because Grambling
State is first among all four-year colleges in conferring Computer and
Information Science degrees to African-Americans.

        You join in a proud tradition and I congratulate each and everyone
of you.  This day marks a great achievement.  You have put in long hours
in the classroom and late nights in the library.  You have gained
knowledge that will last a lifetime and made friendships that will last a
lifetime. And because of your hard work, the possibilities before you are
limited only by your dreams.

        And I congratulate and honor your parents, who should be proud not
only of you, but of themselves.  I understand that one of the most beloved
Presidents of Grambling, Ralph Waldo Emerson Jones, would often say to his
students, O&When you go home, be sure to kiss everybody, including the
mule. Because the mule is the one who pulls the plow and keeps the family
going.08 Well, IO,m not asking you to kiss any mules today, but I am asking
each of you to thank the people who kept your families going.

         To raise a child from infancy to college graduation,is no small
feat.  Every parent has a story -- a story of sacrifice, of love, of late
night worries and silent hopes.    Joyce Gaines of Vallejo, California, who
took on two extra jobs so that her daughter Tieaesha could go to
college.    Even though she was suffering from five ruptured disks, Ms.
Gaines commuted 100 miles each way to work for a company in Sacramento.'
It was worth it. Today Tieaesha is graduating with a degree in Sociology
and plans to open a home for abused children [Tk other heroic stories of
Grambling parents ... a husband and wife who worked double shifts; a 0&
sandwich generation08 parent caring for both children and elderly
relatives.]   Today, the burdens of parents are often doubled, as they care
not only for growing children but for aging parents. We must do more to
lighten their load and help parents succeed at home and at work --
especially now, as we face the new challenges of the new economy.

        This spring, in commencement addresses to the class of 0+99, I
will be speaking about how a bold new economy is transforming virtually
every facet of our lives.   Next month, at the University of Chicago, I
will talk about how we must put a human face on the dynamic but sometimes
disruptive international marketplace. And today, I want to talk about how
we as a nation must respond to the new challenges facing families 'in the
new economy. We must make sure every family, regardless of race, income,
or geography, has the chance to live out their dreams and raise their
children in dignity.  We must reshape our institutions in ways that give
parents more time with their children. No government can raise a child,
Mothers and fathers do.   But we have a duty to help parents -- to give
them the tools they need to meet their responsibilities at home and work;
and to pass on their values to their children.

        The class of 0+99 is entering an era of unparalleled opportunity
and possibility. We all know that this is one of the strongest economies
in American history.   WeO,ve created more than 18 million new jobs since
1993. We have achieved the lowest African-American unemployment and
poverty rates, and the highest African-American homeowership rates on
record.

           We all know that this prosperous economy is driven by information


and fast-paced technological change. But what we are now beginning to
understand is that the best may be yet to come. A productivity explosion,
powered by technology 0) from the Internet that links offices around the
world to the computers used to track warehouse inventory 0) is now being
fully felt throughout the economy. America has a tremendous capacity for
more growth, greater investment, higher salaries, and even faster
technological innovation.   With your diplomas in hand, you will have the
opportunity to help shape these times, and to lead lives of greater
accomplishment and affluence than your parents ever dreamed of.

        But as your parents can attest, we still have far to go before we
have fully adapted to the demands of this new era.  In our modern economy,
companies compete not just with others down the street, but with firms
across the globe. To stay competitive, they have had to produce more with
fewer employees -- and the pace of work has picked up.   Jobs today feel
like two jobs. And to make ends meet, many people have had to take on yet
another job.   Working parents are feeling enormous stress -- and they are
bringing that stress home with them.

         This will only get worse as the Class of 0+99 moves through its
careers.   It may seem a million years away to those of you graduating
today, but soon, many of you will become parents -- some of you may
already be parents.  Working at nine at night may seem routine to you now,
but soon enough, you will want to be home at nine at night, putting your
children to bed. We must have an economy that allows you to do that.

          Last year, I asked the PresidentO,s Council of Economic Advisers
to study the sweeping changes the new economy has brought to our
families.   It has been said that if every economist on Earth were laid end
to end they still wouldnO,t reach a conclusion.   But on this question a
team of the nationO,s top economists has reached a conclusion, one that
confirms our common sense and common experience.   They found that because
more and more parents are working outside the home, they have less time
for their children.    The percentage of married mothers in the workforce
has nearly doubled in a generation, from 38 percent in 1969 to 68 percent
in 1996.    To African Americans, that is nothing new. African American
mothers have always had to work outside the home.   Today, all of America
is experiencing challenges African Americans have always known.

        Because more mothers are working outside the home, and because the
number of single parent families has grown, parents in the average family
have 22 fewer hours per week to spend at home.

        The vast majority of todayO,s parents are doing everything they can
to give their children whole and happy childhoods. But no matter how hard
they try, they worry that it is still not enough. They worry that waking
up early and staying up late to make time for a child might not be enough,
when that child still has to go home alone to an empty house after
school. They worry that all those Sunday morning sermons about a world of
love might not be enough, when the movies their children watch, the music
they listen to, the video games they play show a world of hate and
violence. They worry that all those nights working overtime to buy a
computer so that a child can visit some of the worldO,s finest libraries on
the Internet might not be enough, when that same Internet can also lead
them to recipes for pipe bombs and explosives.

        One of the gravest tasks IO,ve had to perform as President is
comforting families who have lost loved ones to senseless violence.   Last
week, Hillary and I visited with the students and families of Columbine
High School in Colorado.  I came away more certain than ever that as we
"

work to strengthen our gun laws, we must also work to strengthen our
families.

        America has done so before. When America last experienced a time
like today -- a period of sweeping technological and wrenching social
change -- our government acted to protect families.  In the previous
century, America moved from farm to factory.  Families migrated to cities,
husbands went to work in factories, and wives were left alone in cramped
apartments, their children roaming the streets or, worse, toiling in
dangerous factories.  Alarmed by the condition in the cities, America
responded with big, practical solutions -- labor unions, settlement
houses, child labor laws, and universal elementary education. One hundred
years ago, America made the industrial age safe for families.  Today, we
must make the information age safe for families.

        The modern economy has created four great challenges for families.

        The greatest and most obvious of these is time.  In our round-the
world, round-the-clock economy, there just donD,t seem to be enough hours
in the day for parents to do everything they need to at home and at work.
I am proud that the first bill I ever signed into law was the Family and
Medical Leave Act.  Since 1993, millions of Americans have used it to take
up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave to care for a newborn or sick relative
without losing their jobs. But the current law meets just a fraction of
the need. Too many people and too many family obligations are not covered
by this law. And too many families cannot take advantage of the law at
all because they simply cannot survive without their paychecks.

        We must think bigger. On the eve of the 21st Century, let us set a
goal that all working Americans can take the time they need to care for
their families without losing the income they need to support their
families.   Americans must have paid family leave.

         This would mark a significant shift in how our nation helps
families succeed at home and at work.   It will require enormous thought,
creativity -- and a willingness to experiment.    It must be done in a way
that gives families flexibility and promotes a dynamic and growing
economy.

        Today, using my executive authority as president, I am taking
important steps toward these goals.  I am directing the Office of
Personnel Management to allow all federal workers to use the sick leave
they have earned for themselves to take time off to care for their sick
family members. Currently, the most sick leave a worker can take in these
cases is 13 days.  With the new policy I am proposing today, federal
employees will be able to take up to 12 weeks paid sick leave to nurse an
ailing child or parent back to health.

        Just as the federal g'overnment was the first major employer to
desegregate its workplaces, today, our goverment can blaze a path toward
paid family leave that the private sector can follow.    If every company
in America that offers sick leave to its workers adopted the policy we are
adopting today, TK percent of all American families would have this
important benefit.
        [policy under consideration) We must find other creative new ways
to help more Americans use benefits they have earned to finance the time
off they need for their families.   Several states have asked the federal
government for permission to try a bold experiment: allow employees to tap
the unemployment insurance balances they have accumulated so that they can
have some income while they are on family leave.   This is a promising


experiment. Today, I am granting states permission to take these first
steps, in ways that promote economic growth and do not undermine the
fiscal soundness of the unemployment insurance system.  [precise action
TKJ

         I also challenge Congress to do its part.   I have proposed
expanding family leave to cover more workers and more parental
responsibilities. And I calIon Congress to act.    Parents should not have
to fear a bossD, wrath because they left work to take a child to the doctor
D) or call in sick to attend a parent teacher conference or volunteer in a
school.

        Americans believe in hard work. They put in long hours to get
their jobs done -- and theyD,re proud of it. This work ethic is the reason
our economy is one of strongest in the history of the world.   But, we
clearly need to find new ways to give workers more. time off families.

         The second challenge parents face in the modern economy is
finding affordable, high-quality child care.  Low-income families spend up
to a quarter of their income on child care, and studies show that only one
in seven child care centers are of good quality. When parents are lucky
enough to locate affordable and nurturing care for their children, they
face waiting lists that take weeks and months to move.  I am supporting
child care subsidies and tax credits, better training for caregivers and
stronger enforcement of safety standards. And I challenge businesses to
do their part by helping their own workers find and afford quality child
care.

        Today, millions of working parents start eyeing the clock every
day at three in the afternoon, wondering if their children have made it
safely back from school, and wondering how they will fare, at home alone.
The hours after the schoolbell rings and before parents come home from
work are a perilous time for children, the time they are most tempted to
try drugs and alcohol, and most likely to become victims of a crime.
That is why I have called for tripling our investment in quality after
school care. Too often, the safest, best equipped buildings for children
are kept locked and shuttered in the afternoon. I challenge school
districts all across America to unlock these empty classrooms and fill
them with the sounds of children playing and reciting their multiplication
tables.

        The third challenge parents face in the modern economy is that
they are physically separated from their children for longer and longer
periods of time. We can close that distance by bringing back an old idea:
that children can be with parents when they work.   I have experienced the
benefits of this myself. When I was a boy, living with my widowed mother
and her parents in Hope, Arkansas,   I spent many happy hours in my
grandfatherD,s tiny grocery store.   ID,d watch him with his customers, black
and white, and usually poor.   HeD,d give credit to whoever needed it, and   .
they always paid him back.   In that little family business, I absorbed
lessons and values that have stayed with me all my life.

         As a father, I have had the privilege of living, as it were, 0&
above the store,DB first in the GovernorD,s Mansion, then in the White
House.   I can D&commuteDB from my office to the family dinner table in about
three minutes when the lights are with me.   So I challenge more of America'\
s employers to bring workers and their children closer together during the
day, by allowing employees to telecommute -- that is, work from home with
a modem.    I challenge employers to opening more on-site child care
centers, and I support tax breaks to help them do so. And I challenge
 ·

employers to team up with school districts to build public schools at
worksites. Dozens of companies have already built such innovative public
schools and I have called for a new federal program to encourage more of
them.  Employees who enroll their children at these workplace schools can
spend more time with their children -- they can commute to work together
in the mornings and do homework on the ride home at night. Workplace
schools can bring parents and children closer together.

        The fourth great challenge that parents face in the modern economy
is cultural. The new economy has enriched our lives with lower-priced
electronic gear and a growing variety of medial entertainment.  But too
often, TV, radio, and the Internet bombard our children with images and
ideas that no parent would ever want them to see or learn.   We need tools
that can protect free speech but also give parents more control over what
their children see and read and hear.  We are creating these tools.  Soon,
half of all TV sets sold in America will come with V-chips: devices
parents can use to screen out sex, violence, or any program they donD,t
want their children to see. And soon, with just the click of a mouse, 95
percent of all Internet users will be able to make offensive web-sites
off-limits to their children.

        Creating these kinds of tools is the responsibility of
government. But the entertainment industry must d~ its part.    I challenge
the industry to stop showing. guns in any ads children might see, to
enforce more strictly their movie rating systems; and to determine whether
that system is allowing children to see too much gratuitous violence.

        If we provide these tools -- to screen out bad influences, to
bring home and work closer, to improve child care, to spend more time at
home -- we can help working parents succeed at the most important job of
all: the job of raising children.

        It is the responsibility of government to make these tools
available. But is the responsibility of parents to use them. More working
parents must take advantage of tools already available, such as family
leave. And all across American society, we must get serious about putting
our children first.

        Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. once wrote, D&It is quite easy for me
to think of a God of love mainly because I grew up in a family where love
was central and loving relationships were ever present.DS  I hope and pray
that the Class of 1999 will have the chance to build those ever-present
relationships with their children.

        To raise your children well, you will have to make many
sacrifices. But then, your parents made many sacrifices for you. I want
all of you to take a minute to think of how you got to this day.  How many
of you would have made it if it werenD,t for your families? If it werenO,t
for the precious hours your mom or dad found between shifts to help you
with your homework, or read you a story.    If it werenO,t for mornings
your mother rose at the crack of dawn to go to work so that she could be
home when you got back from school.  If it werenD,t for the hugs and
home-cooked meals that conveyed more powerfully than words,  unconditional
love, support and faith.  Ask your parents today: D&Was it worth it?D,

        Until you watch your own child graduate from school, you may
never know just how proud your parents are today.  But let me just add
that all America is proud today. Congratulations.
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

