RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diane C. Regas ( CN=Diane C. Regas/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-MAR-1997 16:44:28.00

SUBJECT:   Response to ideas to vet

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
2. Environment (Diane/Paul): 1) Is EPA working on an expansion of right
to know laws to cover chemical waste in 7 additional industries? 2) When
will EPA develop the Safe Water regs requiring every water company to send
every consumer an annual statement showing test results of the quality of
water in their tap and any health concerns about drinking it? 3) Are we
expanding Brownfields?

1)  EPA is in the middle of implementing the three phases of right to know
expansion that the President announced in Baltimore in late 1995.  Phase
II is the idea mentioned in your note.

Phase I is the expansion of the number of chemicals covered from 300 to
600. The regulations for Phase I are done, companies will report the new
information beginning in July 1997, and EPA will release the information
in about April 1998.

Phase II is the expansion of the list of industries covered to include
those that were not explicitly required to report in the law. While there
is an ongoing discussion within the Administration about which industries
should be covered, the rule will likely include at least mining, hazardous
waste handlers, and utilities.  EPA has a draft final rule at OMB for
review, and we should expect the normal review process to yield a final
rule within a couple of months.

Phase III is the expansion of reporting to include information about what
is going on inside a factory, i.e.what chemicals are used in making
products. EPA released a pre-proposal in late summer 96; and we should
expect a proposed rule in the next year or so. This proposal will be very
controversial for legal and policy reasons.

EPA has proposed that the Administration support right to know legislation
(or legislative principles)  that would provide information about toxicity
in products (this is known as "family right to know") there is a CEQ-NEC
led process to take this up after the kids e.o. is decided.  Some
environmentalists feel strongly that the Administration should support
Waxman's efforts to move this idea forward, even though prospects are dim
for final legislation in this Congress.  Industry is likely to criticize
this idea, but will face difficulty in explaining why parents shouldn't be
warned of toxics in products that kids are exposed to.  The timing on this
proposal is specifically dependent on how hard the WH pushes--it could be
a few weeks to many months.

2)  EPA is preparing regulations under the new Safe Drinking Water Act to
require water utilities to provide information to consumers about what is
in the tap water (known as "consumer confidence reports").  The


regulations are being developed through a consensus process with the
drinking water industry. The current schedule is to propose regulations
later this year and to finalize the regulations 1998. This action is
widely supported.

3)   Brownfields:   Paul is working on an announcement.


