RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: June Shih ( CN=June Shih/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-MAY-1999 13:36:14.00

SUBJECT:     grambling draft -- resend. Can we have comments asap?

TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO)       )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cathy R. Mays    ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP   [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO)     )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP      [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 5/20/99 6:20 pm
Glastris/Shih

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
D&NEW TOOLS FOR PARENTS IN THE NEW ECONOMYD8
COMMENCEMENT ADDRESS
GRAMBLING STATE UNIVERSITY
GRAMBLING, LOUISIANA
MAY 23, 1999

        When I heard that ID,d been invited to Grambling State University,
there wasnD,t much discussion about whether or not I would be here today.
I told my staff in Washington, a place where everybody thinks they,re
somebody, that I wanted to go to D&A Place Where Everybody is Somebody. 18
school motto) And I was not about to miss a chance to see the D&Best Band
in the LandD8 -- the Grambling State Marching Tigers -- play without having
to buy a ticket to the Super Bowl [they have played in four) .

        It is an honor to join the last Grambling class of the 20th
Century on this very important day in your lives.   In so many ways, the
story of this fine institution embodies the African American experience in
our 20th century.   In 1901, not a single school in this part of Louisiana
would welcome an African-American student into its classrooms.    But the
visionary farmers of this community -- the children and grandchildren of
slaves -- were determined to give their children the education, the pride,
and the power to rise above bigotry and injustice. They raised some money
and wrote to Booker T. Washington, asking him to send a teacher to help
establish a school.

           Out of that determination and vision, Grambling has grown into a


university for the 21st Century.  This beautiful campus has nurtured some
of AmericaO,s best educators and lawyers, pastors and public servants,
nurses and business leaders. Of course the NFL recruits here. -- thanks
to your legendary coach Eddie Robinson and his successor, Superbowl MVP
Doug Williams.  But AmericaO,s top technology firms recruit here, too,
because they know that Grambling State confers more Computer and
Information Science degrees to African-Americans than any other university
in the nation.

        You join a proud tradition and I congratulate each and everyone of
you.  This day marks a great achievement.  You have gained knowledge that
will enrich you for the rest of your lives and made friends who will stand
by you the rest of your lives.  Through long hou~s in the classroom and
late nights in the library, through moments of self-doubt and triumph, you
have gained the prize: an education that will help you succeed in one of
the most exciting times in human history.

        And I congratulate and honor your parents, who should be proud not
only of you, but of themselves. To raise a child from infancy to college
graduation is no small feat.  I understand that one of the most beloved
Presidents of Grambling, Ralph Waldo Emerson Jones, would often say to his
students, O&When you go home, be sure to kiss everybody, including the
mule. Because the mule is the one who pulls the plow and keeps the family
going.OS Well, IO,m not asking you to kiss any mules today, but I am asking
each of you to thank the people who kept your families going.

        People like Joyce Gaines of Vallejo, California. Even though the
pain of five ruptured disks in her back, Joyce worked three jobs,
commuting 200 miles a day to put her daughter Tieaesha through Grambling.
Today Tieaesha is graduating with a degree in Sociology and plans to open
a home for abused children.  People like James and Lillie Bedford of
Shreveport. James is a plumber; Lillie is a cook. Both took on extra
work at night and on weekends to help their youngest son Terrence pay for
college. Lillie was a student for a while here at Grambling back in the
1950s, but she had to leave before graduating when her father died.   Now
Terrence, GramblingO,s senior class president, is the second of seven
Bedford children to earn a Grambling degree.  ItO,s been said that to have
a child is to have your heart walking outside your body. I think James and
Lillie Bedford know that feeling today.

        Stories like these remind us of what Americans can achieve when
they set their minds on reaching a high goal. But they also remind us of
the hard work it takes to raise a child right, especially in our demanding
modern economy. This spring, in commencement addresses to the class of 0+
99, I will be speaking about how this bold new economy is transforming
virtually every facet of our lives.  Next month, at the University of
Chicago, I will talk about how we must put a human face on the dynamic but
sometimes disruptive international marketplace.  And today, I want to talk
about how we as a nation must respond to the new challenges facing
families in the new economy. We must reshape our institutions in ways that
give parents more time with their children. No government can raise a
child. Mothers and fathers do.   But we have a duty to help parents -- to
give them the tools they need to meet their responsibilities at home and
work; and to pass on their values to their children.

        The class of 0+99 is entering an era of unparalleled opportunity
and possibility. We all know that this is one of the strongest economies
in American history, with more than 18 million new jobs since 1993; the
lowest African-American unemployment and poverty rates on record; and the
highest African-American homeownership rates in history. But what we are


now beginning to understand is that the best may be yet to come. A
productivity explosion powered by technology 0) from the Internet that
links offices around the world to the computers used to track warehouse
inventory 0) is now being fully felt throughout the economy. America has a
tremendous capacity for more growth, greater investment, higher salaries,
and even faster technological innovation.   With your diplomas in hand,
you will have the opportunity to help shape these times, and to lead lives
of greater accomplishment and affluence than your parents ever dreamed of.

        But as your parents can attest, we still have far to go before we
have fully adapted to the demands of this new era.  In our modern economy,
companies compete not just with others down the street, but with firms
across the globe.  To stay competitive, they have had to produce more with
fewer employees -- and the pace of work has picked up.   Jobs today feel
like two jobs. And to make ends meet, many people have had to take on yet
another job.   Working parents are feeling enormous stress -- and they are
bringing that stress home with them.

         This will only get worse as the Class of 0+99 moves through its
careers.   It may seem a million years away to those of you graduating
today, but soon, most of you will become parents.  When that happens, you
will look at the clock on the wall in a whole different way. Today, you
may think nothing of being out with your friends or at the library working
at nine at night.  But soon enough, you will want to be home at nine at
night, putting your children to bed.  We must have an economy that will
give the class of 1999 the chance to do that.

          Last year, I asked the PresidentO,s Council of Economic Advisers
to study the sweeping changes the new economy has brought to our
families.   It has been said that if every economist on Earth were laid end
to end they still wouldnO,t reach a conclusion.   But on this question a
team of the nationO,s top economists has reached a conclusion, one that
confirms our common sense and common experience.   They found that because
more and more parents are working outside the home, they have less time
for their children.    The percentage of married mothers in the workforce
has nearly doubled in a generation, from 38 percent in 1969 to 68 percent
in 1996.    To African Americans, that is nothing new. African American
mothers have always had to work outside the home.   Today, all of America
is experiencing challenges African Americans have always known.

        Because more mothers are working outside the home, and because the
number of single parent families has grown, parents in the average family
have 22 fewer hours per week to spend at home.  ThatO,s nearly one full day
less time per week for parents to spend with their children.

        The vast majority of todayO,s parents are doing everything they can
to give their children whole and happy childhoods.   But no matter how hard
they try, they worry that it is still not enough.   They worry that waking
up early and staying up late to make time for a child might not be enough,
when that child still has to go home alone to an empty house after
school. They worry that all those Sunday morning sermons about a world of
love might not be enough, when the movies their children watch, the music
they listen to, the video games they play show a world of hate and
violence. They worry that all those nights working overtime to buy a
computer so that a child can visit some of the world" ,s finest librarie~ on
the Internet might not be enough, when that same Internet can also lead
them to recipes for pipe bombs and explosives.

        One of the gravest tasks IO,ve had to perform as President is
comforting families who have lost loved ones to senseless violence.   Last


week, Hillary and I visited with the students and families of Columbine
High School in Colorado.  I came away more certain than e·ver that as we
work to strengthen our gun laws, we must also work to strengthen our
families.

        America has done so before. When America last experienced a time
like today -- a period of sweeping technological and wrenching social
change -- our government acted.  In the previous century, America moved
from farm to factory.  Families migrated to cities, husbands went to work
in factories, and wives were left alone in cramped apartments, their
children roaming the streets or, worse, toiling in dangerous factories.
Alarmed by the condition in the cities, America responded with big,
practical solutions -- labor unions, settlement houses, child labor laws,
and universal elementary education. One hundred years ago, America made
the industrial age safe for families.  Today, we must make the information
age safe for families.

       The modern economy poses four great challenges for families.

        The greatest and most obvious of these is time.  In our round-the
world, round-the-clock economy, there just donO,t seem to be enough hours
in the day for parents to do everything they need to at home and at work.
I am proud that the first bill I ever signed into law was the Family and
Medical Leave Act.  Since 1993, millions of Americans have used it to take
up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave to care for a newborn or a sick relative
without losing their jobs. The current law, however, meets just a
fraction of the need.  Too many people and too many family obligations are
not covered. And too many families cannot take advantage of the law at
all because they simply cannot survive without their paychecks.

        We must think bigger. On the eve of the 21st Century, let us set a
goal that all working Americans can take the time they need to care for
their families without losing the income they need to support their
families.

        Achieving this goal will require a significant shift in how our
nation helps families succeed at home and at work.  It will demand
enormous thought, creativity -- and a willingness to experiment.   It must
be done in a way that gives families flexibility and promotes a dynamic
and growing economy.

        Today, using my executive authority as President, I am taking
important steps toward this goal.  I am directing the Office of Personnel
Management to allow all federal workers to use the sick leave they have
earned to take time off to care for their sick family members. Currently,
the most sick leave a worker can use in these cases is 13 days.  With the
new policy I am proposing today, federal employees will be able to take up
to 12 weeks paid sick leave to nurse an ailing child or parent back to
health.

        Just as the federal government was the first major employer to
desegregate its workplaces, today, our government can blaze a path toward
paid family leave that other employers can follow.    If every company in
America that offers sick leave to its workers adopted the policy we are
adopting today, TK percent of all American families would have this
important benefit.
        [policy under consideration ... We must find other creative new
ways to help more Americans use benefits they have earned to finance the
time off they need for their families.   Several states have asked the
federal government if it would be possible to try a bold experiment: allow


employees to tap the unemployment insurance balances they have accumulated
so that they can have some income while they are caring for a newborn.
This is a promising experiment.  Today, I am asking the Department of
Labor to begin the process of granting states permission to try this
experiment, in ways that promote economic growth and do not undermine the
fiscal soundness of the unemployment insurance system ... precise action TKJ

         I also challenge Congress ~o do its part.   I have proposed
expanding family leave to cover more workers and more parental
responsibilities. Congress should act on this proposal.   Parents should
not have to fear a bossO, wrath because they left work to take a child to
the doctor D) or call in sick to attend a parent teacher conference.

        Americans believe in hard work.  They put in long hours to get
their jobs done -- and theyD,re proud of it. This work ethic is the reason
our economy is one of strongest in the history of the world.  But, we
clearly need to find new ways to give workers more time off for their
families.

         The second challenge parents face in the modern economy is
finding affordable, high-quality child care.  Low-income famili~s spend up
to a quarter of their income on child care, and studies show that only one
in seven child care centers are of good quality. When parents are lucky
enough to locate affordable and nurturing care for their children, they
face waiting lists that take weeks and months to move.  I am supporting
child care subsidies and tax credits, better training for caregivers and
stronger enforcement of safety standards. And I challenge businesses to
do their part by helping their own workers find and afford quality child
care.

        Today, millions of working parents start eyeing the clock every
day at three in the afternoon, wondering if their children have made it
safely back from school, and wondering how they will fare, at home alone.
The hours after the schoolbell rings and before parents come home from
work are a perilous time for children, the time they are most tempted to
try drugs and alcohol, and most likely to become victims of a crime.
That is why I have called for tripling our investment in quality after
school care. Too often, the safest, best equipped buildings for children
are kept locked and shuttered in the afternoon.  I challenge school
districts all across America to unlock these empty classrooms and fill
them with the sounds of children playing and reciting their multiplication
tables.

        The third challenge parents face in the modern economy is that
they are physically separated from their children for longer and longer
periods of time.  We can close that distance by bringing back an old idea:
that children can be with parents when they work.   I have experienced the
benefits of this myself. When I was a boy, living with my widowed mother
and her parents in Hope, Arkansas,   I spent many happy hours in my
grandfatherD,s tiny grocery store.   ID,d watch him with his customers, black
and white, and usually poor.   HeD,d give credit to whoever needed it, and
they always paid him back.   In that little family business, I absorbed
lessons and values that have stayed with me all my life.

        As a father, I have had the privilege of living, as it were,   &
above the store,DS first in the GovernorD,s Mansion, then in the White
House.  I can D&comrnuteDS from my office to the family dinner table in about
three minutes when the lights are with me.   So I challenge more of AmericaD,
s employers to bring workers and their children closer together during the
day, by allowing employees to telecommute -- that is, work from home with


a modem.   I challenge employers to open more on-site child care centers,
and I support tax breaks to help them do so.  And I challenge employers to
team up with school districts to build public schools at worksites.
Dozens of companies have already built such innovative public schools and
I have called for a new federal effort to encourage more of them.
Employees can carve out more time for their children by enrolling them in
these workplace schools.  They can commute to work together in the
mornings, do homework on the ride home at night, even have lunch together.

        The fourth great challenge that parents face in the modern economy
is cultural. The new economy has enriched our lives with lower-priced
electronic gear and a growing variety of medial entertainment. But too
often, TV, radio, and the Internet bombard our children with images and
ideas that no parent would ever want them to see or learn.   We need tools
that can protect free speech but also give parents more control over what
their children see and read and hear.  We are creating these tools.  Soon,
half of all TV sets sold in America will come with V-chips: devices
parents can use to screen out sex, violence, or any program they donD,t
want their children to see. And soon, with just the click of a mouse, 95
percent of all Internet users will be able to make offensive web-sites
off-limits to their children.

        But the entertainment industry must do its part.   I challenge the
industry to stop showing guns in any ads children might see, to enforce
more strictly their movie rating systems; and to determine whether that
system is allowing children to see too much gratuitous violence.
        If we provide these tools - - to screen out bad influences, to
bring home and work closer, to improve child care, to spend more time at
home -- we can help working parents succeed at the most important job of
all: the job of raising children.

        It is the governmentD,s responsibility to make these tools
available. But is the responsibility of parents to use them. More working
parents must take advantage of tools already available, such as family
leave. And all across American society, we must get serious about putting
our children first.

        Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr .. once wrote, D&It is quite easy for me
to think of a God of love mainly because I grew up in a family where love
was central and loving relationships were ever present.DS I hope and pray
that the Class of 1999 will have the chance to build those ever-present
relationships with their children.

        To raise your children well, you will have to make many
sacrifices.  But then, your parents made many sacrifices for you. I want
all of you to take a minute to think of how you got to this day. How many
of you would have made i t if it werenD,t for your families? If it werenD,t
for the precious hours your mom or dad found between shifts to help you
with your homework, or read you a story.     If it werenD,t for mornings
your mother rose at the crack of dawn to go to work so that she could be
home when you got back from school.   If it werenD,t for the hugs and
home-cooked meals that conveyed more powerfully than words,   unconditional
love, support and faith.   Ask your parents today: O&Was it worth it?~,
        Until you watch your own child graduate from school, you may
never know just how proud your parents are today.   But let me just add
that all America is proud today. Congratulations.


