       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Irene Bueno ( CN=Irene Bueno/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

       CREATION DATE/TIME:23-MAY-1999 16:31:38.00

       SUBJECT:    FYI INS Restructuring Meeting

       TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
       READ:UNKNOWN

       TO: Janet Murguia ( CN=Janet Murguia/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
       READ:UNKNOWN

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ:UNKNOWN

       CC: Caroline R.   Fredrickson ( CN=Caroline R. Fredrickson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       Attached is a summary drafted by Steve Mertens on our meeting with INS on
       their restructuring proposal.  Steve's note indicates some concerns with
       the INS proposal that will require some resolution before a senior WH
       staff level meeting.

       It is important that we move quickly to develop and promote an
       Administration proposal will serve as a bold and credible alternative
       proposal to a Rodger/Reyes proposal.


       ---------------------- Forwarded by Irene Bueno/OPD/EOP on OS/23/99 04:26
       PM ---------------------------



       Steven M. Mertens

       OS/21/99 09:50:06 AM
       Record Type:    Record

       To:      Irene Bueno/OPD/EOP
       cc:
       Subject:         FYI INS Restructuring Meeting

       IB:    This is the e-mail I sent to Deich.

       Irene Bueno, Ken Schwartz, David Haun and I met with Bob Gardner and Frank
       Gordan of INS' Restructuring staff yesterday morning to discuss INS'
       proposed restructuring package.  The package is intended to represent the
       Administration's restructuring strategy for the INS at "the ground level"
       and included proposed geographic subdivisions that replace the existing
       regional structure and specific office and job titles/locations.

       Over the past year, INS has worked closely the it's staff and
       PriceWaterhouseCooper (PWC) to develop a series of organizational
       options. The draft presentation yesterday represented the choices of INS'
       leadership. While the overall presentation represented considerable
       thought, we have real concerns about the plan as outlined.  In general,
       except for the separation of enforcement and services which is a forgone


conclusion, the draft proposal seems to represent maintaining the
organizational status quo. As proposed, it also perpetrates a separate
"special" reporting relationship for the Border Patrol which we had
opposed in meetings with INS last spring.

Highlights of the draft proposal include:

Clearly delineated split between enforcement and services with three
Associate Commissioners for Enforcement, Immigration Services and Support
Operations.
Eliminates regional office designations and redraws geographic boundaries
to support six immigration service and enforcement areas, plus one
international area.
Creates a Chief Financial Officers to coordinate budget and finance.
Notes that costs for restructuring will be kept to a minimum -- but states
that additional funding may be required for pay reform and for additional
support positions.
Establishes a customer focus by establishing advisory panels and consumer
advocates.

Our concerns, which were shared with the INS representatives, are:

Establishing six geographic areas essentially just expands the number of
regional directors.

As proposed in the draft document, district offices would be split by
function but remain, and rather than the current three regional directors,
INS would have 12 area directors (6 for each program function) .

As originally envisioned the enforcement and service areas would be
operational entities running INS' program functions in specific
locations. For enforcement, these areas would be primar~ly clustered
along the border and for services they would be centered in key cities
requiring immigration services. By establishing only 12 areas 96 for each
program function), the broad span of control will mean (1) district
offices will be by necessity maintained (likely under another name), and
(2) the program areas will essentially become administrative centers or
under the current structure, smaller regions.

The Administration's proposal attempted to flatten the organization and
remove a layer of middle management.  We recommended eliminating the
district director position. On the enforcement-side, the .Border Patrol
Sector Chiefs, port-of-entry directors, area investigative and detention
staff would report directly to an enforcement area manager who in turn
would report to the Associate Commissioner for Enforcement. On the
Service-side, district directors would also be eliminated as city or
city-cluster office managers would report directly to the immigration
service area manager and then to the Associate Commissioner for
Immigration Services.

Border Patrol must be part of INS' chain of command and no outside
reporting relationship should exist

As a paramilitary organization, the Border Patrol has a clear reporting
relationship from agents to sector chiefs to the Border Patrol chief.
They clearly want to maintain this chain of command.

The draft proposal maintains this chain of command by placing the Border
Patrol under a sector chief reporting to an enforcement area director.
This enforcement area director reports to the Associate Commission through


both the Chief of the Border Patrol and the Deputy Associate Commissioner,
who are at the same level beneath the Commissioner. But in reality, the
establishment of a stand alone Border Patrol Chief -- with no other
responsibilities -- will lead to BP Sector Chiefs circumventing the area
enforcement directors and reporting directly to the BP Chief.

The Administration, as did the Commission on Immigration Reform,
recommended that the Border Patrol be more fully integrated into INS
operations in part by eliminating separate special reporting
relationship.  We had a long discussion with INS on this issue last
Spring, where it was agreed that no special reporting relationship would
be included in the Administration's plan. One method to ensure
integration, was to make the Border Patrol Chief the de facto Deputy to
the Associate Commissioner for Enforcement.   In this way, the Border
Patrol and all enforcement operations would report to this individual and
the Border Patrol Chief/Deputy Associate Commissioner for Enforcement
would be required to ensure enforcement program i.ntegration.


In our meeting, we also raised a number of questions regarding'INS' level
of preparedness for rolling out this plan.  The response was that this is
essentially a discussion draft.  While we agree that any plan will require
modification, we believe that a year after announcing the Administration's
plan the Hill will be looking for concrete plans and an implementation
strategy on restructuring. Any attempt to float a discussion draft --
especially one that appears to simply tinker with the status quo -- will
be ridiculed as too little, to late by Congress and not taken seriously,

After Michael's call to Steve Colgate, we have had follow-up discussions
on restructuring with INS.  Justice and INS plan to meet with us next week
to discuss/accommodate our concerns.  In addition, Therese called this
morning to see if OMB was OK with the AG talking with Roger's on INS
restructuring.  I said yes, based on the four principles OMB and DOJ had
agreed upon with the DAG a month ago.  She agreed the AG would not get
into the level of detail with which we were dealing.

If you have any questions on the above, please let me know.   Thanks.


