               RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

               CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

               CREATION DATE/TIME:24-MAY-1999 17:29:55.00

               SUBJECT:   fun to watch

               TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1
               READ: UNKNOWN

               TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
               READ: UNKNOWN

               TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
               READ: UNKNOWN

               TEXT:
               Elizabeth Dole Pushes Gun Control

                                    By Brigitte Greenberg
                                    Associated Press Writer
                                    Monday, May 24, 1999; 4:31 p.m. EDT

                                 NEW HAVEN, Conn. (AP) -- With a bottle of children's
               aspirin in her right
                                 hand and a handgun trigger lock in her left, Republican
               presidential hopeful
                                 Elizabeth Dole asked Yale Medical School graduates on
               Monday why the
                                 government requires a safety cap for one and not the
               other.

                                 "This will protect our children,"    said Dole, holding
               up the black trigger lock.
                                 " I t will also help you as future physicians, so you
               don't have to treat
                                 accidentally wounded children in hospital emergency
               rooms. I I

                                    Speaking to 123 new doctors and their families, Dole
               sought to distance
                                    herself .from the other GOP presidential candidates on
               the issue of gun
                                    control.

                                    "Leadership requires more than sitting on the sidelines
               measuring which
                                 direction the gun smoke is blowing, " she said, an
               apparent reference to
                                 Texas Gov. George W. Bush, the GOP front-runner.

                                    She had planned to make similar remarks at Saturday's
               state Republican
                                    convention in Georgia, but was unable to do so because
              of laryngitis.

                                    Asked last week about Mrs. Dole's planned remarks, Mindy
              Tucker, a
                                    spokeswoman for Bush, said:   "Gov. Bush has a record in


office of enacting
                     tough laws on those who commit crimes with a gun. ' ,

                     Dole said that as president she would sign a bill passed
last week by the
                     u.s.   Senate requiring background checks for weapon sales
at gun shows
                     and child safety locks on all guns.

                  She pointed to recent shootings at schools in Littleton,
Colo., and Conyers,
                  Ga., as reason enough to restrict the constitutional
right to bear arms.

                  "You who have dedicated your life to saving lives will
surely understand the
                  importance of a debate that is underway in Washington, ' ,
Dole said. "As we
                  stop and pray for those affected by this tragedy, let's
also stop and think. ' ,

                     The former American Red Cross president also reiterated
her belief that no
                    civilian needs an assault rifle. " r cannot imagine why
any family would need
                    an AK-47 to protect themselves or to go hunting. They
should be banned, ' ,
                    she said.

                  Although her remarks on gun control were obviously
well-received, some
                  graduates said she didn't go far enough.

                  "r've already seen quite a bit of street violence, ' ,
said Jessica Haberer, 26,
                  of Phoenix, who plans to specialize in internal medicine
in San Francisco. " r
                  would take a much stronger stance. r don't think a lock
on the gun is going
                  to make a difference."
..                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

