RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Todd Stern ( CN;Todd Stern/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO]            )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-MAY-1999 17:30:21.00

SUBJECT:   Draft potus memo

TO: Maria Echaveste
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN;Gene B. Sperling/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: James T. Edmonds ( CN;James T. Edmonds/OU;WHO/O;EOP@EOP [ WHO]                )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN;Jose Cerda III/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Charles F. Ruff ( CN;Charles F. Ruff/OU;WHO/O;EOP@EOP [ WHO]              )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD ]              )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: "Christopher Edley,   Jr."    <edley@law.harvard.edu> ( "Christopher Edley,       Jr."   cedI
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Sally Katzen ( CN;Sally Katzen/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Melissa G. Green ( CN;Melissa G. Green/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a short memo to the President intended to accompany the new
draft of the book, which Maria plans to send with the President on his
vacation. The memo is intended to flag major areas of dispute in order to
inform the President's review of the book.  It is not framed as a decision
memo, which would, in my view, be inappropriate at this time.

Please let me know if you have comments or edits.  I want to finalize this
first thing tomorrow morning.  tds;====;===========;== ATTACHMENT   1 ==============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D75]ARMS27415055R.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000001700000000000000001000001800000001000000FEFFFFFF000000001600
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
                                          May 24,1999


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                 TODD STERN

SUBJECT:              Race Book


Attached is a new draft ofthe race book. Maria and I circulated the previous draft to a relatively
small number of your advisors, and in this new draft Chris has incorporated some, but by no
means all, of their substantive comments. There continue to be several areas of disagreement
between Chris and some of your advisors, with respect both to policy and tone. This memo
doesn't present these disagreemel,lts in option form for your decision, as that doesn't seem
appropriate at this time. But, it is intended to help inform your review of the new draft so that
you can provide guidance on how you want these matters handled.

POLICY DISPUTES

Education (chapter 111.1)

The Compact. The principal dispute is over the new Compact for Equal Opportunity in
Education, which Chris has proposed. The Compact is framed as a program designed to close the
racial gap in achievement, which the chapter describes as our number one goal in education.
Chris sees your ESEA proposals as helpful, but still overly top-down in their prescription of the
means for achieving good results, while not tough enough in demanding that good results be
achieved.

In order to address the racial gap in achievement, the Compact would act as a kind of results-
based block grant. A separate funding stream would be established and the federal government
could provide (1) some new funding and (2) broad flexibility in existing federal grant programs
to school systems that adopt measurable goals, with a strategy and timetable for meeting those
goals. The awarding of grants and flexibility would depend upon a judgment by experts that the
school systems' proposed strategy was likely to succeed. School systems that failed to produce
results - reducing racial disparities in achievement - would face the loss of at least some funding
and flexibility and would have to work with experts to reform their strategies, including through
shock therapy and new management if necessary.

Bruce and Elena argue that this Compact could undermine your ESEA proposals by giving
ammunition to Republicans who favor block grants (without Chris's insistence on results) and
who will be only too pleased to point to your book as support for their position. Bruce and Elena
also dispute Chris's characterization of your ESEA proposals as too soft, arguing that these
proposals are sweeping in their range and fundamental to closing the educational opportunity gap
by ensuring qualified teachers, smaller class rooms, sound discipline, high expectations and
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

consequences for schools that fail. They contend that your ESEA proposals are given short shrift
in the book.

Social promotion. Chris is skeptical about the objective of ending social promotion, concerned
that the use of standards and tests can only be legitimate if we give students a full and fair
opportunity to meet the standards and pass the tests. As he said in an earlier memo to you, "I and
others fear that it is politically easy for some state or local official to say he's for tough standards
and then show it by flunking poor colored kids." Bruce and Elena's view is that we're for high
standards now, not at some future time when all aspects of unequal funding have been addressed.
They argue that the best way to address the concerns of the civil rights community is to couple
no-social-promotion policies with steps to strengthen leaming opportunities for kids, such as
providing extra help for students who need it and extended learning time.

Economic development (chapter 111.2)

Gene is concerned that this chapter fails to give adequate credit to what you've done over the
past six years in terms of directing investment to poor communities and is too heavily focussed
on the example of the federal financing system for housing. He is working on edits, but has not
completed them yet.

Crime -- Racial Profiling (chapter 111.3)

An interagency group including DPC, White House Counsel, Justice and Treasury (Customs),
among others, has been working for some time on a draft executive order on racial profilng. You
will be receiving a memo on this matter in due course. The consensus of this group, in a
nutshell, is that the Order should begin with a forceful statement about the undesirability of racial
profiling, and should then direct the relevant agencies (1) to report on their actual policies and
practices, and (2) to undertake a serious data collection effort in order to inform your ultimate
decision-making. Chris believes the Order should include a flat ban on profiling with an escape
valve for extraordinary showings - e.g., by INS in certain situations on the southwest border - as
presented in the current draft ofthe book. The consensus of the group (other than Chris) is that
an Order including an exception will be portrayed as your acceptance of racial profiling (and thus
be criticized by civil rights groups), while a flat ban isn't feasible at this time without greater
understanding of the extent to which Customs and INS make use of the practice.


Civil Rights -- School funding (chapter 111.4)

The draft chapter on civil rights includes what Chris describes as a fairly muscular endorsement
of disparate impact analysis in the area of allocating resources among schools. This is consistent
with a number of references in the education chapter that express disapproval with the use of
local property taxes to fund schools. ("In recent years, there have been over a dozen law suits
brought under state constitutional provisions, challenging the school finance systems established
by state laws. These have met with some success. I hope much more change of this sort is on
the way.") Chuck Ruff notes that there are differing views on resource allocation among DOJ,
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

     DoEd and DPC, that the discussion in the book may raise questions about the legality of school
     funding schemes all over the country, and that more policy discussion is needed before you get
     out front on this issue.

     TONE AND MESSAGE

     A number of concerns have also been voiced regarding tone or message. They include:

        It isn't credible at this late date to add "heart" to your traditional triad of opportunity,
         responsibility and community. It's fine to say that racial reconciliation requires a change in
         people's hearts, but not to add a fourth leg to your traditional litany, as if you just realized
         that something has been missing there for the last seven years;

        Responsibility, while listed in the litany, is given short shrift in the body of the book. There
         is an intensive focus on the need to provide greater opportunity to minorities in order to close
         racial gaps in education, economic development, treatment by the criminal justice system,
         health care and environmental justice, but there is not enough of your traditional emphasis on
         the need for all of us, including minorities, to assume responsibility -- work hard, play by the
         rules, support our children, etc.;

        The book doesn't adequately capture your voice, the special character of your discourse on
         race, as evident in speeches like Memphis, Austin, etc. To some degree, this comment
         overlaps with the previous one about responsibility, but it is broader than that;

        The book is too negative in certain places. For example, the opening poem, an Ojibway
         prayer, begins, "Grandfather, look at our brokenness." In a couple of chapters (Part II and
         Part V), there is an extended discussion about why your generation failed to pick up the torch
         from Dr. King, musing about whether the combination of assassinations, Vietnam and riots
         knocked the wind out of your idealism, wondering whether your generation stood aside
         because you thought further progress was inevitable, or would be taken care of by others, or
         was just too difficult or fatiguing.

     These concerns are by no means shared by all your advisors, but have been expressed by a
     number of them.
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

