RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N, Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-MAY-1999 17:29:14.00

SUBJECT:   from sunday

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Barry J. Toiv ( CN=Barry J. Toiv/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP   [ WHO I   )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Hastert, Hyde back gun limits

                     May 23, 1999

                     BY LYNN SWEET SUN-TIMES WASHINGTON BUREAU

                     WASHINGTON--Two powerful conservative Illinois
Republicans--House
                   Speaker J. Dennis Hastert and Judiciary Chairman Henry
Hyde--will support a
                   variety of gun control measures pushed by Senate
Democrats as the divisive
                   issue heads to the House.

                   How Hastert manages the legislation will be seen as a
test of his leadership,
                   which was criticized after a vote on whether to
authorize air strikes in Kosovo,
                   which Hastert backed, ended in a 213-213 losing tie.

                   Gun control legislation is handled by Hyde'S judiciary
panel, and Hyde, a House
                   leadership source said, has no problems with most of
the initiatives the Senate
                   passed in the last two weeks, including background
checks at gun shows and
                   trigger locks. That's consistent with Hyde's support in
past years of anti-gun
                   legislation, including an assault weapons ban and a
waiting period imposed in
                   the Brady Bill.

                   Although Hyde is a conservative, he does not believe
the second amendment is
                   absolute. He thinks that "reasonable" restrictions are
permitted.

                   In a May 13 interview, Hastert said he supported
raising the minimum age for
                   gun ownership to 21 and gun show background checks. He
repeated the
                   sentiment in a floor speech Thursday.



                   Hastert faces the challenge of forging a consensus
among Republicans in the
                   House, where anti-gun control lawmakers from Western
states will be at odds
                   with those from from Northeast states and suburban
districts who favor more
                   restrictions.

                    Hous~   Democrats want to capitalize on the Senate gun
control
                   victories--propelled by Thursday's shootings at a
Georgia high school--and use
                   the momentum to force votes on anti-gun legislation
this week.

                   Hastert and Hyde foresee no floor votes until mid-June
and want gun laws to be
                   a component of a comprehensive package addressing youth
violence.

                   "We want to convey to Speaker Hastert and to the
leadership of the House of
                   Representatives that we need to act. We need to act
now," said Rep. Steny
                   Hoyer (D-Md.) after a strategy session with the
president Friday.

                   Hyde has scheduled a judiciary panel hearing on
anti-gun proposals and the
                   lack of enforcement of existing federal gun laws for
Thursday.

                   In anticipation of that hearing, House Republicans
circulated a memo Friday
                   about a 1996 Clinton administration decision that
allowed 100,000 Chinese
                   assault weapons to be imported, despite a ban.

                   "Given the hearing next week is to focus at least in
part on the enforcement
                   record and that China is much in the news, I wonder
whether it might be an
                   opportune time to bring this story back up," the memo
said.

                   Gun control legislation tied up the Senate most of the
last week. In a series of
                   Senate votes on the issue, Sen. Peter Fitzgerald
(R-Ill.) broke from party ranks,
                   making good on campaign promises to back "reasonable"
gun restrictions.

                    Fitzgerald voted for the strongest versions--all
Democratic--of anti-gun
                    legislation. As a state senator, Fitzgerald voted for a
bill that would have
                   allowed a person with police training to carry a
concealed weapon. The bill
                   didn't pass.
  .,



                    His votes surprised some of his colleagues, he said.

                    "They thought I would vote against it."

                    Back to News Seven-day Archive Page


