RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME:27-MAY-1999 11:59:34.00

SUBJECT:    edley laughs

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD I    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
2001: A Gore
                Odyssey

                WAS H I N G TON,           D C




                HeD,s vice-president; heD,s heir apparent. But
                who is Al Gore, and what does he believe in?


  Lexington: Bill
  Bradley


  Search
  archive

  Links

                FOR months, Al GoreD,s selection as the
                Democratic nominee for president in 2000 has
                looked unavoidable. For months, until now. In
                short order, a credible rival has emerged in the
                gangling shape of Bill Bradley (see article), and the
                partyD,s nagging doubts about Mr Gore have been
                given voice by Bill Clinton himself. The president,
                talking privately to colleagues and by telephone to
                the New York Times, admitted that he was
                worried by the campaignD,s slow start and by the
                candidateD,s lack of forcefulness. Other Democrats
                agree. Although Mr Gore still beats Mr Bradley
                with ease in polls among Democrats, he always
                trails both George W. Bush·and Elizabeth Dole,
                two Republican contenders, when a broader
                national pulse is taken; and his extraordinary
                fund-raising prowess has never been matched by a
                set of convincing ideas.

                The mediaD,s attention is now fixed on the
                wobblings of the Gore electoral machine. The


              recent appointment as campaign manager of Tony
              Coelho, a former congressman renowned for his
              fund-raising skills, gives sceptics only slightly more
              confidence, for Mr GoreD,s image already suffers
              from his obsession with money. But these are early
              days, when any campaign is unformed. Rather than
              agonising over Mr GoreD,s day-to-day fumblings,
              his critics would do better to investigate how
              D&Prince AlbertD8 differs from King Bill, and what he
              is offering his country.




              If you ask Mr GoreD,s campaign organisers what
              Gore-ism is, you get· two rather careful and wary
              answers. The first is that it is too early to say: the
              campaign must stick to its initial priorities, raising
              money and harvesting grass-roots endorsements in
              key primary states. The second is that, to
              understand Gore-ism, one need only look at
              Clintonism. Over the past seven years, Mr Gore
              has been the presidentD,s most durably influential
              adviser, with the exception of Hillary Clinton; other
              intimates, like the pollster Dick Morris, have
              proved ephemeral. It follows that a Gore
              administration would continue Mr ClintonD,s
              policies, since these are in large part Mr GoreD,s
              anyway.

              There is, admittedly, much truth in this second
              answer. Unlike most presidents, Mr Clinton chose
              a deputy who resembled him in many ways: a
              youngish southerner, a policy wonk, a centrist.
              Moreover, shared years in the White House have
              increased the bond between the two men. Past
              presidents have disparaged their deputies, but Mr
              Clinton has always been commander-in-chief of the
              Gore fan club. In the suite of offices occupied by
              the vice-presidential staff, the walls are lined with
              photographs showing Mr Gore in a series of
              intimate moments with the president: walking alone
              together down a corridor, exchanging confidences
              at a conference table, embracing at a rally. Hence
              the damage done when Mr ClintonD,s private
              doubts were aired.

              The Clinton-Gore bond extends to the people who
              advise them. Many prominent members of Mr
              GoreD,s kitchen cabinet have also been part of Mr
              ClintonD,s. The top Gore economist, for example, is
              Larry Summers, just nominated as Mr ClintonD,s
              treasury secretary. Mr GoreD,s chief of staff, Ron
              Klain, once worked on Mr ClintonD,s staff at the
              White House. Mr KlainD,s predecessor, Jack
              Quinn, went on to be Mr ClintonD,s chief counsel.
              Elaine Kamarck, a Harvard academic charged with
              developing policies for Mr GoreD,s presidential
              campaign, has known and advised Mr Clinton


              since 1990. Chris Edley, another Harvard
              professor and Gore policy guru, worked in Mr
              ClintonD,s budget team and advised him on race
              issues.

              Shared years in the White House have also
              developed in Messrs Clinton and Gore some
              common political reflexes. Having plunged abruptly
              from victory in 1992 to humiliation in the mid-term
              elections of 1994, both men are risk-averse. Mr
              Gore, like Mr Clinton, seems to believe in stroking
              interest groups, even when he has the strength to
              defy them. He listens carefully to pollsters, rather
              than risk getting ahead of public opinion. He raises
              pots of campaign money, even though he damages
              his boy-scout image in the process.

              Third-term Clinton?

               In keeping with this political caution, Mr Gore
              ·seems to share Mr ClintonD,s belief that modest
               proposals are better than grand designs: they serve
               the political function of registering concern, but are
               too small to provoke opposition. This is the lesson
               learned from the defeat of Mr ClintonD,s ambitious
               health reform in 1994. Asked about Mr GoreD,s
               ideas on health care now, a top aide waffles for a
               while. But then he adds, with sudden clarity and
               emphasis, that the vice presidentD,s proposals will
               be D&hard to demoniseD8.

              Thanks to similar centrist instincts, overlapping
              staffs, and the shared experience of the White
              House, many Gore administration policies would
              indeed resemble those that America has grown
              used to. On the economy, for example, Mr Gore
              emphasises fiscal prudence. He resists Republican
              calls to spend the current budget surplu·s on tax
              cuts, preferring to put money aside for the day
              when demography drives government finances
              back into deficit. He prefers to shore up the big
              pension and health-care programmes, rather than
              experiment with their privatisation. He favours
              cautiously redistributive tax and spending policies,
              arguing that technology and globalisation are
              tending to increase gaps be'tween rich and poor,
              and that public policy should mute this.

              Like Mr Clinton, Mr Gore favours free trade; but
              he may not be inclined to take risks for it. In the
              past, some of his finest moments have come on this
              issue: against Dick Gephardt, then a rival in the
              Democratic primaries, for proposing anti-trade
              policies in 1988, or against Ross Perot over
              NAFTA in 1993. But these days Mr Gore seems to
              sense that the political winds have turned. His
              advisers talk of trade liberalisation, but they add
              that this must be D&appropriateD8. That means that
              new trade deals must include concessions to the
              environmental and labour lobbies.



              Mr GoreD,s foreign policy is also likely to resemble
              Mr ClintonD,s. It will be pragmatic, ad hoc, lacking
              in a grand design; but its basic instincts will be
              sensible. As vice-president, Mr Gore has veered
              between amoral realpolitik, as when he visited
              China but made few public statements about
              human rights, and moralistic sermons, as when he
              delivered a lecture to the Malaysian hosts of last
              yearD,s APEC summit, criticising the trial of Anwar
              Ibrahim, the countryD,s former deputy prime
              minister. Rather like Mr Clinton, Mr Gore
              promises to defend American values with gusto
              when the price is low, but to be tactful when
              dealing with big countries that can damage
              American interests.

              Mr Gore has also emerged as a believer in African
              debt relief, development programmes aimed at the
              poor worldD,s under-educated girls, and generally in
              the idea that rich countries will suffer in the end if
              large chunks of humanity are left behind to languish.
              As he noted at the World Economic Forum in
              Davos las't January, one in three adul ts in the
              developing worldD*872m of themD*cannot read or
              write; 125m children of primary-school age are not
              attending classes. This is compassionate,
              internationalist stuff, but it shares Mr ClintonD,s taste
              for the eclectic.

              Those little differences

              Despite all these similarities, Gore-ism and
              Clintonism will differ. For one thing, circumstances
              will compel a difference. Two of Mr ClintonD,s main
              policy aimsD*reducing the fiscal deficit and
              reforming welfareD*were accomplished during his
              first term, obliging Mr Gore to look for new
              frontiers to conquer. For another, Mr Gore does
              have personal interests, and personal quirks, that
              distinguish him from the president. Most strikingly,
              Mr Gore is interested in science: his famous
              concern for the chemical balance of environment is
              matched by' similar passions for the Internet, the
              genome map, new research on learning.

              If you measure Mr Gore on a left-right scale, he
              looks like a conventional centrist. He surrounds
              himself with clever technocrats: people who are on
              the whole unattached to union interests and
              uncommitted to the traditional welfare state. The
              exceptions, such as HarvardD,s Chris Edley (a
              self-proclaimed D&paleo-liberalD8) tend only to
              confirm Mr GoreD,s centrism. The vice-president,
              Mr Edley points out, is tough on crime; he
              supported welfare reform; he is a fiscal hawk: there
              is no way that he could be identified with the
              Democratic PartyD,s liberal wing, Mr Edley
              concludes regretfully. The archetypal Gore man is
              Mr Klain, the chief of staff, a super-smart lawyer


              with no known ideology.

              But the left-right measure is not the most telling
              gauge of the vice-president. Indeed, if you ask Mr
              GoreD,s tribe of advisers what he is like, adjectives
              like D&leftDB or D&rightDB do not feature in the answer.
              Instead, you are liable to hear a lot about his
              D&futurismDB, his fascination with D&complex systemsDB,
              his taste for methodical analysis. If Mr Clinton is in
              his element chairing a town hall discussion on race,
              or empathising with the victims of a school
              shooting, Mr Gore is drawn to long-run, abstract
              themes. He worries about acid rain. He
              brain-storms about. the Internet. He calls in
              management gurus to help reinvent government. He
              is fascinated with the science and social science
              that shape the D&new economyDB. He is, as Ms
              Kamarck (one of his chief government reinventors)
              gushingly says, D&a creature of the next centuryD8.

              To illustrate this futurism, Mr GoreD,s advisers draw
              attention to his record before he became
              vice-president. In the 1980s, they like to point out,
              Mr Gore focused on global warming: he even
              predicted, amid much derision at the time, the
              demise of the internal combustion engine. History,
              say Mr GoreD,s boosters, is already proving him
              right: last year Jack Smith, the chairman of General
              Motors, declared that no car company that relied
              solely on the internal combustion engine would
              thrive in the next century. Equally, Mr Gore spoke
              passionately during the 1980s about the
              importance of linking computers together, and
              claims to have coined the term D&information
              superhighwayDB. Again, history is on his side: the
              Internet is everywhere.

              The Gore campaign will play up this record of
              canny futurism. Already Mr Gore peppers his
              speeches with grand predictions. In his recent
              Davos appearance, he foresaw an age when
              D&billions of ubiquitous intelligent devices, connected
              to the global information superhighway, promise
              ultimately to have an impact on our civilisation
              larger even than that brought about by the invention
              of writing.DB And he showered his audience with
              breathless historical comparisons: the means of
              production have changed as dramatically as they
              did in the industrial revolution; the ways of thinking
              are changing as profoundly as during the
              Renaissance; the climatic balance is changing in
              ways it has not done since before the agricultural
              revolution.

              The Gore people are convinced that this message
              is a vote-winner. People understand, they say, that
              AmericaD,s prosperity is built on technology; they
              know that their individual prosperity will depend on
              this. People also suspect that most politicians know
              little about technology: after all, George Bush, the


              Republican front-runner, made money in oil and
              baseball; Elizabeth Dole ran the Red Cross until
              recently. Mr Gore wants to stand out as the man
              who can sustain the high-tech boom, and at the
              same time devise measures that protect the weak
              from technologyD,s more alarming consequences.

              What might this mean in policy terms? Mr Gore is
              likely to apply science-friendly instincts to all sorts
              of government challenges. If you ask his advisers
              about crime policy, for example, you will hear all
              about the breakthrough that computerised patrol
              cars imply for police productivity. If you ask about
              schools, you will be told that the wiring of the
              classroom will soon deliver a quantum leap in
              learning. The first applications of a new technology,
              Ms Kamarck says, never realise its potential: when
              electricity arrived, some misguided companies
              acquired separate generators for each floor of their
              buildings. If an enlightened administration leads the
              way, Ms Kamarck goes on, America can
              accelerate the productivity gains of the information
              revolution.

              To this end, Ms Kamarck talks enthusiastically of
              computer-focused teacher training and pilot
              programmes that may improve applications of
              existing science. But she is also keen on basic
              science: on the search for the next Internet-sized
              breakthrough. She likes to note that the effort to
              map the human genome began as a government
              project, and has been taken over by private efforts
              now that the commercial potential has become
              obvious. Mr Gore has lately been passing around
              an article about the Human Genome ProjectO,s
              public-sector origins, hoping to provoke ideas on
              its consequences for medicine.

              Next, Mr GoreD,s advisers offer policies to improve
              the information revolutionD,s social consequences.
              Because of rapid technological change, they say,
              people must be prepared to change jobs
              frequently: therefore, pensions and health care
              should be portable. In order to change jobs,
              people must retrain: therefore, tax breaks should
              make adult education D&as affordable and routine as
              buying a new appliance or financing a car,D8 as Mr
              Gore put it recently. But adult retraining is not
              enough. Thanks to the information revolution, the
              rewards for university study are growing: in 1997
              college graduates earned 77% more than high
              school graduates, up from a differential of 58% in
              1975. This D&digital divideD8 worries Mr Gore:
              D&How,D8 he asked in a recent speech, D&do we make
              sure that everyone has the chance to compete and
              win in this new knowledge-based economy?D8 His
              answer is to extend Mr ClintonD,s commitment to
              reducing class size, and to give children a better
              start by making pre-school education universal.


              Restless mind, heavy hand

              Thus far, Mr GoreD,s scientism seems benign. The
              trouble is that it may be pushed further than this; for
              Mr GoreD,s intellectual style is to push everything to
              its furthest limits. His brain-storming carries him to
              extremes: in O&Earth in the BalanceOS, published in
              1992, Mr Gore likens global warming to the
              Holocaust, discerns its root cause in the
              O&dysfunctional civilisationOS of the West, and
              demands O&a change in our essential character.OS The
              clich? holds that Mr Gore is a bore. There is some
              truth in this: the issues he loves, as Michael Kinsley,
              the editor of Slate, has pointed out, tend to be
              both obscure and politically uncontroversial, which
              makes for dull campaigning. But it is also true that,
              were this man to get the presidency, he might well
              be too interesting for comfort.

              You can hear traces of this hyperactive mind in the
              adoring praise from his advisers. Policy sessions
              with the vice-president, they say, are an
              intellectualO,s dream. Mr Gore will suddenly
              expound on the fifth law of thermo-dynamics and
              why this is a metaphor for reinventing government.
              He seizes upon the idea that government
              programmes should be evaluated according to their
              impact on families, rather than individuals, and
              demands a thorough re-analysis of anti-poverty
              policy. He loves, above all, to spot links between
              different subjects. O&Environmentalism is not just
              about the health of the planet,OS one Gore
              confidante explains, in his tribeO,s signature style. O&It
              has implications that extend to political stability.
              When the streams dry up, people migrate, and that
              causes instability and conflict.OS

              The worry is that this restless mind may make for
              restless government. If ArnericaO,s security
              ultimately depends on Bengali pollution and the
              education of African girls, presumably ArnericaO,s
              president should fix these problems, just as he
              should help to make teachers computer-literate. If
              the cohesion of families goes a long way to
              determine rates of poverty and illiteracy,
              presumably the president should devise ways of
              promoting families also. The more ideas Mr Gore
              grapples with, the more policy initiatives he is likely
              to produce. Lately, for example, he has promised
              to grapple with urban sprawl, and to make the
              suburbs more D&liveableOS. This conjures up a new
              image of the American presidency, or one at least
              not seen since Jefferson: the president as town
              planner.

              There are three possible dangers in Mr GoreD,s
              restlessness. The firstO*which will be played up by
              RepublicansO*is that a Gore presidency would
              bring about a large expansion in the size of
              government. This seems, on balance, unlikely: Mr


              GoreD,s restless intellect is checked and balanced
              by his Clintonian political caution. At a recent
              conference on adult education, for example, Mr
              Gore laid out grand-sounding policy goals: D&we
              must ensure that all of our people have good,
              up-to-the-minute information and counselling on
              available jobs, the training needed to get those
              jobs, and the knowledge of where to get the
              resources to pay for it.DB But the suggested means
              to these ends involved very little expansion in
              government. Mr Gore offered a tax break to
              employers that provide college scholarships, and
              another to those that provide literacy and English
              training. He promised a token sum of
              moneyD*$60mD*to help alliances of employers,
              colleges and unions to organise more training. And
              he announced a new Labour Department website
              with training information. This is hardly a harbinger
              of big government.

              The second danger in restless Gore is that
              AmericaD,s tax code will become even more
              complicated and unpopular than it is already. To
              requite his policy passions without expanding
              government, Mr Gore will propose tax incentives
              for an endless list of worthwhile pursuits, with the
              result that even accountants cease to keep track of
              the new loopholes in the system. This danger is,
              unfortunately, real: Mr GoreD,s advisers concede
              that they mean to use tax breaks frequently. Far
              from denying this, indeed, they argue that it is fine:
              better to have a complicated tax code, they say,
              than a larger government bureaucracy. This is
              debatable, to say the least. A bewildering tax code
              is economically inefficient, and frequently fails to
              promote the activities that it favours.

              But the biggest danger in restless Gore is the last
              one. It is that, preoccupied with innovative small
              policies, he will fail to tackle the big challenges. In
              foreign policy, he will think interestingly about the
              interconnectedness of migration and war; but he
              may fail to clarify AmericaD,s muddled thinking on
              military interventions. On the domestic front, his
              attention to urban sprawl may come at the expense
              of more presidential issues.

              Is this last danger real? Mr Gore usually appears
              methodical enough to stick to the big themes; he is,
              by nature, less distractable than Mr Clinton. But,
              occasionally, he seems to lose a sense of
              perspective. D&The person who deserves to be our
              next president is the one who understands how
              tired working parents are,DB he said on a campaign
              swing through Iowa in March. This is nonsense.
              The person who deserves to be the next president
              is the one who resolutely ignores peripheral issues
              and attends to the big ones. When Mr Clinton frets
              about his micro-managing vice-president, it is not
              merely campaign-management he is referring to.




               LINKS
               GoreD,s presidential agenda is displayed at the
               Gore2000 official campaign site. His office at
               the White House site contains a cartoon gallery.
               Rivals Bill Bradley and George W Bush are
               challenging Gore online as well as on the
               campaign trail. GoreD,s Davos speech on debt
               relief is available in audio format. You can
               check the state of GoreD,s (and BradleyD,s)
               campaign coffers at the Federal Election
               CommissionD,s site.
               Top of page


