RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Barry J. Toiv ( CN=Barry J. Toiv/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-MAY-1999 18:16:21.00

SUBJECT:   Note paragraph in bold re hastert

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
                      House GOP backs gun control bill

                      May 26, 1999

                      BY LYNN SWEET SUN-TIMES WASHINGTON BUREAU

                      WASHINGTON--Top House Republicans lined up Tuesday
behind
                      gun-control proposals pushed by the White House and
congressional
                      Democrats as House passage of the measures became more
likely.

                      House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert and Judiciary Committee
Chairman Henry
                      Hyde agreed with other House leaders on legislation to
require mandatory
                      trigger locks on all guns, background checks for buyers
of explosives and
                   closing other sales loopholes as part of what Hyde
called a wider-ranging bill
                   aimed at reducing youth violence.

                      "We support common-sense legislation that keeps guns
out of the hands of
                   unsupervised children," Hastert said in a floor speech.
"We support tightening
                   laws to bring uniformity between gun shows and gun
shops.

                      "We support instant background checks at gun shows. We
intend to bring
                      these measures to the floor of the House. And I believe
they will pass. But
                      passing these measures is only part of the solution,"
Hastert said.

                   Democrats continued to push on Tuesday for a vote
before the Memorial Day
                   recess on just the gun control measures passed by the
Senate.

                      House Democrats do not have enough support to force a
vote this week.


                      "We don't want to be stampeded," Hyde said. A Judiciary
subcommittee
                      chaired by Rep. Bill McCullom (R-Fla.) holds a hearing
Thursday to discuss
                   the lack of enforcement of current anti-gun laws, and
tougher penalties.for
                   juveniles who commit crimes.

                   Hastert, who owns a rifle and two shotguns used for
hunting, and Hyde, who
                   said his father once gave him a civil War-era shotgun,
said their gun and youth
                   violence proposals will hit the House floor by mid-June
after consideration by
                   Hyde's committee.

                   "You can't ignore what happened in Colorado and
Georgia," Hyde said,
                   referring to the two recent high school shootings.

                   White House spokesman Barry Toiv said the
administration was waiting to see
                   the details of the Republican plan and noted the
absence of a provision to raise
                   the minimum age for gun ownership to 21. Hastert
endorsed increasing the age
                   May 13. Hastert spokesman Pete Jeffries said, "We'd
expect the age issue to
                   be addressed in an amendment."

                      Between 50 and 60 Republicans would join with Democrats
to guarantee
                   passage of gun legislation, enough to make up for the
expected defection of
                   about 20 to 30 Democrats who will oppose more gun
control.

                   What will be an issue is the makeup of the larger
Republican package, which
                   contains items opposed by Democrats, such as longer
mandatory sentences.

                      Hyde and Hastert also did not spell out what they will
offer in the way of
                   "changing the culture of violence" they said was
integral to the legislation.

                   A controversial provision of the Republican plan for
liberals may be a proposal
                   to not expunge the record of minors convicted of
felonies. Hyde sees that as
                   necessary in order to revoke the right of gun ownership
to any juvenile .
                   convicted of a violent crime.

                   Republican leaders also called for the a ban on
importing large-capacity
                   ammunition clips.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 052 - FOLDER -002


[05/27/1999-05/28/1999]


