RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:31-MAY-1999 15:06:05.00

SUBJECT:   NC10225: Gay students fight back

TO: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce .N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Richard Socarides/WHO/EOP on 05/31/99
03:03 PM ---------------------------



        rwockner@netcom.com
        OS/28/99 01:45:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Richard Socarides@EOP
cc:
Subject: NC10225: Gay students fight back
~~AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA




This item is copyrighted. Do not print it without permission from the
originating media operation. Do not post this item in a public online
forum. Items on this mailing list that are not copyrighted will not
contain this message. This free mailing list is open only to people with
whom I am acquainted. It has 219 recipients.
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA




LOS ANGELES TIMES, May 28, 1999

( http://www.latimes.com )

Abuse of Gay Students Brings Increase in Lawsuits
Harassment: Victims, once silent or ignored, now strike out against a
favorite form of campus torment.

By BETTINA BOXALL, DUANE NORIYUKI, Times Staff writers



        MORGAN HILL, Calif.-- In the halls of the local high school, the
words "faggot" and "dyke" were routinely uttered, about as often, Alana
Flores remembers, as "hello" and "goodbye."
        Slurs were hissed at her in class, she says, scribbled on her
locker and on pornographic death threats -- including a picture of a bound
and gagged woman with a slit throat.
        Flores is 20 now, the high school harassment behind her but hardly
forgotten. Together with five other former students of Live Oak High
School in this half country, half suburban town south of San Jose, she is
suing the Morgan Hill Unified School District, claiming that teachers and
administrators ignored pervasive anti-gay abuse.  One of several such
actions filed around the nation, the lawsuit represents the latest
frontier in school harassment issues--a legal front that gained ground
this week when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that school districts can be
held liable in similar cases involving extensive sexual harassment of
students by one another.
        Emerging in the past five years, gay harassment suits and
legislative efforts to ban discrimination in California schools are a
reaction to a favorite, and at times remarkably ugly, form of
student-on-student torment. As early as grade school, gay epithets and
accusations of homosexuality are tossed with abandon at kids who are gay,
thought to be gay or who are simply different or unpopular.
        Anti-gay taunts are hardly new to schools. But by many accounts,
campus gay-baiting and bashing are more pronounced than ever, the flip
side of the increasing profile of gay youth and homosexuality in general
and the emergence of gay student support groups.
        "The more visibility and openness with which the issue is addressed
in culture at large and the more support for young people, ironically the
more attacks," said Beth Reis, principal researcher for a recent study of
school-related anti-gay harassment across Washington state.
        In an anonymous 1995 survey of Bay Area community college students
conducted by a psychologist studying hate crimes, half the young men
questioned admitted that they had engaged in anti-gay name calling,
threats or physical violence.
        "Harassment of young people, accusing them of being gay and lesbian
whether or not they are, is much worse than ever," said Assemblywoman
Sheila Kuehl (D-Santa Monica), who is sponsoring a bill--due for a vote
next week--that would specifically ban discrimination against gay
students, "I think it's the flavor of the moment to castigate people
with. "
        California teenagers lobbying for her proposal say they have been
spat on, beaten and constantly called "faggot" or "dyke" by their peers.
One Fullerton teenager says she had her head shoved into a school toilet
by a group of girls.
        The study in which Reis was involved chronicled eight gang rapes
of males and females in Washington.
        In one of those cases, a school cheerleader told interviewers, she
had been forced to watch while a lesbian friend who had kissed her at the
high school prom was raped and urinated on by the cheerleader's boyfriend
and his buddies. The alleged attack, never reported to school authorities,
occurred in a storage building on school grounds.
        In the Central Valley town of Manteca, the harassment followed
17-year-old Robert Ryan off campus.
        He says a group of students knocked him down and kicked him
repeatedly one day while he was walking home from school. His house has
been egged and draped with toilet paper. In March, he says, he awakened
and found the carcasses of a mutilated raccoon and a cat on his lawn and
porch.
        Two months ago, Ryan, founder of the Sierra High School


gay-straight student group, quit school and took up independent studies at
home.
         "It wasn't worth it," he said. "The crap they put me through was
not worth a high school education. There are people I miss a lot, but it's
not worth going through that hell."
        Ryan says he was too ashamed to report the kicking attack to
authorities, and Sierra High officials say he didn't inform them of
various campus incidents until more than a year after they occurred.
        Abuse Dismissed as Teasing
        When faculty or administrators are told of harassment or see it
for themselves, the response is often inadequate, students and parents
charge.
        They say the harassment is ignored or dismissed as teasing, or the
targets are admonished that if they are openly gay, they have to expect
such treatment.
         "It was distressing how many educators stood by in silence or
actually participated," Reis said of episodes reported in the Washington
survey, which was conducted by a group of public and private agencies
called the Safe Schools Coalition.
        Reis and others say that even the well-intentioned are sometimes
afraid to address anti-gay bullying for fear they will be labeled gay
themselves or accused by conservative parents of promoting homosexuality
in schools.   In Morgan Hill, the school district roundly denies that it
failed to take appropriate action.
         "Contrary to the plaintiffs' claims," said the district's
attorney,
Mark Davis, the administration "is unaware of any incident in which school
employees had actual knowledge of these incidents of harassment and then
acted with indifference."
        Flores, who now attends a San Jose-area community college,
remembers it differently.
        When she went to the office with one of the more offensive death
threats that had been stuffed in her locker in her sophomore year--the
picture of the bound and gagged woman--Flores says the assistant principal
asked her if she was gay, telling her not to "bring me this trash anymore"
and crumpling it up. She said she would try to get Flores another locker
but never did, Flores recalls.
        In one of her math classes, a classmate openly harangued her with
gay slurs and obscenities but the teacher did nothing, contends the suit,
filed last year in U.S. District Court by the American Civil Liberties
Union of Northern California, the National Center for Lesbian Rights and
San Jose attorney Diane Ritchie.
        The teacher denies hearing the anti-gay remarks, according to
Davis.  The assistant principal says she did not make the comments
attributed to her and does not recall being asked to change Flores'
locker.
        Flores is an outgoing, talkative young woman who was active in
dance and drama at Live Oak. She won a scholarship to the California
Institute of the Arts in SSValencia but turned it down, she says, because
she was afraid of being hundreds of miles from her supportive family and
feared encountering more harassment.
        She says she decided to sue after graduation, when she recounted
her experiences to a couple of shocked adults, including a gay Morgan Hill
teacher who told her nothing would change unless the district was taken to
court. Other students, two of whom said they dropped out of Live Oak
because of harassment, subsequently joined the action.
        Crystal, another plaintiff who asked that her last name not be
used, says the name calling and insults were so commonplace they became
part of the day's routine.
        "You get up and take a shower and get harassed for the rest of the


day," said Crystal, who was once hit in the head by a cup thrown at her in
the school parking lot by students yelling obscenities.
         Her girlfriend had been a cheerleader and dated boys. She said
that when she started going out with Crystal, everything changed.
         "I'd seen [others targeted], but I still didn't think it could
happen to me," Crystal's girlfriend said. "All of a sudden I was the one
they were saying these things to." She talked some teachers about it,
"and they saw it in the halls," she said, "but they really didn't have any
kind of response . . . . They didn't do anything."
         The gay harassment suits in many ways mirror those involving
student-on-student sexual harassment, raising the same issues of
responsibility.
         In the past decade a growing number of lawsuits have sought to
hold schools accountable for student sexual harassment, arguing that it
violates Title IX, the federal law barring sex discrimination in schools
and colleges.
         The court results had been mixed. But Monday, the U.S. Supreme
Court allowed a case filed by a Georgia schoolgirl to go forward, ruling
that school officials who ignore severe student sexual harassment can be
liable for damages.
         The decision was a boost to the gay harassment claims, since they
frequently cite Title IX, along with other federal laws.
         The first major victory in a gay student harassment suit came in
late 1996, when a federal jury found Wisconsin high school officials
liable for not protecting Jamie Nabozny from extensive physical and verbal
abuse. He settled the case for nearly $1 million.
         All told, about half a dozen similar cases have been filed in the
last five years, several of them in California, according to the Lambda
Legal Defense and Education Fund, which helped represent Nabozny.
         Dennis Meyers, a lobbyist for the Assn. of California School
Administrators, said the issue is not that schools don't care or that they
ignore harassment but that "the law has not given clear guidance."
         For that reason, his association supports Kuehl's Assembly
proposal to add sexual orientation to existing parts of the California
Education Code that bar discrimination on the basis of sex, ethnicity and
the like and that also forbid instruction that reflects adversely on the
protected groups.
         "With this bill it will be a lot more clear" what constitutes
harassment, Meyers said. "In the past, [administrators] may have thought
it was teasing, that it didn't meet some standard of the law."
         But the measure, introduced each session since 1995 by Kuehl and
defeated in the Assembly two years ago, is strongly opposed by religious
conservatives who contend that it will promote homosexuality in schools.
         "How about kids with pimples, kids who are fat, kids who are into
computers, why don't we include them?" asked the Rev. Louis P. Sheldon,
chairman of the Anaheim-based Traditional Values Coalition, which is
airing radio ads against Kuehl's bill. "Right now there are more laws than
we need to prevent any kind of harassment."
         Gay Insults Learned Early
         These days, children learn the potency of gay insults in the
earliest grades.    "I'm not sure the kids really understand what they're
saying in most cases, but they know the word has negative connotations and
they use it as a put-down," said California Teachers Assn. Gay and Lesbian
Caucus Co-Chairman Eric Heins, a Bay Area elementary school teacher who
often hears students call each other gay or use gay slurs.
         The targets of the abuse learn early too, even before they have a
sexual identity.   They describe the sick feeling that comes before recess,
seeking refuge from the playground in the nurse's office, asking to go to
the restroom minutes before school ends to get a running start from
bullies, constantly strategizing, changing patterns and routes between
".     .
     ARMS Email System


     home and school, between one class and the next.
             To understand what it's like to suffer such harassment, says
     16-year-old Christina Smith of Monterey Park, try this: "Get a knife,
     stick it in your stomach. Twist it."
             Since Smith, who has lobbied for Kuehl's bill in Sacramento, "came
     out" two years ago, she says there have been threats on her life.
             Last October, she transferred to a continuation school.
             Jesse Torres' memories of elementary school consist of being
     pushed on the floor, socked and called names.
             It didn't get any better in high school in Ontario.
             "People didn't want to change in front of me in the locker room,
     and when I was changing they would push me over and they would laugh and
     walk by and step on me, pretending it was an accident," said Torres, 21,
     who quit school in the 10th grade because of harassment.
             He has worked odd jobs since dropping out of school: Taco Bell,
     Starbucks. He now works at a clothing store and as a cocktail waiter. He
     plans to get his graduate equivalency degree and go to college.
             "I was weak when I dropped out. I regret that," he said. "I wish I
     would have stuck it out and fought. I admire the gays and the lesbians who
     have gone through what I have gone through and stuck it out and graduated.
     I admire them. I envy them."


