RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN;Sarah A. Bianchi/O;OVP [ UNKNOWN]      )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1999 23:32:44.00

SUBJECT:   radio address paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett    ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP@EOP [ WHO]   )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Karin Kullman ( CN;Karin Kullman/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
        ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D69]ARMS239268160.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
000000000001000000100000000000000000100000110000000100OOOOFEFFFFFFOOOOOOOOOFOO
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
        PRESIDENT CLINTON AND TIPPER GORE ANNOUNCE NEW CAMPAIGN
       TO COMBAT THE STIGMAS SURROUNDING MENTAL ILLNESS AND
         ENCOURAGE PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS TO GET HELP
                             June 5,1999

Today, in a joint radio address, President Clinton and Tipper Gore announced a new national
campaign to eliminate the stigmas of mental illness and encourage the millions of Americans
with mental health needs to get help. The President and Mrs. Gore unveiled new infonnation
about some of the widespread myths of mental illness and some of the facts that dispel them.
These myths will be discussed on Monday as part of the first-ever White House Conference on
Mental Health, chaired by Mrs. Gore, the President's Mental Health Advisor. Today, the
President and Mrs. Gore:

Announced National Campaign to Combat the Stigmas of Mental Illness and Encourage
Americans with Mental Health Needs to Get Help. The President and Mrs. Gore announced
that this fall a new nationwide campaign, with Mrs. Gore serving as the honorary chair, will be
launched to dispel the myths of mental illness and encourage those with mental illness to get
help. This new nationwide campaign will be a public-private partnership, led by the Surgeon
General and the Ad Council, which will involve a wide range of community organizations,
media, and others. This campaign will draw from many of the issues raised at the White House
Conference on Mental Health.

Unveiled New Information on the Widespread Myths of Mental Illness and the Facts That
Dispel Them. The President and Mrs. Gore unveiled new infonnation that highlights many of
the myths surrounding mental illness, including the following:

       Myth: Mental illness is not a disease and cannot be treated.
       Fact: The reality is that mental illnesses are diagnosable disorders of the brain and
       treatments that are effective 60 to 80 percent of time.

       Myth: Mental illness doesn't happen to people like me or my family.
       Fact: One in five Americans will suffer from a mental illness in their lifetime. These
       Americans are from all backgrounds.

       Myth: Depression is a part oflife that can be worked through without seeking treatment.
       Fact: Depression is a diagnosable treatable illness that impacts 19 million adult
       Americans each year and is the leading cause of disability in the United States.

       Myth: Teenagers don't suffer from "real" mental illness; they are just moody.
       Fact: One in ten children and adolescents suffer from mental illness.

       Myth: Depression is a part of aging.
       Fact: Five million older Americans suffer from clinical depression and older people
       account for 13 percent of the population but 20 percent of suicides.
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
       Myth: Talk about suicide is an idle threat that need not be taken seriously.
       Fact: Research has shown that 90 percent of all suicide victims have had a mental or
       substance abuse disorder. People who admit to having thoughts and plans about suicide
       and people who have attempted suicide are at increased risk for completing suicide in the
       future.

       Myth: We cannot afford to treat mental disorders.
       Fact: States and businesses that have improved treatment of mental illness, including
       implementing parity, have not seen a major increase in costs.

      Myth: Mental health problems are really the result of poor parenting practices.
      Fact: Mental illnesses are proven to be biologically based illnesses that often have
      nothing to do with parenting.

      Myth: A homeless person suffering from mental illness has little chance ofrecovery.
      Fact: Research demonstrates a decrease in homelessness with an effective style of case
      management that connects the person with treatment for their disorder, housing, and other
      supportive services.

      Myth: There is no hope for people with mental illness.
      Fact: Mental illnesses can be treated up a higher rate than many chronic illnesses.


Highlighted the First-Ever White House Conference on Mental Health. These myths and the
stigma campaign will be highlighted and discussed on Monday at the first-ever White House
Conference on Mental Health, that will involve tens of thousands of Americans around the
country at over 1,000 cites connected to the conference in Washington.
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


MYTH #1:   Mental illness is not a disease and it cannot be treated_

FACT:      Research in the last decade proves that mental illnesses are diagnosable disorders
           ofthe brain. New brain imaging technologies visually illustrate the differences in
           the brains of healthy people and people with serious mental disorders, such as
           schizophrenia. They show reductions in the overall volume of the brain and
           distinct differences in the way in which the brain processes information. There
           are also now effective treatments for mental illness that, for example, relieve
           symptoms for 80 percent of people with major depression; control symptoms such
           as hallucination or delusions for 70 percent of people with schizophrenia; and
           alleviate symptoms for 50 to 60 percent of people with Obsessive Compulsive
           Disorder.



MYTH #2:   Mental illness doesn't happen to people like me or my family.

FACT:      Mental illness affects most extended American families. One in five Americans
           suffer from mental illness at some point in their life. These illnesses strike all
           kinds of families, regardless of race, socioeconomic class, educational level or
           place of residence. Schizophrenia occurs at equal rates regardless of education,
           socioeconomic status, or culture. Depression, panic disorder and obsessive
           compulsive disorders are also equal opportunity illnesses. Women suffer from
           depression at twice the rate of men regardless of where they live, their culture, or
           socioeconomic status. Five million older Americans suffer from depression, and
           one in ten children and adolescents suffer from some type of a mental illness.
           Mental illness can happen to anyone. However, it is also a treatable illness.
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

MYTH #3:   Depression is a part of life that can be worked through without seeking help.

FACT:      Depression is a diagnosable, treatable illness that impacts 19 million adult
           Americans each year. It is a disorder of the brain that is characterized by serious
           and persistent symptoms such as changes in sleep, appetite, and energy; cognitive
           losses such as slowed thinking, and clearly discernible feelings like irritability,
           hopelessness, and guilt. The severity and duration of depression symptoms are
           clearly distinguishable from sadness and mood swings that are part of life. When
           untreated, depression can have serious consequences. Depression is the cause of
           over two-thirds of the 30,000 American suicides each year, and according to the
           World Health Organization, it is the leading cause of disability in the United
           States. However, there are effective treatments available that have proven to have
           80 percent success rate for people diagnosed with depression.



MYTH #4:   Teenagers don't suffer from "real" mental illness; they are just moody.

FACT:      We now know that teenagers and even younger children, can and do suffer from
           mental illness. One in ten children and adolescents suffer from mental illness
           severe enough to cause some level of impairment, but fewer than 20 percent of
           these children receive treatment. Without treatment, school work may suffer,
           normal family and peer relationships may be disrupted, and the absence of
           diagnosis can potentially contribute to violent acts. In fact, depression may lead to
           suicide, which is the third leading cause of death among young adults. However,
           recent studies indicate that 60 percent of depressed teenagers will improve with
           modem treatments.
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
MYTH #5:   Depression is a part of aging.

FACT:      Depression is not a nonnal part of aging. Research using the methods of the
           clinical and basic neurosciences in older persons with depression have identified
           actual changes in brain structures. In older persons with other serious health
           problems (strokes, hip fractures, heart conditions) depression may delay recovery,
           cause refusal of treatment, and lead to excessive disability and even death. In fact,
           nearly 5 million of the 32 million Americans age 65 and older suffer from clinical
           depression. Comprising only 13 percent of the U.S. population, individuals ages
           65 and older account for 20 percent of all suicide deaths, with white males being
           most vulnerable. However, effective mental health treatment is available for older
           Americans suffering from mental illness.



MYTH #6:   Talk about suici"e is an idle threat that need not be taken seriously.

FACT:      People who admit to having thoughts and plans about suicide and people who
           have attempted suicide are at increased risk for completing suicide in the future.
           In a study of nearly 4,000 adults seeking psychiatric treatment, persons with a
           history of severe suicidal thoughts were 14 times more likely to later commit
           suicide within four years, compared to persons with less severe suicide ideation.
           Research has shown that 90 percent of all suicide victims have had a mental or
           substance abuse disorder.


MYTH #7:   We cannot afford to treat mental disorders.

FACT:      We cannot afford NOT to treat mental illness. Researchers estimate that mental
           illnesses, including indirect costs such as days lost from work, cost America tens
           of billions of dollars each year. However, businesses and states that have
           implemented new strategies to treat these disorders have not found notable
           increases in costs. For example, one business, Bank One, spearheaded a
           comprehensive effort to improve the company's ability to identify and get
           appropriate treatment for employees with depression in a timely manner. Between
           1991 and 1995, the direct treatment costs for depressive disorders decreased by 60
           percent. Moreover, Ohio implemented full mental health parity for its state
           employees and did not find that this increased their costs.
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

MYTH #8:     People with severe and persistent mental illnesses cannot be productive
             members of society.

FACT:        People with psychiatric disabilities have had many barriers. In fact, one study
             showed a 10-15 percent employment rate for individuals with severe and
             persistent mental illnesses. A 1995 study of the Employment Intervention
             Demonstration Program run by the Center for Mental Health Services assessed the
             effectiveness of employment strategies to assist individuals with severe mental
             illness get and keep employment. They found 49 percent of individuals receiving
             employment support services for one year were working and after two years, 55
             percent were employed. Clearly, people with severe and persistent mental
             illnesses want to be employed and productive, and given appropriate treatment
             and support, they can ..

MYTH #9:     A homeless people suffering from mental illness has little chance of recovery.

FACT:        There are effective treatments for the homeless with mental illness. While one-
             third of homeless Americans suffer from an untreated mental illness, research
             demonstrates a decrease in homelessness when outreach to these individuals is
             coupled with case management that connects them to housing and other
             supportive services. One study reported a 45 percent reduction in the number of
             days of homeless ness in the first three months of this type of treatment. Over a
             year, clients had a 70 percent increase in the number of days worked,
             demonstrating that homeless persons with mental illnesses can make substantial
             improvements in the overall quality of their lives.



MYTH #10: There is no hope for people with mental illness.

FACT:        These illnesses, that will affect one in five Americans in their lifetime, can be
             extremely debilitating. However, research proves that mental illnesses are
             diagnosable and treatable disorders of the brain. Eighty percent of people treated
             for severe depression show positive responses to treatment, and the rate of success
             for controlling the symptoms of schizophrenia is also high, at 70 percent, higher
             rates than many physical illnesses. The challenge is to assure that Americans with
             mental illness recognize these disorders and get the help that they need.


