RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1999 12:32:14.00

SUBJECT:   FYI -- Education Week article on last week's hearing on NAEP reading score

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO I   )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO I )
READ: UNKNOWN

Bethany Little ( CN=Bethany Little/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Republicans Vow To Free NCES
                 From Political Meddling


                 By David J. Hoff

                 Washington

                 Congressional Republicans say they want the
                 National Center for Education Statistics to be
                 free from the day-to-day political influence of
                 future presidential administrations.

                 Senior members of the House education committee said last
week that Vice
                 President Al Gore had tainted results from the student
assessment overseen by
                 the center when he put a positive spin on them in
February. And just last
                 month, new questions arose when the Clinton
administration declined to
                 renominate the federal commissioner of statistics, who
heads the NCES, after
                 he sided with critics of Mr. Gore's role, the GOP
lawmakers said.

                 "They need to be independent so they can drive the debate
... rather than being
                 perceived as a political organization," Rep. Peter
Hoekstra, R-Mich., the
                 chairman of the oversight and investigations subcommittee
of the Education and
                 the Workforce Committee, said at a hearing.

                 Mr. Hoekstra and Rep. Michael N. Castle, R-Del., said
after the hearing that
                 they would look at other federal statistical agencies for
models to see how the
                 NCES could be better insulated from political
considerations.

                 That question will be "absolutely critical" when Congress


turns to revising the
                 law that defines the lines of authority between the
Department of Education and
                 the NCES, according to Mr. Castle.

                    "The commissioner is very much beholden to the Department
of Education,"
                 Mr. Castle said in the interview. He chairs the K-12
subcommittee that will
                 oversee changes to the NCES organizational structure.

                 The Clinton administration hasn't yet sent its
reauthorization proposal to
                 Congress. David Frank, an Education Department spokesman,
declined to
                 comment on the idea of granting the statistical agency
independent status.

                    'Good News'

                 Questions about the administration's influence over the
NCES have arisen since
                 a Feb. 10 news conference where Mr. Gore dominated the
stage during the
                 release of the 1998 reading results from the National
Assessment of
                 Educational Progress.

                    Mr. Gore spoke about the results ahead of Pascal D.
Forgione Jr., the
                 commissioner of the NCES. According to long-standing
policy, Mr. Forgione
                 was to release the scores first and then allow others to
interpret them.

                 Instead, Mr. Gore hailed the rise in 4th, 8th, and 12th
grade scores in 1998,
                 compared with those from 1994, before Mr. Forgione could
point out that 4th
                 and 12th graders had shown "no net gain" since 1992, the
first time the NAEP
                 reading test was given. ("Board Contends Gore's Role
Politicized NAEP
                 Release," March 10, 1998.)

                  At last week's hearing, Mr. Hoekstra released internal
electronic mail between
                  Education Department officials and an education adviser
to the vice president,
                  Jonathan Schnur, that indicates the Feb. 10 event was
designed to give positive
                  press coverage to Mr. Gore, who is running for president.
Mr. Hoekstra
                  requested the e-mail from the department, which turned it
over voluntarily.

                 In a Feb. 9 message, for example, Mr. Schnur suggests to
a department official
                 that 'packages distributed to journalists be assembled to
display an executive


                   summary more prominently than Mr. Forgione's statement.

                 After the event, Mr. Schnur asked the department's press
secretary: "Do you
                 think the press will cover it as good news?"

                 Mr. Schnur was not in his office last Thursday and did
not return a message left
                 on his voice mail.

                   Political Pressure

                   After the National Assessment Governing Board, which sets
NAEP policy,
                   protested that Mr. Gore had created a partisan atmosphere
that might
                 undermine the test scores' credibility, Mr. Forgione
publicly questioned the vice
                 president's role in the Feb. 10 event and supported a
revision to the board's
                 policy that requires the NCES to issue the official press
releases on NAEP
                 results.

                   At last week's hearing, Mr. Hoekstra suggested that there
might be a link
                 between Mr. Forgione's support of NAGB and the White
House's decision to
                 block his renomination. The commissioner withdrew his
name from
                 consideration May 18, after administration officials said
his failure to file
                 income-tax returns in a timely manner might cause
problems with Congress.2

                 "Perhaps, by doing the job of maintaining the
independence of that agency,
                  [Mr. Forgione] may have lost the opportunity to be
reappointed to his job,"
                 Mr. Hoekstra said.

                 "I've heard this tax [reason] ... that doesn't seem
overwhelming to me," said
                 Mr. Castle, who was the governor of Delaware when Mr.
Forgione was the
                 state schools superintertdent there. "Frankly, I just hope
it was not for political
                 reasons."

                   But an Education Department spokesman said there was no
link between the
                 commissioner's impending departure and his criticisms of
the Feb. 10 event.

                 "It's nonsense to say Forgione was not reappointed"
because of his statements
                 about Mr. Gore's presentation at the press conference,
Mr. Frank, the
                 communications director for Secretary of Education
Richard W. Riley and the


                     recipient of some of the e-mail fromMr.Schnur.said in
    an interview after the
                     hearing.

                     Also last week, the Advisory Council on Education
    Statistics, which works
                     closely with Mr. Forgione, expressed its dismay to Mr.
    Riley that the
                     commissioner will leave his job June 21.

                     "We advised you that he be retained, and we are
    disappointed that he has not
                     been," Andrew C. Porter, the council's chairman and the
    director of the
                     Wisconsin Center for Education Research, wrote in a May
    24 letter.

                     The department has yet to decide who will replace Mr.
    Forgione, Mr. Frank
                     said.


