RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1999 10:45:34.00

SUBJECT:   ESEA changes

TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB I )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD I )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
fyi -- I'm not sure what this is from
---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 06/03/99
10:45 AM ---------------------------



        Andy Rotherham <ARotherham@dlcppi.org>
        06/03/99 10:31:13 AM
Record Type: Record

To: Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject: ESEA changes



. Bruce: What do you all think of this? We're considering mentioning it in
  the fax, but I don't want to get in front of you all.

Andy

House Democrats Alter Clinton's Social Promotion Plan

Revealing a simmering controversy, House Democrats last week modified
President Clinton's social promotion plan before introducing it as a bill
in
Congress, underscoring some advocates' disagreement with the White House
about needed school reforms.

In changes that emphasize the need to provide added academic services to
struggling students, the House bill, H.R. 1960, alters the president's
proposed definitions for "social promotion" and "retention."

And lawmakers included a new clause in the House bill that would require
states, school districts and parents to take "whatever steps are necessary
*
to ensure that all students will meet the challenging academic performance
standards * so that students will progress through school and graduate."

Clinton submitted his bill for updating the 1965 Elementary and Secondary
Education Act (ESEA) to lawmakers on May 21, asking schools over four years
to identify struggling students, provide intensive academic services and
ultimately hold back children who fail to meet promotion requirements (ED,'
May 20) .                                                  .


Led by Rep. Bill Clay, D-Mo., House education lawmakers are taking extra
care to ensure that states meet "a pretty tough burden" before stalling a
student's grade advancement, according to a House aide.

A New Mandate
Clinton's bill would require states to ensure that students "progress
through school on a timely basis" and that states "end the practice of
social promotion and retention."

Clay and his allies, including most Democratic members of the House
Education and the Workforce Committee, have retained that general language.
But they altered the definition of "social promotion," which Clinton called
an unsound educational practice of promoting students who have not mastered
challenging state academic standards.

House Democrats also deemed the practice unsound, but only after schools
have provided students with "continuing intensive and comprehensive
interventions" that are needed to ensure children can master state
standards.

Likewise, House Democrats revised the president's definition of
"retention,"
which the administration called the unsound practice of requiring students
to repeat a grade "without the specific educational interventions they need
to master" state standards.

Rather than swallow this whole, House lawmakers proposed to bar schools
from
retaining a child for one grade, or for part of a grade, without first
providing "age-appropriate settings" that offer struggling students aid in
meeting state standards.

The clause mandating "whatever steps are necessary" for graduation would
represent a new educational mandate for districts, schools and parents, who
are all listed in the Clay bill.  But Democrats believe that new standard
is
needed, especially when coupled with a federal policy aimed at retaining
some children who fall short of state academic goals.

Schools that fail to provide age-appropriate remedial programs are
"cheating
students out of the help they need," the House aide said.

Jeff Simering, lobbyist for the Council of the Great City Schools, reviewed
Clay's language and said he was pleased to see that states would share the
legal obligation with school districts to ensure that children receive
needed academic help.

"If the federal government is forcing people into policies that would
likely
retain kids, or somehow put them in a high-stakes situation,  then,
arguably, someone ought to provide them with some services," Simering said.

Quiet Negotiations
Clay's changes to the president's bill underscore a wrenching debate that
has dogged the Clinton administration in recent weeks.

Civil rights advocates--including representatives from the Leadership
Conference of Civil Rights, the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, the National
Council of La Raza and noted civil rights lawyer William Taylor of


Washington, D.C.--have met often with Education Department officials in
recent weeks to negotiate retention issues.

The advocates pressured ED to drop any social promotion strategy, fearing
it
would have a disparate, harmful impact on poor and minority children in
high-poverty sChools.

The meetings continued through May 19, the day ED officials briefed
reporters about the president's plan.   But the process ended in a truce,
according to both sides.

The Clay language "is not something the civil rights groups were seeking,"
Taylor explained in an interview.  "This is, essentially, our last, best
offer to the administration in the negotiations that were going on * It was
kind of a compromise."

If the administration were to propose an amendment inserting its original
social promotion plan back into the ESEA bill, the president would face
opposition from the civil rights community, according to Taylor.

"It would be very wrong, and terrible policy, for the federal government to
put its imprimatur behind retaining" students, said Taylor, citing research
showing that retained children are more likely to drop out (ED, April 30).
"We wanted to get that out of the bill."

Not The Last Word
Mike Cohen, senior adviser to Education Secretary Richard Riley, greeted
Clay's language as "not far" from the administration's own.  "I'm sure that
this will not be the last change in the wording of a bill we sent up,"
Cohen
said.  "This is part of the process."

He added that ending social promotion is "a controversial issue.  But
there's actually a remarkably high degree of agreement--to make sure that
children don't move through school without meeting basic standards, and to
make sure that children aren't held back in ways that we know are harmful."

For the moment, the social promotion controversy has not surfaced in the
Senate.

Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., last week introduced Clinton's ESEA plan, S.
1180, without changing the president's social promotion language or any
other aspect of the bill. The senator intends to keep track of the social
promotion issue as ESEA debate progresses, said spokesman Jim Manley.

Lawmakers are on a Memorial Day recess until June 7.

--William J. Cahir




Andrew Rotherham
Director, 21st Century Schools project
Progressive Policy Institute
600 Pennsylvania Ave., SE, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20003
  ..
(202)547-0001
(202)544-5014 FAX


