RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL          (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Courtney       o.   Gregoire ( CN=Courtney   o.   Gregoire/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-JUN-1999 18:05:25.00

SUBJECT:     DPC Weekly Report

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
June 4, 1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:      Bruce Reed
                               Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:          DPC Weekly Report

        Crime/Guns -- House Republican Bill: While we have yet to see
actual bill language, Chairman Hyde and Rep. McCollum released some
preliminary details on the juvenile crime bill they intend to move in the
next two weeks.  The legislation will build on McCollum's current juvenile
crime bill -- a significantly scaled-back version of a bill passed in the
House two years ago -- which now has bipartisan cosponsors.

U       Juvenile provisions: The McCollum bill creates a $500 million
juvenile accountability block grant for states and localities to fund
numerous activities including: graduated sanctions programs; juvenile drug
and gun courts; and the hiring of additional prosecutors; probation
officers and juvenile court judges.  Instead of requiring states to
prosecute juveniles as adults as a condition of receiving block grant
funds, the McCollum bill allows states one year to adopt graduated
sanctions for juvenile offenders in order to receive funding.

U       Gun provisions: ynlike the previous bill, this version will
contain a number of gun-related measures -- many which are similar to
those recently passed in the Senate (e.g., background checks at gun shows,
juvenile Brady, child safety locks, juvenile ban on assault weapons).   The
House bill will likely reach beyond the Senate to include additional
provisions -- some from our bill -- to require background checks for
explosives purchases; prohibit bomb-making instructions on the Internet;
ban all long gun sales to juveniles; increase penalties for gun
traffickers and individuals who transfer guns to juveniles; and require
mandatory sentences for juveniles who use guns to hurt others on school
property.

u       Other provisions: The bill will likely include provisions from
the Senate bill to address the "culture of violence" issue, including
studies and investigations into the marketing and effects of violent
television shows and games on children. The House Republicans also plan
to include a contentious IDEA provision opposed by Senator Harkin -- to
allow school officials to discipline disabled children in the same manner
as other students for bringing guns to schools.


        Crime -- Gun Free-Schools Report: The Education Department
planning to release shortly the Gun-Free Schools Act   (GFSA) report for
the 1997-98 school year. The report will show that there were over 3,000
students expelled for bringing a gun to school -- almost half the number
of expulsions as compared to the previous school year. There is some
concern about under-enforcement by school districts of the GFSA,
particularly in California. DOEd will be working with the state and
relevant school districts about these concerns.

Crime -- Citizen Perceptions of Police and Crime: On Thursday, the
Department of Justice's Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) released a
12-city survey on criminal victimization and perceptions of community
safety. The survey was the first BJS effort to collect victimization and
community policing data at the city level.  The 12 cities surveyed were:
Chicago, IL; Kansas City, MO; Knoxville, TN; Los Angeles, CA; Madison, WI;
New York, NY; San Diego, CA; Savannah, GA; Spokane, WA; Springfield, MA;
Tucson, AZ; and Washington, DC.

Among the key findings of the survey:

u       Satisfaction with police: Overall, the survey found widespread
support for local police: 85 percent of the residents surveyed reported
satisfaction with the police who served their neighborhood. Only three
percent of residents reported that they were very dissatisfied with the
police.    While white residents were more likely to be satisfied with
local police than black residents, both reported high levels of
satisfaction:   90 percent for white residents, and 76 percent for black
residents.  In each of the 12 cities, residents who had been victims of
violent crime and those who were fearful of crime in their neighborhood
reported less satisfaction with the police. About 30 percent of the
residents of each city had some level of contact with the police within
the past 12 months.

u       Community policing/quality of life: In addition, over half of all
respondents were familiar with community policing, with 54 percent
reporting that police officers practiced community policing in their
neighborhoods.  Sixty percent of citizens surveyed indicated that in the
past year, the police had worked with neighborhood residents on crime
prevention and safety. And about 80 percent of residents in each city
said they were satisfied with the quality of life in their neighborhood.

Education    D.C. College Access Act: Acting on a concept proposed in
your FY 2000 Budget, the House has passed a version of the D.C. College
Access Act. Under this bill, the Federal government would be authorized
to pay the difference between in-state and out-of-state tuition for any
qualified D.C. undergraduate attending a public college or university in
any of the 50 states. The bill would also provide grants of up to $3,000
annually to D.C. residents who choose to attend a private college or
university in D.C., Maryland or virginia, as well as authorize financial
support for the University of the District of Columbia (UDC).  Initial
projections show that this proposal could cost more then double, or even
triple, the $17 million included in your FY 2000 Budget. Secretary Riley
sent a letter to the Senate expressing the AdministrationO,s support for
the intent of this bill, but also our reservations regarding some of the
provisions.  Instead, the Secretary urges them to consider a bill
introduced by Senator Jeffords 0) one that the Administration was involved
in drafting. The Jeffords proposal limits the tuition assistance to D.C.
undergraduates attending public colleges and universities in Virginia and
Maryland, whose family income is less than $50,000 annually.  It would
also limit the grants for students attending area private colleges and


universities to $2,000 annually. While we support additional funding for
UDC, we prefer that they receive the additional funding they are entitled
to as an Historically Black College or univer~ity (HBCU) under Title III
of the Higher Education Act.

Education -- School Uniforms:  Per your request for an update on the
percent of school districts adopting school uniform policies, we have
requested additional data from the Department of Education and will
forward that to you as soon as possible. As of July, 199B the Department
of education estimated that 3% of all public schools have mandatory
uniform policies. A survey of principals in 10 states showed that 11% of
elementary schools require uniforms, and 15% are considering a policy.
Some of the nationD,s largest school districts have adopted school uniform
policies, including New York City, Dade County, San Antonio, Houston,
Chicago, Boston and Albuquerque.  In Washington, D.C., the District School
Superintendent has requested that the principals of the cit yO,s 146 public
schools consider the adoption of a policy that would require students to
wear school uniforms or adhere to a strict dress code.  In Massachusetts,
the Governor has proposed legislation for next year that would require all
public schools to adopt uniforms unless their local parent councils vote
to opt out.

Education -- Republican Teacher Empowerment Act:   Congressman McKeon has
introduced a version of Title II (Teacher Quality) of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act (ESEA) that has some similarities to your
proposal, including a focus on high-quality, sustained professional
development and a an effort to improve alternative certification methods
and teacher pension and credential portability.  However the McKeon bill
differs from your proposal in many important ways.   McKeonD,s bill:

u       Would weaken the Class Size Reduction Initiative by giving
districts the option of using their Class Size Reduction funds for
professional development.  It also does not maintain the focus on reducing
class size in the early elementary grades.

u       Does not encourage States and districts to continue their efforts
to develop and implement content and performance standards and curricula
and assessments aligned to those standards D) an essential part of
advancing the Goals 2000 agenda.

u       Does not target funds to high-poverty districts as effectively as
your proposal.

u       Would prohibit Federal support of the National Board for
Professional Teaching Standards.

u       Does not expand the Troops-to-Teachers program to non-military
mid-career pr~fessionals D) which your proposal does.

u       At this point, the bill does not include the kind of clear,
enforceable accountability provisions included in your Title XI proposal.


        Tobacco -- Treasury Ruling on Smoking Cessation: The Treasury
Department is ready to issue tax guidance clarifying that the costs of
smoking cessation products are a medical expense, and are thus tax
deductible (up to the existing limits in law, e.g., to the extent medical
expenses exceed 7.5% of income). This is a reversal of a 1979 opinion
based on the new evidence that smoking is addictive and harmful. As with
other medicines or drugs, only those prescribed by a physician are


deductible.

Health Care -- ArkansasO, 1915(b) waiver proposal:   You had asked for an
update on the status of O&Benefit Arkansas08, .the State of ArkansasD,
proposal to use a managed care delivery system to provide intensive case
management services to children with special mental health needs. This
demonstration was designed to assure that these children receive
inpatient, outpatient, and rehabilitation services in a coordinated and
cost-effective fashion. Last week, HCFA requested that Arkansas
momentarily halt the review of their application in order for the State to
assure that beneficiaries mandatorily enrolled in managed care have access
to specialists, are guaranteed a choice of providers, or have access to an
effective complaints and appeals process.  Following our inquiry into this
matter, HCFA has concluded that the Arkansas proposal meets the necessary
standards and expects to approve the Arkansas waiver by mid June.

Health Care -- Update on the dissemination of polio vaccine contaminated
with monkey (simian) viruses and the associated spread of other diseases:
You had asked for an evaluation of Walter KyleD,s contention that the
distribution of contaminated polio vaccine is responsible for the spread
of a variety of viruses that cause cancer and immune depressive diseases,
such as HIV. Mr. Kyle also asserts that in 1977, the FDA released
additional batches of polio vaccine contaminated with many simian viruses,
including SIV (the simian version of HIV) , that he believes are associated
with the spread of AIDS. Mr. Kyle is correct that from 1955 to 1963, FDA
did release several batches of vaccine that were contaminated with a
simian virus called SV40. However, research experts at FDA and NIH have
definitively concluded that after more than 30 years of follow-up,
exposure to polio vaccines that was contaminated with SV40 is not
associated with a significantly increased rate of cancer. In addition,
last year, in response to the assertion that FDA had released polio
vaccine contaminated with SIV, FDA tested 12 lots of polio vaccine from
1977 and the years surrounding it for the presence of HIV or SIV. The
results of the test were negative, and FDA has been unable to find any
additional corroborating evidence for Mr. KyleO,s claims.   The majority of
the scientific community, including John Coffin, a senior editor of the
Journal of Virology and Jonathan Allan, a well respected and
internationally known AIDS researcher, stand solidly behind rOAD,s
contention that the polio vaccine is safe.   As for the issue of informed
choice on the use of the polio vaccine, researchers and physicians at the
Centers for Disease Control believe that parents should be informed about
the potential risk of the polio .or any other vaccine before vaccinating
their children. However, they believe that the polio vaccine is completely
safe as far as retroviruses are concerned, and believe it is therefore
unnecessary to discuss the issue of contamination by simian viruses.

Health Care    Stopping the inappropriate use of physical restraints on
the mentally ill in institutional settings: There have been a series of
reports of mentally ill children residing in psychiatric institutions
dying after being inappropriately restrained by facility staff.   In
response, Senators Lieberman and Dodd have introduced legislation that
prohibits hospitals participating the Medicare and Medicaid programs from
using restraints in a manner that has the potential to harm patients. We
have determined, however, that that we can act administratively to stop
most of these abuses. We have requested that HCFA issue regulations
prohibiting institutions participating in the Medicare and Medicaid
programs from imposing physical restraints except upon the written order
of a physician and only when necessary to ensure the physical safety of
the patient or of other patients. Moving administratively in this area has
the support of Tipper Gore. We are planning to release these regulations


shortly after the mental health conference, in an event with Senators
Lieberman and Dodd.

==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D18]ARMS271360363.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCFIIEOAIBllAEl000000000000000000000000000000003E00030OFEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000004BOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI000004DOOOOOOOIOO0000FEFFFFFF000000004AOO
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFF.FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFPFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion




                                       June 4, 1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:           Bruce Reed
                Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:        DPC Weekly Report

        Crime/Guns -- House Republican Bill: While we have yet to see actual bill language,
Chairman Hyde and Rep. McCollum released some preliminary details on the juvenile crime bill
they intend to move in the next two weeks. The legislation will build on McCollum's current
juvenile crime bill -- a significantly scaled-back version of a bill passed in the House two years ago
-- which now has bipartisan cosponsors.

   Juvenile provisions: The McCollum bill creates a $500 million juvenile accountability block
    grant for states and localities to fund numerous activities including: graduated sanctions
    programs; juvenile drug and gun courts; and the hiring of additional prosecutors; probation
    officers and juvenile court judges. Instead of requiring states to prosecute juveniles as adults as
    a condition of receiving block grant funds, the McCollum bill allows states one year to adopt
    graduated sanctions for juvenile offenders in order to receive funding.

   Gun provisions: Unlike the previous bill, this version will contain a number of gun-related
    measures -- many which are similar to those recently passed in the Senate (e.g., background
    checks at gun shows, juvenile Brady, child safety locks, juvenile ban on assault weapons). The
    House bill will likely reach beyond the Senate to include additional provisions -- some from our
    bill -- to require background checks for explosives purchases; prohibit bomb-making
    instructions on the Internet; ban all long gun sales to juveniles; increase penalties for gun
    traffickers and individuals who transfer guns to juveniles; and require mandatory sentences for
    juveniles who use guns to hurt others on school property.

   Other provisions: The bill will likely include provisions from the Senate bill to address the
    "culture of violence" issue, including studies and investigations into the marketing and effects
    of violent television shows and games on children. The House Republicans also plan to include
    a contentious IDEA provision opposed by Senator Harkin -- to allow school officials to
    discipline disabled children in the same manner as other students for bringing guns to schools.

         Crime - Gun Free-Schools Report: The Education Department planning to release shortly
the Gun-Free Schools Act (GFSA) report for the 1997-98 school year. The report will show that there
were over 3,000 students expelled for bringing a gun to school -- almost half the number of expulsions
as compared to the previous school year. There is some concern about under-enforcement by school
districts ofthe GFSA, particularly in California. DOEd will be working with the state and relevant
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

school districts about these concerns.

        Crime -- Citizen Perceptions of Police and Crime: On Thursday, the Department of
Justice's Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) released a 12-city survey on criminal victimization
and perceptions of community safety. The survey was the first BJS effort to collect victimization
and community policing data at the city level. The 12 cities surveyed were: Chicago, IL; Kansas
City, MO; Knoxville, TN; Los Angeles, CA; Madison, WI; New York, NY; San Diego, CA;
Savannah, GA; Spokane, WA; Springfield, MA; Tucson, AZ; and Washington, DC.

      Among the key findings of the survey:

     Satisfaction with police: Overall, the survey found widespread support for local police: 85
      percent of the residents surveyed reported satisfaction with the police who served their
      neighborhood. Only three percent of residents reported that they were very dissatisfied with
      the police. While white residents were more likely to be satisfied with local police than
      black residents, both reported high levels of satisfaction: 90 percent for white residents, and
      76 percent for black residents. In each of the 12 cities, residents who had been victims of
      violent crime and those who were fearful of crime in their neighborhood reported less
      satisfaction with the police. About 30 percent of the residents of each city had some level of
      contact with the police within the past 12 months.

     Community policing/quality 0/ life: In addition, over half of all respondents were familiar
      with community policing, with 54 percent reporting that police officers practiced community
      policing in their neighborhoods. Sixty percent of citizens surveyed indicated that in the past
      year, the police had worked with neighborhood residents on crime prevention and safety.
      And about 80 percent of residents in each city said they were satisfied with the quality of life
      in their neighborhood.

            Education -- D.C. College Access Act: Acting on a concept proposed in your FY 2000
    Budget, the House has passed a version of the D.C. College Access Act. Under this bill, the
    Federal government would be authorized to pay the difference between in-state and out-of-
    state tuition for any qualified D.C. undergraduate attending a public college or university in
    any of the 50 states. The bill would also provide grants of up to $3,000 annually to D.C.
    residents who choose to attend a private college or university in D.C., Maryland or Virginia, as
    well as authorize financial support for the University of the District of Columbia (UDC).
    Initial projections show that this proposal could cost more then double, or even triple, the $17
    million included in your FY 2000 Budget. Secretary Riley sent a letter to the Senate
    expressing the Administration's support for the intent of this bill, but also our reservations
    regarding some of the provisions. Instead, the Secretary urges them to consider a bill
    introduced by Senator Jeffords - one that the Administration was involved in drafting. The
    Jeffords proposal limits the tuition assistance to D.C. undergraduates attending public colleges
    and universities in Virginia and Maryland, whose family income is less than $50,000 annually.
     It would also limit the grants for students attending area private colleges and universities to


                  2
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
    $2,000 annually. While we support additional funding for UDC, we prefer that they receive
    the additional funding they are entitled to as an Historically Black College or University
    (HBCU) under Title III of the Higher Education Act.

         Education -- School Uniforms: Per your request for an update on the percent of school
districts adopting school unifonn policies, we have requested additional data from the
Department of Education and will forward that to you as soon as possible. As of July, 1998 the
Department of education estimated that 3% of all public schools have mandatory unifonn
policies. A survey of principals in 10 states showed that 11 % of elementary schools require
unifonns, and 15% are considering a policy. Some of the nation's largest school districts have
adopted school unifonn policies, including New York City, Dade County, San Antonio, Houston,
Chicago, Boston and Albuquerque. In Washington, D.C., the District School Superintendent has
requested that the principals of the city's 146 public schools consider the adoption of a policy
that would require students to wear school unifonns or adhere to a strict dress code. In
Massachusetts, the Governor has proposed legislation for next year that would require all public
schools to adopt unifonns unless their local parent councils vote to opt out.

        Education -- Republican Teacher Empowerment Act: Congressman McKeon has
introduced a version of Title n (Teacher Quality) of the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act (ESEA) that has some similarities to your proposal, including a focus on high-quality,
sustained professional development and a an effort to improve alternative certification methods
and teacher pension and credential portability. However the McKeon bill differs from your
proposal in many important ways. McKeon's bill:

     Would weaken the Class Size Reduction Initiative by giving districts the option of using their
      Class Size Reduction funds for professional development. It also does not maintain the focus
      on reducing class size in the early elementary grades.

     Does not encourage States and districts to continue their efforts to develop and implement
      content and perfonnance standards and curricula and assessments aligned to those standards
      - an essential part of advancing the Goals 2000 agenda.

     Does not target funds to high-poverty districts as effectively as your proposal.

     Would prohibi~ Federal support of the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.

     Does not expand the Troops-to-Teachers program to non-military mid-career professionals-
      which your proposal does.

     At this point, the bill does not include the kind of clear, enforceable accountability provisions
      included in your Title XI proposal.




                  3
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

        Tobacco -- Treasury Ruling on Smoking Cessation: The Treasury Department is ready to
issue tax guidance clarifying that the costs of smoking cessation products are a medical expense,
and are thus tax deductible (up to the existing limits in law, e.g., to the extent medical expenses
exceed 7.5% of income). This is a reversal of a 1979 opinion based on the new evidence that
smoking is addictive and harmful. As with other medicines or drugs, only those prescribed by a
physician are deductible.

        Health Care -- Arkansas' 1915(b) waiver proposal: You had asked for an update on
the status of "Benefit Arkansas", the State of Arkansas' proposal to use a managed care delivery
system to provide intensive case management services to children with special mental health
needs. This demonstration was designed to assure that these children receive inpatient,
outpatient, and rehabilitation services in a coordinated and cost-effective fashion. Last week,
HCFA requested that Arkansas momentarily haIt the review of their application in order for the
State ~o assure that beneficiaries mandatorily enrolled in managed care have access to specialists,
are guaranteed a choice of providers, or have access to an effective complaints and appeals
process. Following our inquiry into this matter, HCFA has concluded that the Arkansas proposal
meets the necessary standards and expects to approve the Arkansas waiver by mid June.

         Health Care -- Update on the dissemination of polio vaccine contaminated with
monkey (simian) viruses and the associated spread of other diseases: You had asked for an
evaluation of Walter Kyle's contention that the distribution of contaminated polio vaccine is
responsible for the spread of a variety of viruses that cause cancer and immune depressive
diseases, such as HN. Mr. Kyle also asserts that in 1977, the FDA released additional batches of
polio vaccine contaminated with many simian viruses, including SN (the simian version of
HN), that he believes are associated with the spread of AIDS. Mr. Kyle is correct that from
1955 to 1963, FDA did release several batches of vaccine that were contaminated with a simian
virus called SV 40. However, research experts at FDA and NIH have definitively concluded that
after more than 30 years of follow-up, exposure to polio vaccines that was contaminated with
SV40 is not associated with a significantly increased rate of cancer. In addition, last year, in
response to the assertion that FDA had released polio vaccine contaminated with SN, FDA
tested 12 lots of polio vaccine from 1977 and the years surrounding it for the presence of HIV or
SN. The results of the test were negative, and FDA has been unable to find any additional
corroborating evidence for Mr. Kyle's claims. The majority of the scientific community,
including John Coffin, a senior editor of the Journal of Virology and Jonathan Allan, a well
respected and internationally known AIDS researcher, stand solidly behind FDA's contention
that the polio vaccine is safe. As for the issue of informed choice on the use of the polio vaccine,
researchers and physicians at the Centers for Disease Control believe that parents should be
informed about the potential risk of the polio or any other vaccine before vaccinating their
children. However, they believe that the polio vaccine is completely safe as far as retroviruses are
concerned, and believe it is therefore unnecessary to discuss the issue of contamination by simian
viruses.




               4
                                                                                                     "


                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

              Health Care -- Stopping the inappropriate use of physical restraints on the mentally
     ill in institutional settings: There have been a series of reports of mentally ill children residing
     in psychiatric institutions dying after being inappropriately restrained by facility staff. In
     response, Senators Lieberman and Dodd have introduced legislation that prohibits hospitals
     participating the Medicare and Medicaid programs from using restraints in a manner that has the
     potential to harm patients. We have determined, however, that that we can act administratively to
     stop most of these abuses. We have requested that HCFA issue regulations prohibiting
     institutions participating in the Medicare and Medicaid programs from imposing physical
     restraints except upon the written order of a physician and only when necessary to ensure the
     physical safety of the patient or of other patients. Moving administratively in this area has the
     support of Tipper Gore. We are planning to release these regulations shortly after the mental
     health conference, in an event with Senators Lieberman and Dodd.




                    5


