RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1999· 10:20:04.00

SUBJECT:   FYI: WSJ editorial re:CA charter school debate

TO: Bethany Little ( CN=Bethany Little/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI: This is a Wall Street Journal editorial about a very controversial
bill in the California
legislature that would require charter schools to participate in their
school district's collective
baragaining agreement.


Wall Street Journal
May 25, 1999

E d ito ria 1
Jerry's Kids

When Jerry Brown was governor of California he expanded the power of
unions to organize public employees. But as mayor of Oakland, he now has
declared war on those bent on unionizing independent charter schools he
believes-necessary for Oakland to turn around its dismal record on
education.

Yesterday Mr. Brown turned out to join parents and teachers who were
lobbying the solidly Democratic legislature to kill a bill requiring
charter school employees to belong to. the same union that represents the
regular public schools in their areas. Ironically, the measure would
make charter schools the only public schools in California absolutely
required to have union contracts. "If it passes, we're dead," says
Yvonne Chan, principal of the Vaughn charter school in Los Angeles. "It
will be the districts and the unions that run charter ·schools." Backed
by the state teachers union, the bill has already passed the Assembly
Education Committee and is scheduled for another committee hearing
tomorrow.

In response, Mayor Brown and his allies have penned a stinging manifesto
that reads as if Tom Paine had taken up residence in the Bay Area.
Addressed to Assemblywoman Carole Migden, the bill's author, the letter
notes that Oakland's charter schools educate poor children of all races:
black, Latino, American Indian, etc. "I assure you that we will not back
down or cravenly accept the sellout of our right to determine our
educational destiny," Mr. Brown wrote. "As we all learned from the sorry
experience of state-sanctioned bureaucracies in Eastern Europe and the


soviet Union, decentralization is crucial to both ·freedom and
excellence."

Though publicly funded, what makes charters different is that
they are run by parents and teachers, not bureaucrats. Some 34 states
allow them, and last year California raised the statewide cap on
charters to 250. Even though he's not in charge of the schools, Mayor
Brown is helping parents with zoning and permit problems and has invited
the for-profit Edison Project and the Fisher family foundation in to
advise on management. Local officials have been supportive. "We have not
delivered," admits Noel Gallo, president of Oakland's School Board. "A
charter is a poor man's access to private education."

It is precisely this fact--that charters are popular with low-income
parents--which prompted the California Teachers Association to push for
mandatory unionization. Indeed, in hearings thus far the question
whether charters have been good for education hasn't even come up. "This
shouldn't be about good or bad," says Assemblyman Scott Wildman, a
former teacher union organizer. "This is about whether teachers [in
charters] should be granted the same rights as teachers in other public
schools."

Not surprisingly, teachers in charter schools don't see it that way.
Many charters have chosen union contracts, but many haven't. "We choose
class assignments based on what's best for the kids, not seniority,"
says Susan Cornell, a teacher at the Fenton charter school. And the CTA
has not been able to produce examples of charter teachers being abused.

Indeed, when the National Education Association started its own charter
schools in Connecticut and Colorado, it chose to operate them under
flexible labor agreements the Migden bill seeks to ban. Back in March,
NEA President Bob Chase admitted that his union "needs to get out of the
way. We can't allow union sacred cows to block the path of members who
want to pursue their own vision of school quality and reform." Maybe he
should call his California affiliate and ask why it is trying to
strangle the very reform he claims to embrace.

Copyright 1999 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.


