RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD       1 )
CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-JUN-1999 09:39:15.00

SUBJECT:   register now, pay later

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD   1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Clinton: Gun Control May Take Years

                     By Sandra Sobieraj
                     Associated Press Writer
                     Friday, June 4, 1999; 8:20 a.m. EDT

                     WASHINGTON (AP)   -- Set on the defensive about his
resolve to tighten
                  gun .controls, President Clinton said today he prefers
sweeping restrictions
                   -- such as a mandate that people --register guns like
they register cars"   --
                   but they could take years because he is hamstrung by a
Republican
                   Congress --out of touch with the American people."

                   The president and his wife, Hillary, aimed their
anti-youth-violence
                   campaign at family breakfast tables nationwide today,
appearing on
                   ABC's --Good Morning America"  with 40 teen-agers --
some from
                   schools made infamous by shootings last year -- for a
live brainstorming
                   session.

                    Anchor Charlie Gibson opened the broadcast from the
White House's
                     Roosevelt Room with a separate interview with the
president. The
                  journalist quoted an unnam~d Clinton ally as saying the
president, after the
                  Littleton, Colo., school massacre, --had a chance to
roar and he
                  meowed. ' ,

                  Clinton narrowly won Senate passage last month of a
limited bill requiring
                  mandatory background checks for all transactions at gun
shows, then lost
                  a fight to have the House follow suit before its
Memorial Day recess.



                  He has -- as a matter of political practicality, he said
-- deferred until later
                  the battle for additional gun controls, such as
background checks for
                  explosives sales, increasing from 18 to 21 the legal age
for owning
                  handguns and assault weapons, and limiting gun purchases
to one per
                  month.

                  --Look, let's join the real world here,"  Clinton said
to Gibson in response
                  to the --meowed"  characterization. His eyes narrowed
and his finger
                  pointed accusingly, Clinton continued:

                     --You want to have an honest conversation, let's have an
honest
                     conversation. I am the first president who ever took on
the NRA. I got my
                     party in Congress to stand with me on the Brady bill.
    Now wait a
                     minute, you talk about roaring and meowing -- then I
came forward with
                     this legislation."

                     Clinton pounded his left fist into his right palm.

                  --For you to say I shouldn't take what I can get and
instead I should ask
                  for things that I am absolutely positive will be
defeated in the Congress is
                  quite wrong, " he said.

                     He said the House delayed a gun vote until after the
holiday recess in
                  order to give the National Rifle Association time to
lobby and water down
                  the legislation.

                  --I made it clear I want to do this in sequence. I think
this is going to take
                  years. The Congress is out of touch with the American
people. ' ,

                     Following the president's one-on-one interview in the
Cabinet Room, he
                     and Mrs. Clinton sat down with students from Littleton,
Springfield, Ore.,
                     West Paducah, Ky., Conyers, Ga., and other areas for an
uninterrupted
                     discussion of youth violence.

                  After 45 minutes, the Clintons agreed to scrap their
schedules and stretch
                  it another 10 minutes. "We can stay longer," the first
lady said. --I want to
                  hear from them. ' ,


                   One student, Albert Smith, questioned the president
skeptically. "How
                   spectacular is this legislation and why will it make a
difference?" Another
                   student in the discussion was Missy Jenkins, who was
paralyzed from the
                   waist down on Dec. 1, 1997, when a classmate opened fire
inside her
                   West Paducah high school.

                      Mrs. Clinton, with apologies for pulling "the nosey
mother routine, ' ,
                  beseeched kids to ask questions and demand safe
surroundings. "If you
                  guys are going to a party make sure there are no guns
around, " she said.

                  The first lady also asked students to speak out for
tougher gun controls.
                  "There's no reason why a lot of you who are about to be
or are already
                  18 can't let your voices be heard too."

                   The Clintons saw "Good Morning America"   and its
estimated 7 million
                   viewers as a ripe opportunity, White House spokesman
Jake Siewert
                   said. "The Clintons can talk directly to families as
they get ready for
                   another school day. ' ,

                  Earlier this week, the president ordered a joint
investigation by the Justice
                  Department and Federal Trade Commission of marketing
practices by the
                  motion picture and video game industries to see if they
are targeting
                  children with their violent wares.


