        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

        CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-JUN-1999 17:21:23.00

        SUBJECT:   Mental Health Conference Briefing Items

        TO: Devorab R. Adler ( CN=Devorah R. Adler/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
        READ:UNKNOWN

        TO: Courtney O. Gregoire ( CN=Courtney O. Gregoire/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Christopher C. Jennings    ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Cathy R. Mays   ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TEXT:
        ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
        ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

        TEXT:
        Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D41]ARMS20877236K.136 to ASCII,
         The following is a HEX DUMP:

        DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
        0000000000010000002200000000000000001000002300000001000000FEFFFFFF000000002100
        OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
        FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
        FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
        FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
        FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

                                              June 6, 1999

                   WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE ON MENTAL HEALTH:
                        WORKING FOR A HEAL'J:HIER AMERICA

                                 DATE:                          June 7, 1999
                                 LOCATION:                      Blackburn Auditorium
                                                                Howard University
                                 BRIEFING TIME:                 11 :35am - 11 :50am
                                 EVENT TIME:                    12:3Opm - 1:50pm
                                 FROM:                          Bruce Reed, Audrey Tayse-Haynes,
                                                                Marsha Scott


I.        PURPOSE

          To bring together a broad coalition of consumers, providers, advocacy groups, business
          leaders, state, local, and national elected officials, and leaders in the mental health
          research and pharmacology, service delivery and insurance coverage - as well as
          communities across the country through over 1,000 satellite sites - to increase awareness
          on issues surrounding mental illness and its impact on people of all ages.

II.       BACKGROUND

          Today, at the first-ever White House Conference on Mental Health, chaired by your
          Mental Health Advisor Tipper Gore, the Clinton/Gore Administration will unveil
          unprecedented measures to improve mental health. "Weare taking new steps to
          breakdown the myths and misperceptions of mental illness and to encourage and enable
          Americans to get the care they need," said Tipper Gore. The Administration's proposals
          provide parity, improve treatment, bolster research, and expand community responses to
          help those with mental illnesses. Highlights of these initiatives include:

         Ensuring that the Federal Employees Health Benefits Plan (FEHBP) -- the nation's
          largest private insurer - implements full mental health and substance abuse parity.
          Today, the Office of Personnel Management is sending a letter to the 285 participating
          health plans informing them that starting next year they will have to offer full mental
          health and substance abuse parity to participate in the program. This step will provide full
          parity for nine million beneficiaries by next year and ensure that the Federal government
          leads the way to providing parity. The Department of Labor is also launching a new
          outreach campaign to inform Americans about their rights under the Mental Health Parity
          Act of 1996.
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


   Launching national school safety training program for teachers and education
    personnel. You will announce a major nationwide public/private partnership between
    the National Education Association (NEA), EchoStar, and other partners to improve
    school safety. The partnership, which includes the Departments of Education, Justice,
    and Health and Human Services, will create and run a comprehensive program that will
    be available at the beginning of the new school year with the goal of reaching every
    school across the country and providing training to teachers, school personnel, and
    community members on how to improve school safety.

   Accelerating progress in research. In July, National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
    will launch a $7.3 million landmark study to determine the nature of mental illness and
    treatment nationwide and to help guide strategies and policy for the next century. This
    new study will collect information on mental illness, including the prevalence and
    duration of mental illness as well as the types of treatment that are most commonly used.
    NIMH also will announce the launch of two new clinical trials, investing a total of$61
    million, to build on effective treatments for those affected by mental illness.

   Encouraging states to offer more coordinated Medicaid services for people with
    mental illness. Millions of Americans with severe mental illness rely on Medicaid to pay
    for their health care. To encourage states to make the most effective services available,
    the Health Care Financing Administration (RCFA) will advise all state Medicaid
    directors that: (1) Medicaid will reimburse for services provided in Assertive Community
    Treatment (ACT) programs targeting people with the most severe and persistent mental
    illness; (2) Medicaid recipients all have access to medications approved by FDA for the
    treatment of serious mental illnesses; and (3) states should educate Medicaid providers
    and beneficiaries about their ability to enter into "advance planning directives" that set
    out treatment guideline for people who became severely incapacitated in the future.

   Launching a pilot program to help people with mental illness get the quality
    treatment they need to return to work. Of the 4.7 million Americans that receive
    Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), the Social Security Administration (SSA)
    estimates that approximately one in nine (about 500,000) has an affective disorder (such
    as depression or a bipolar disorder). Research suggests that many of the people suffering
    with these disorders could get effective treatment and perhaps return to work. The
    Administration will launch a new five-year, $10 million demonstration to provide
    treatment for SSDI beneficiaries with affective disorders. This complements the Jeffords-
    Kennedy-Roth-Moynihan legislation, which allows people to buy into the Medicaid or
    Medicare program when they return to work.



   Educating older Americans and their health professionals about the risks of
    depression. Five million Americans over the age of 65 suffer from some form of
    depression, but many do not recognize their symptoms as depression and do not receive
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

    the treatment they need. NIMH and the Administration on Aging (AoA) will launch an
    outreach initiative to educate the elderly and their healthcare professionals about mental
    illness. The Department of Veteran Affairs will also launch six new study sites to test two
    modes of primary care for older Americans with mental health and/or substance abuse
    disorders.

   Reaching out to vulnerable homeless Americans with mental illnesses. The
    Department of Housing and Urban Development is launching a new initiative to
    encourage communities to create safe havens where homeless mentally ill Americans can
    get treatment and care. HHS will also launch a two-year, $4.8 million grant program to
    study the treatment, housing, education, training, and support services needed by
    homeless women and their children given to as many as 2,000 homeless mothers and their
    4,000 children, many of whom suffer from mental illnesses. The Department of Veteran
    Affairs will double the number of "stand down" events to reach out to homeless
    Americans with mental illness to help them get the treatment and services they need.

   Implementing new strategies to meet the mental health needs of crime victims. To
    ensure that the federal response to community crises, like acts of terrorism or mass
    violence, includes a strong mental health component, the Administration is announcing a
    new interagency partnership between the Department of Justice's Office for Victims of
    Crime and the Center for Mental Health Services within the Substance Abuse and Mental
    Health Services Administration (SAMSHA). This partnership also will ensure that
    strategies are in place to address the mental health needs of victims of violent crime.

   Developing and implementing new strategies to address mental illness in the
    criminal justice system. SAMHSA and DOJ are hosting a conference later this summer
    to focus on how the criminal justice system can prevent crime by mentally ill people and
    can address the needs of offenders with mental illness. Following this conference, DOJ
    will launch an outreach effort to educate the criminal justice community on how to better
    serve people with mental health needs. This initiative will include a new partnership with
    the National GAINS center so that communities interested in pursuing these approaches
    can get technical assistance and ideas about how to implement successful strategies.

   Implementing a new comprehensive approach to address combat stress in the
    military. At least 30 percent of those who have spent time in war zones experience
    combat stress reaction. Today you will direct the Department of Defense to report back
    within 180 days on an implementation plan for a comprehensive combat stress program
    throughout the military. DOD will also hold a conference this fall to develop strategies
    and educate military leaders and medical personnel about the need to enhance current
    prevention strategies.

   Launching the expansion of the "Caring For Every Child" mental health campaign.
    At least one in ten American children and adolescents may have behavioral, or mental
    health problems. The Administration will launch a five-year $5 million dollar campaign
    in targeted communities to highlight the special mental health needs of children.
                                                                  Hex-Dump Convllrsion

         Improving the mental health of Native American youth. The suicide rate for Native
          Americans between the ages of five and 24 years old is three times higher than the rest of
          the U.S. population in this age group. This initiative allocates at least $5 million for a
          collaboration between the Departments of Interior, Justice, Education, and HHS, to go to
          ten Native American communities to develop effective strategies to address mental health
          needs of youth in settings such as the home, school, treatment centers, and the juvenile
          justice system.

         The Administration Also Challenged Congress to Pass Legislation to Improve Care
          and Services for People with Mental Illness. The Administration urged Congress to:
          ~ Pass the J effords-Kennedy-Roth-Moynihan-Lazio-Waxman-Bliley-Dingell
             legislation, which would enable people with disabilities to return to work by accessing
             affordable health insurance.
          ~ Hold hearings on the mental health parity law to review its strengths and weaknesses.
          ~ Fund the historic $70 million increase in the mental health grant.
          ~ Pass a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights which ensures that people with
             mental health needs obtain critical protections such as access to specialists and the
             continuity of care protections.
          ~ Pass strong comprehensive privacy and legislation to eliminate genetic
             discrimination.

I.        PARTICIPANTS

          Briefing Participants:
          Bruce Reed
          Audrey Tayse-Haynes
          Chris Jennings
          Marsha Scott
          Sarah Bianchi
          Neera Tanden
          Jordan Tamagni

          Event Participants:
          The Vice President
          The First Lady
          Mrs. Gore
          Bob Chase, President, National Education Association
          Bill Vanderpoel, Vice President, EchoStar
          Panel Participants (see attached participants list)
IV.       PRESS PLAN

          Open Press.
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
V.     SEQUENCE OF EVENTS

       NOTE: SUGGESTED DISCUSSION SEQUENCE OF EVENTS AND QUESTIONS
       ATTACHED

              YOU, the Vice President, the First Lady, and Mrs. Gore will be announced onto
              the stage.
              Mrs. Gore will make brief opening remarks and lead the first group discussion.
              Upon conclusion of the discussion, Mrs. Gore will introduce the Vice President.
              The Vice President will make brief remarks and lead the second group discussion.
              Upon conclusion of the discussion, Mrs. Gore will introduce the First Lady.
              The First Lady will make brief remarks and lead the third group discussion.
              Upon conclusion of the discussion, Mrs. Gore will proceed to the podium.
              Mrs. Gore will make brief concluding remarks and introduce YOU.
              YOU will make remarks from the podium.
              YOU will introduce Bob Chase.
              Bob Chase will make brief remarks and introduce Bill Vanderpoel.
              Bill Vanderpoel will make brief remarks.
              YOU will conclude your remarks and depart.

VI.    REMARKS

       To be provided by speechwriting.

VII.   ATTACHMENTS

       -Panel Participants Bios
       -Suggested Discussion Sequence of Events and Questions
       -Mental Health Fact Sheet
                                                                    Hex-Dump COnversion
           WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE ON MENTAL HEALTH:
                          WORKING FOR A HEALTHIER AMERICA

                                       Panelist Biographies


Mike Wallace,
Co-Editor, CBS' 60 Minutes
Mike Wallace has become an American icon as co-editor of CBS's 60 Minutes and an award-
winning journalist, whose career spans nearly 60 years. His incisive interviewing techniques and
expansive knowledge of current affairs has enabled him to produce an impressive series of
interviews with American and international leaders, including every President from John F.
Kennedy through George Bush. More recently, Mr. Wallace has openly discussed his experience
with depression with the same candor that he has demanded of his interviewees. His hour-long
HBO documentary, "Dead Blue: Surviving Depression," has helped draw attention to the
pervasiveness of depression and the ability to recover from it. He is a testament to the
contributions that people living with mental illness can and do make in our society.

John Wong, Rosemead, CA
John Wong immigrated to the United States with his parents and two stepbrothers from Hong
Kong in 1973 when he was seven years old. He first experienced symptoms of schizophrenia
when he was 16 years old and had the first of his four psychiatric hospitalizations when he was
about 18 years old. John's symptoms have been reduced gradually through medication and
psychosocial rehabilitation treatment in the past 17 years. In fact, John is president of the
Consumer Planning Council of Pacific Clinics Asian Pacific Family Center (APFC) where he is
also a part-time employee. As part of his work duties, he teaches an "English as a Second
Language" class to other Asian immigrant consumers. He also participates in home visits and
outreach activities in collaboration with other agency staff. Jon's father, Mr. Hoi Wong, gave up
his restaurant business in 1980 in order to take care of his two children- John with mental illness
and another son with a heart disease.

Jennifer Gates, Scotch Plains, NJ
Jennifer Gates is a nineteen-year-old from Scotch Plains, NJ. She is a sophomore at the College
of William and Mary in Virginia, hoping to double major in English and psychology. She has
been recovering from an eating disorder for the past three years, and has always felt strongly
about dispelling the misconceptions the public has about eating disorders. She hopes that by
speaking about her struggle today she will be able to give a personal perspective and to increase
understanding ofthis very debilitating disease.
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Robin Kitchell, Franklin, TN
Robin is a parent and professional who has worked with children and families for ten years. She
is married and is the parent of a thirteen-year-old son with bipolar disorder, ADD, and learning
disabilities. She has been a passionate advocate for children and families with special needs. She
believes that one of the challenges for parents of a child with mental illness is to navigate through
the education and mental health system, and thinks it is critical for parents, teachers, and school
district officials to work as a team. Mrs. Kitchell is also an advocate with Tennessee Voices for
Children, and recently participated in a forum with Mrs. Gore at VanderbiIt University.

Wayne Burton, M.D., First Vice President ICorporate Medical Director
Bank One Corporation, Chicago, IL
Bank One is the 5th largest U.S. bank holding company with over 90,000 employees worldwide.
The Medical and Benefits Units of Bank One have worked together since 1982 to strategically
design health and wellness benefits programs and cost management strategies. To address the
impact of depression on employees and Bank One, Dr. Burton with his colleague Dr. Conti,
spearheaded a comprehensive effort to improve the company's ability to identify and get
appropriate treatment for employees with depression in a timely manner. In addition to his duties
at Bank One, Dr. Burton is an Associate Professor of Clinical Medicine and Psychiatry at
Northwestern University Medical School.

David Satcher, M.D., Ph.D.
Assistant Secretary for Health and U.S. Surgeon General
Department of Health and Human Services
Dr. Satcher is the 16th Surgeon General of the United States, and only the second person to
simultaneously hold the position of Assistant Secretary for Health and Surgeon General. Prior to
this appointment, Dr. Satcher served four years as the Director of the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) and Administrator for the Toxic'Substances and Disease Registry from
1993 to 1997. Dr. Satcher will be joining the conference plenary session via satellite from the
Carter Center in Atlanta, GA. He will be there with a number of community mental health
leaders, and will be focusing on the ways communities can respond to crises or traumas.

Congresswoman Lynn Rivers (D-MI)
Congresswoman Lynn Rivers was born in Au Gres, Michigan, the daughter of a mailman and a
homemaker. She is married with three children. While raising her children, working, and going
to college at the University of Michigan, she became politically active. Representative Rivers
ran for a seat on the school board in 1984 and won, serving for eight years. In 1992, she
graduated from Wayne University Law School. In 1994, Representative Rivers ran for the
United States Congress and won, becoming one of only 13 freshman Democrats to gain a seat
that year, and she now serves on the Science Committee and the House Budget Committee.
Though she was diagnosed with manic depression in her twenties, Representative Rivers
accomplished a great deal because of her effective treatment.

Harold S. Koplewicz, M.D, New York, NY
Dr. Harold S. Koplewicz, founder and director ofthe New York University Child Study Center,
is a nationally renowned child and adolescent psychiatrist. He is the Editor-in-Chief of the
the diagnosis and treatments of children and adolescents with behavioral disorders, anxiety
disorders, and mood disorders. He is also the author ont's Nobody's Fault: New Hope and Help
for Difficult Children And Their Parents. Dr. Koplewicz seeks to change the way we treat and
deal with child mental illness so that no parent or child is ashamed to seek the help they need.

Steven E. Hyman, MD
Dr. Hyman is the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health, the component of the
National Institute of Health charged with generating the information needed to understand, treat,
and prevent mental illness. He was Professor of Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and
Director of Psychiatry Research as Massachusetts General Hospital. He was also the first faculty
Director of Harvard University's Interfaculty Initiative on Mind, Brain, and Behavior. In addition
to his many scientific writings, he has authored and edited several widely used clinical texts. He
also serves on several review and advisory boards including the Riken Brain and Sciences
Institute in Japan, the Max Planck Institute in Germany, and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute in the United States.




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                       PLENARY SESSION
              SUGGESTED SEQUENCE OF DISCUSSION
                          June 7, 1999

Mrs. Gore's Panel

Q:    Mike Wallace: And now, I want to introduce a man who also struggled with mental
      illness - and whose decision to come forward with his experience has inspired many
      Americans to do the same. Mike we have a broad audience here today, with varying
      levels of understanding about mental disorders. Will you tell us about your experience
      with depression?

      Background:

      Possible follow-up: Tell us about the stigma associated with depression for men?

      Possible follow-up: What do Americans need to know about depression?

Q:    John Wong who came here today from California has been living with schizophrenia for
      over 13 years. John, when did you first realize you were experiencing a mental illness?

      Background: Mr. Wong's illness started in adolescence. (In men we know that
      schizophrenia usually appears in the late teens or early twenties.) Initially John was very
      resistant to treatment, but for the past nine years he has managed his illness. He now does
      outreach with others to help them get the treatment and support they need when coping
      with a mental disorder.

      POTUS POSSIBLE FOLLOW-UP: Was there a particular event or symptom that made
      you realize that you needed mental health treatment and how did you get help?

      Possible follow-up: Can you tell us about your recovery and how you have reached out to
      help others?

      Possible follow-up: I know your father is in the audience, and has been very supportive
      and helpful in your recovery. Tell us how he helped.

Q:    Jennifer Gates is here to talk about her experience. Jennifer, you had a very serious
      experience with anorexia. Tell us when your illness started.

      Background: Jennifer, who is now 19-years-old, was IS-years-old when her eating
      disorder began. She controlled her food intake as a way to lose weight and look "good"
      for the summer. After a few months the disease took control of her. She can speak to her
      obsessive thoughts of perfection in all aspects of her life (i.e., grades, weight), and how
      treatment, 3 years later, remains an important part of her recovery.
                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
      themselves up by their bootstraps. I know you have mentioned the stigma you
      experienced when you were ill, how often family and friends didn't understand why you
      wouldn't just eat. As best as you can, will you tell us what you were experiencing at that
      time and the role treatment and support played in your recovery?

      Possible Follow-up: What do you see in your future?


Vice President's Panel

Q:    Robin Kitchell, from Nashville Tennessee, has a son who suffers from bi-polar disorder.
      She recently met Tipper at an event like this one in Tennessee. Robin, tell us about some
      of the challenges and rewards of caring for a child with a mental illness?

      Background: Mrs. Kitchell struggled with schools to assure her son received the support
      he needed to succeed. Robin is also an activist with Tennessee Voices for Children and
      fights to make sure that schools and other aspects of the community work effectively to
      help children with mental illness.

      Possible follow-up: How can we help communities and schools do a better job of
      reaching and supporting kids with mental illness?

Q:    Dr. Wayne Burton is the Corporate Medical Director of Bank One Corporation. Dr.
      Burton, tell us how the comprehensive mental health services Bank One offers has helped
      your business?

      Background: In 1983, Bank One began to implement comprehensive mental health
      services for its employees including: (1) training managers to reduce stigma; (2)
      increasing employee awareness of services; and (3) enhancing covered mental health
      benefits. As a result, the costs of mental health have gone from 15 percent of health care
      costs in 1982 to 6 percent in 1996.

      Possible follow-up: What are some of the things your program does to
      raise awareness among your employees?

      Possible follow-up: Do your employees worry about discussing these issues in the
      workplace because of confidentiality? How do you all address this issue?

Q:    I'd like to call on Dr. David Satcher, who is joining us from the Carter Center in Atlanta
      where he is leading a discussion on how communities can better respond to the short-term
      and long-term impact of crises, such as school violence or floods. Dr. Satcher, tell us
      about some of what you all are focusing on today?


                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
      communities, including a woman from Oklahoma who helped set up comprehensive
      mental health services following the bombings.

      POTUS POSSIBLE FOLLOW-UP: What are the long-term mental health effects of
      these types of crises?

      VP possible follow-up: What can communities do to assure they can respond in times of
      crisis and address every day mental health needs?


Mrs. Clinton's Panel

Q:    Dr. Steven Hyman: I'd like to talk with this distinguished group of panelists about the
      science of mental health and illness. We're happy to have Dr. Steven Hyman with us
      today, a distinguished scientist who directs the National Institute of Mental Health. NIMH
      is part of the National Institutes of Health.

      Dr. Hyman, you are dealing with some very difficult diseases that affect millions of
      people. Over the last few years, what progress are we making and what have we really
      learned about these diseases?

      Possible Follow-up: How have these scientific discoveries changed the way we as a
      society deal with mental illness?

Q:    Dr. Koplewicz is an expert on mental health issues, particularly in children. What steps
      can we take as a nation to demystify mental illness?

      Background: Dr. Koplewicz, founder and director of the New York University Child
      Study Center, is a nationally renowned child and adolescent psychiatrist. He has written
      many scientific articles on the diagnosis and treatments of children and adolescents with
      behavioral disorders, anxiety disorders, and mood disorders. He is also the author ofIt's
      Nobody's Fault: New Hope and Help for Difficult Children And Their Parents. Dr.
      Koplewicz seeks to change the way we treat and deal with child mental illness so that no
      parent or child is asharned to seek the help they need.

      Possible Follow-up: What are the particular issues associated with children with mental
      illness?

      POTUS POSSIBLE FOLLOW-UP: What can we do to intervene early, before the
      mental illness causes a child to become violent to themselves or others?

Q:    Representative Lynn Rivers: So all this offers us new hope about treatment of mental
      health, but also the importance of early diagnosis. Congresswoman Rivers, would you
      share with us your experience?
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
illness. Though she was diagnosed with manic depression in her early twenties, she has
accomplished a great deal due to her effective treatment.

Possible follow-up: How did you decide to come forward?




                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


