RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-JUN-1999 23:51:54.00

SUBJECT:    final documents

TO: Courtney O. Gregoire ( CN=Courtney O. Gregoire/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 you have read myths and press paper (although mrs. gore herself had one
'edit --= she didn;t want to call it the first ever conference) and the
 accomplishments were done by Janeda's office and the FY2000 leg stuff by
 us

sb
---------------------- Forwarded by Sarah A. Bianchi/OVP on 06/06/99 11:49
PM ---------------------------




Sarah A. Bianchi
06/06/99 11:43:19 PM
Record Type:     Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject:         final documents




Message Sent
TO: ____________~-----------------------------------------------
Audrey T. Haynes/ovP@OVP
Marsha Scott/WHO/EOP@EOP
Karin Kullman/OPD/EOP@EOP
Gina Tesaura/OVP@OVP
Trooper Sanders/OVP@OVP
Devorah R. Adler/OPD/EOP@EOP
Melissa W. Preston/OVP@OVP
Alejandro G. Cabrera/OVP@OVP
Melissa B. Ratcliff/OVP@OVP
Jeanne Lambrew/OPD/EOP@EOP
Camille Johnston/OVP@OVP
Thomas D. Janenda/WHO/EOP@EOP
Rajiv Y. Mody/WHO/EOP@EOP




==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D9]ARMS220523367.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000003300000000000000001000003500000001000000FEFFFFFF000000003200
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                             June 7, 1999


MYTH #1:   Mental illness is not a disease and cannot be treated.

FACT:      Research in the last decade proves that mental illnesses are diagnosable disorders
           of the brain. New brain imaging technologies visually illustrate the differences in
           the brains of healthy people and people with serious mental disorders, such as
           schizophrenia. They show reductions in the overall volume of the brain and
           distinct differences in the way in which the brain processes information. There
           are also now effective treatments for mental illness that, for example, relieve
           symptoms for 80 percent of people with major depression; control symptoms such
           as hallucination or delusions for 70 percent of people with schizophrenia; and
           alleviate symptoms for 50 to 60 percent of people with Obsessive Compulsive
           Disorder.



MYTH #2:   Mental illness doesn't happen to people like me or my family.

FACT:      Mental illness affects most extended American families. One in five Americans
           suffer from mental illness at some point in their life. These illnesses strike all
           kinds offamilies, regardless of race, socioeconomic class, educational level or
           place of residence. Schizophrenia occurs at equal rates regardless of education,
           socioeconomic status, or culture. Depression, panic disorder and obsessive
           compulsive disorders are also equal opportunity illnesses. Women suffer from
           depression at twice the rate of men regardless of where they live, their culture, or
           socioeconomic status. Five million older Americans suffer from depression, and
           one in ten children and adolescents suffer from some type of mental illness.
           Mental illness can happen to anyone.



MYTH #3:   Depression is a part of life that can be worked through without seeking help.

FACT:      Depression is a diagnosable, treatable illness that affects 19 million adult
           Americans each year. It is a disorder of the brain that is characterized by serious
           and persistent symptoms such as changes in sleep, appetite, and energy; cognitive
           losses such as slowed thinking; and clearly discernible feelings like irritability,
           hopelessness, and guilt. The severity and duration of depression symptoms are
           clearly distinguishable from sadness and mood swings that are part of life. When
           untreated, depression can have serious consequences. Depression is the cause of
           over two-thirds of the 30,000 American suicides each year, and according to the
           World Health Organization, it is the leading cause of disability in the United
           States. However, there are effective treatments available that have proven to have
           80 percent success rate for people diagnosed with depression.
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

FACT:      We now know that teenagers and even younger children, can and do suffer from
           mental illness. One in ten children and adolescents suffer from mental illness
           severe enough to cause some level of impairment, but fewer than 20 percent of
           these children receive treatment. Without treatment, schoolwork may suffer,
           normal family and peer relationships may be disrupted, and violent acts may
           occur. In fact, depression may lead to suicide, which is the third leading cause of
           death among young adults. However, recent studies indicate that 60 percent of
           depressed teenagers will improve with modem treatments.




MYTH #5:   Depression is a part of aging.

FACT:      Research shows that depression is not a normal part of aging, but that it is
           relatively prevalent among older people and can have serious adverse
           consequences. Nearly 5 million of the 32 million Americans age 65 and older
           suffer from clinical depression. While only 13 percent of the U.S. population,
           individuals ages 65 and older account for 20 percent of all suicide deaths, with
           white males being most vulnerable. And older persons with other serious health
           problems (strokes, hip fractures, heart conditions) depression may delay recovery,
           cause refusal of treatment, and lead to excessive disability and even death.
           However, effective mental health treatment is available for older Americans
           suffering from mental illness.




MYTH #6:   Talk about suicide is an idle threat that need not be taken seriously.

FACT:      People who admit to having thoughts and plans about suicide and people who
           have attempted suicide are at increased risk for completing suicide in the future.
           In a study of nearly 4,000 adults seeking psychiatric treatment, persons with a
           history of severe suicidal thoughts were 14 times more likely than other
           individuals to later commit suicide within four years. Research has shown that 90
           percent of all suicide victims have had a mental or substance abuse disorder.




                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

FACT:      We cannot afford NOT to treat mental illness. Researchers estimate that mental
           illnesses, including indirect costs such as days lost from work, cost America tens
           of billions of dollars each year. At the same time, businesses and states that have
           implemented new strategies to treat these disorders have not found notable
           increases in costs. For example, one business, Bank One, spearheaded a
           comprehensive effort to improve the company's ability to identify and get
           appropriate treatment for employees with depression in a timely manner. Between
           1991 and 1995, the direct treatment costs for depressive disorders decreased by 60
           percent. Moreover, Ohio implemented full mental health parity for its state
           employees and did not find that this action increased costs at all.



MYTH #8:   People with severe and persistent mental illnesses cannot be productive
           members of society.

FACT:      People with psychiatric disabilities face many barriers, but appropriate support
           services can help them to succeed. A 1995 study of the Employment Intervention
           Demonstration Program run by the Center for Mental Health Services assessed the
           effectiveness of employment strategies to assist individuals with severe mental
           illness get and keep employment. It found that 55 percent of individuals receiving
           such employment support services were working after two years. Clearly, people
           with severe and persistent mental illnesses want to be employed and productive,
           and given appropriate treatment and support, they can be.



MYTH #9:   Homeless people suffering from mental illness have little chance of recovery.

FACT:      There are effective treatments for homeless people with mental illness. While one-
           third of homeless Americans suffer from an untreated mental illness, research
           demonstrates a decrease in homelessness when outreach to these individuals is
           coupled with case management that provides them with appropriate medical
           treatment and connects them to housing and other supportive services. One study
           reported a 45 percent reduction in the number of days of homeless ness after three
           months of this type of treatment. Over a year, clients had a 70 percent increase in
           the number of days worked, demonstrating that homeless persons with mental
           illnesses can make substantial improvements in the overall quality of their lives.




                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

FACT:        These illnesses, which will affect one in five Americans, can be extremely
             debilitating. However, research proves that mental illnesses are diagnosable and
             treatable disorders of the brain. Eighty percent of people treated for severe
             depression and 70 percent or people treated for schizophrenia show positive
             responses to treatment-far higher rates than for many physical illnesses. The
             challenge is to ensure that Americans with mental illness recognize these
             disorders and get the help that they need.




                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
    TO ADDRESS MENTAL HEALTH AT THE WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE ON
                         MENTAL HEALTH
                            June 7,1999

Today, at the White House Conference on Mental Health, chaired by the President's Mental
Health Advisor Tipper Gore, the Clinton-Gore Administration will unveil unprecedented
measures to improve mental health. "To improve the health of our nation, we must ensure that
our mental health is taken as seriously as our physical health. That is why we are taking new
steps to break down the myths and misperceptions of mental illness, highlight new cutting-edge
treatments, and encourage Americans to get the help they need." said Tipper Gore.

The Administration's proposals provide parity, improve treatment, bolster research, and expand
community responses to help those with mental illnesses. Highlights of these initiatives include:

   Ensuring that the Federal Employees Health Benefits Plan (FEHBP) -- the nation's
    largest private insurer - implements full mental health and substance abuse parity.
    Today, the Office of Personnel Management is sending a letter to the 285 participating health
    plans informing them that they will have to offer full mental health and substance abuse
    parity to participate in the program. This step will provide full parity for nine million
    beneficiaries by next year and ensure that the Federal government leads the way to providing
    parity. The Department of Labor (DOL) is also launching a new outreach campaign to inform
    Americans about their rights under the Mental Health Parity Act of 1996, including a DOL
    toll free number (1-800-789-2647) to call to clarify these rights.

   Launching national school safety training program for teachers and education
    personnel. The President announced that later this year the Vice President and Mrs. Gore
    will launch a major nationwide public/private partnership between the National Education
    Association (NEA), EchoStar, and other partners to improve school safety. The partnership,
    which includes the Departments of Education, Justice, and Health and Human Services, will
    create and run a comprehensive program that will be available at the beginning of the new
    school year and reaching schools across the country, that provide training to teachers, school
    personnel, and community members on how to improve school safety. Training sessions,
    created principally by NEA, will be transmitted to school districts across the country by
    satellite technology, including 1,000 satellite dishes donated by EchoStar for this purpose.

   Accelerating progress in research. In July, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
    will launch a $7.3 million landmark study to explore the nature of mental illness and
    treatment nationwide and to help guide strategies and policy. This new study will collect
    information on mental illness, including the prevalence and duration of mental illness as well
    as the types of treatment that are most commonly used. NIMH will also announce the launch
    of two new clinical trials, investing a total of $61 million, to build on effective treatments for
    those affected by mental illness.



                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                   1
    illness. Millions of Americans with severe mental illness rely on Medicaid to pay for their
    health care. To encourage states to make the most effective services available, the Health
    Care Financing Administration (HCFA) will advise all state Medicaid directors that: (1)
    Medicaid will reimburse for services provided in Assertive Community Treatment (ACT)
    programs targeting people with the most severe and persistent mental illness; (2) Medicaid
    recipients are entitled to medications approved by FDA for the treatment of serious mental
    illnesses; and (3) states should educate Medicaid providers and beneficiaries about their
    ability to enter into "advance planning directives" that set out treatment guideline for people
    who became severely incapacitated in the future.

   Launching a pilot program to help people with mental illness get the quality treatment
    they need to return to work. Of the 4.7 million Americans that receive Social Security
    Disability Insurance (SSDI), the Social Security Administration (SSA) estimates that
    approximately one in nine (about 500,000) has an affective disorder (such as depression or a
    bipolar disorder). Research suggests that many people suffering from these disorders could
    get effective treatment and perhaps return to work. The Administration will launch a new
    five-year, $10 million demonstration to provide treatment for SSDI beneficiaries with
    affective disorders. This project complements the Jeffords-Kennedy-Roth-Moynihan
    legislation that allows people with disabilities to buy into the Medicaid or Medicare program
    when they return to work.

   Educating older Americans and their health professionals about the risks of depression.
    Five million Americans over the age of 65 suffer from some form of depression, but many do
    not recognize their symptoms as depression and do not receive the treatment they need. The
    NIMH and the Administration on Aging (AoA) will launch an outreach initiative to educate
    the elderly and their healthcare professionals about mental illness. The Department of
    Veteran Affairs will invest $17 million to launch six new study sites to test two modes of
    primary care for older Americans with mental health and/or substance abuse disorders.

   Reaching out to vulnerable homeless Americans with mental illnesses. The Department
    of Housing and Urban Development is launching a new initiative to encourage communities
    to create safe havens where homeless mentally ill Americans can get treatment and care. The
    Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) will also launch a
    two-year, $4.8 million grant program to study the treatment, housing, education, training, and
    support services needed by homeless women and their children given to as many as 2,000
    homeless mothers and their 4,000 children, many of whom suffer from mental illnesses. The
    Department of Veteran Affairs will double the number of "stand down" events to reach out
    to homeless Americans with mental illness to help them get the treatment and services they
    need.

   Implementing new strategies to meet the mental health needs of crime victims. To ensure
    that the federal response to community crises, like acts of terrorism or mass violence,
    includes a strong mental health component, the Administration is announcing a new
    interagency partnership between the Department of Justice's Office for Victims of Crime and
    the Center for Mental Health Services within SAMHSA. This partnership also will ensure
    that strategies are in place to address the mental health needs of victims of violent crime.

                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                 2          Hex-Dump Conversion
    justice system. SAMHSA and DOJ are hosting a conference later this summer to focus on
    how the criminal justice system can prevent crime by mentally ill people, and address the
    needs of offenders with mental illness. Following this conference, DOJ will launch an
    outreach effort to educate the criminal justice community on how better to serve people with
    mental health needs. This initiative will include a new partnership with the National GAINS
    center so that communities interested in pursuing these approaches can get technical
    assistance and ideas about how to implement successful strategies.

   Implementing a new comprehensive approach to address combat stress in the military.
    At least 30 percent of those who have spent time in war zones experience combat stress
    reaction. Today the President will direct the Department of Defense to report back within 180
    days on an implementation plan for a more comprehensive combat stress program throughout
    the military. DOD will also hold a conference this fall to develop strategies and educate
    military leaders and medical personnel about the need to enhance current prevention
    strategies.

   Launching the expansion of the "Caring For Every Child" mental health campaign. At
    least one in ten American children and adolescents may have behavioral, or mental health
    problems. SAMHSA will launch a five-year $5 million dollar campaign in targeted
    communities to target and address the special mental health needs of children.

   Improving the mental health of Native American youth. The suicide rate for Native
    Americans between the ages of five and 24 years old is three times higher than the rest of the
    U.S. popUlation in this age group. This initiative allocates at least $5 million for a
    collaboration between the Departments of Interior, Justice, Education, and HHS, to go to ten
    Native American communities to develop effective strategies to address mental health needs
    of youth in settings such as the home, school, treatment centers, and the juvenile justice
    system.

   The Administration Also Challenged Congress to Pass Legislation to Improve Care and
    Services for People with Mental Illness. The Administration urged Congress to:
       ~Pass the J effords-Kennedy-Roth-Moynihan-Lazio-Waxman-Bliley-Dingell legislation
           that would enable people with disabilities to return to work by accessing affordable
           health insurance.
       ~ Hold hearings on the mental health parity law to review its strengths and weaknesses.
       ~ Fund the historic $70 million increase in the mental health grant.
       ~ Pass a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights which ensures that people with
           mental health needs obtain critical protections such as access to specialists and the
           continuity of care protections.
       ~ Pass strong comprehensive privacy and legislation to eliminate genetic
           discrimination.




                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                3            Hex-Dump Conversion
    Hex-Dump Conversion
4
                                    Improving Mental Health

           "Let me say we must step up our efforts to treat and prevent mental illness. No American
           should ever be afraid -- ever -- to address this disease. "

                                          - President Clinton in his State of the Union Address, January 19,1999

       While trying to eradicate the stigma and discrimination associated with mental illness, the
Clinton-Gore Administration is working to improve mental health treatment, enhance prevention
and bolster research. The Administration, under the leadership of President Clinton and Vice
President Gore, is committed to helping Americans with mental illnesses live healthy, productive
lives.

HELPING AMERICANS OVERCOME MENTAL ILLNESS

Supporting Fairness, Requiring Mental Health Parity. The Clinton-Gore Administration
advocated for and signed into law the 1996 Mental Health Parity Act (MHPA). In December 1997,
the Administration issued regulations to take steps to ending discrimination in health insurance on
the basis of mental illness under MHP A. As of January 1998, the law began requiring health plans
to provide the same annual and lifetime spending caps for mental health benefits as they do for
medical and surgical benefits. The Departments of Labor (DOL), Treasury, and HHS have also
established coordination and referral systems at the federal and state levels to coordinate
investigations of alleged practices by health insurance'issuers and to ensure that workers and their
families are not unjustly denied any protections provided under MHP A.

Extending Strong Mental Health Care to Millions of Children through the Children's Health
Insurance Program (CHIP). The President fought to ensure that the 1997 Balanced Budget Act
included $24 billion -- the single largest investment in Health Care for children since 1965 -- to
provide real health care coverage to millions of uninsured children. This investment guarantees the
full range of benefits -- from checkups to surgery -- that children need to grow up strong and
healthy. It ensures that a strong mental health benefit is part of this benefit.

Preparing the First Surgeon General's Report on Mental Health. Due out by late 1999, this
document will distill the most current science to recommend approaches for promoting mental
health, preventing mental illness, and providing state-of-the-art clinical interventions across the life
cycle. The report will illustrate the similarities between mental health and physical health and the
value of prompt, appropriate treatment.

Developing a National Suicide Prevention Strategy. In October 1998, Surgeon General David
Satcher took part in a conference in Reno, Nevada, which laid the foundation for developing a
national suicide prevention strategy -- the first time in the United States that clinicians, researchers,
survivors and activists had been gathered for this purpose.

Ensuring Medicaid Coverage of Mental Health Services. In October 1998, HCF A issued a state
Medicaid director's letter providing guidance to all states regarding the development of Medicaid
managed care programs for persons with special needs. This guidance applies to mental health
service systems and further promotes recognition of mental health needs by managed care
organizations serving Medicaid populations.
                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
the President's Mental Health Policy Advisor, Mrs. Gore, unveiled the Administration's plan to
increase the Mental Health Services Block Grants by an unprecedented $70 million (or 24 percent),
totaling $359 million for fiscal year 2000. Currently, the Mental Health Services Block Grant
provides state and territorial governments with resources to support comprehensive community-
based systems of care to serve people with serious mental illness and their families. This additional
funding will enable states to target particularly-hard-to-reach adults and children with severe
mental illnesses.

Fighting to Pass a Strong, Enforceable Patients' Bill of Rights. President Clinton and Vice
President Gore called on the Congress to pass a strong, enforceable Patients' Bin of Rights that
assures Americans the quality health care they need. Among its protections, the Administration's
bill ensures that consumers cannot be discriminated against because of mental disability as they
seek health care services. Leading by example, the President directed an federal agencies to ensure
that their employees and beneficiaries have the benefits and rights guaranteed under the President's
proposed Patients' Bin of Rights. In addition, HHS currently supports consumers by providing
grants to develop programs that advocate for the legal rights of people with mental illness and to
investigate incidents of abuse and neglect in facilities that care for such individuals.

Protecting the Medicaid Guarantee. The Clinton-Gore Administration rejected proposals to end
the Medicaid guarantee to meaningful health benefits. In 1995, the President vetoed the
Republicans' proposal in the 104th Congress to block grant the Medicaid program, preserving
coverage for million of persons who receive mental health services under Medicaid. Thanks to
President Clinton, the 1997 Balanced Budget Act preserved the federal guarantee of Medicaid
coverage for populations who depend on it.

Sponsoring Studies and Providing Mental Health Information. HHS has taken a proactive
approach in addressing mental health issues by sponsoring studies to advance mental health science
in areas such as Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Schizophrenia. In addition,
SAMSHA operates the National Mental Health Services Knowledge Exchange Network (KEN) as a
user-friendly, "one-stop" gateway to a wide range of information and resources on mental health
services for users of mental health services and their families, the general public, policy makers,
providers and the news media. KEN can be reached at 1-800-789-2647 or via the Internet at
www.mentalhealth.org.

Preventing Discrimination Based on Genetic Information both by Health Plans and
Employers. The Administration has urged Congress to pass bipartisan legislation to prohibit health
plans from inappropriately using genetic screening information to deny coverage, set premiums or
to distribute confidential information. The Clinton-Gore Administration has also supported
legislation tl)at ensures that employers do not use genetic information to discriminate against
employees.

Supporting Brain Research and Improving Technology. Earlier this year, the Energy
Department gave a $10 million grant to establish the first of three National Centers for Functional
Brain Imaging. Moreover, Department of Energy laboratories have developed a device that gives
doctors a "window" into how the human brain actually functions. The device takes snapshots of the
brain using a technique called magnetoencephalography and has lead to greater insights about how
the signals of the brain act or react in individuals with mental illnesses.

                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                  2             Hex-Dump Conversion

Expanding Hiring Opportunities for People with Psychiatric Disabilities. In January, Tipper
Gore announced that the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) would explore measures to
eliminate the stricter standards that are currently applied to federal job applicants who have
psychiatric disabilities. On June 4, 1999, President Clinton signed an executive order ensuring that
individuals with psychiatric disabilities are given the same hiring opportunities as persons with
severe physical disabilities or mental retardation. The civil service rules will be changed to ensure
that people with psychiatric disabilities are covered by the same hiring rules and authority used for
individuals with other disabilities. The executive order also permits people with psychiatric
disabilities the same opportunity to acquire competitive civil service status after two years of
successful service. This authority will allow adults with psychiatric disabilities the same
opportunity for conversion into the competitive civil service as employees with other disabilities.

Working to Enact the Work Incentives Improvement Act (WIIA). The Work Incentives
Improvement Act is an historic, bipartisan bill which removes significant barriers to work for
people with disabilities, including psychiatric disabilities. The proposed legislation improves access
to health care through Medicaid; extends Medicare coverage for people with disabilities who return
to work; and creates a new Medicaid buy-in demonstration to help people with a specific physical
or mental impairment that is expected to lead to a severe disability without medical assistance.

Helping People with Mental Illness Return to Work. Initiated in 1995, the Employment
Intervention Demonstration Program (EIDP) program has shown that people with serious mental
illness not only can work but also can be highly productive, given the right environment and the
right support systems. EIDP has been identifying model interventions to help people with severe
mental illnesses return to work or enter the workforce for the first time. While not yet complete, the
study already has yielded important information about employment for people with serious mental
illnesses -- information to help break through the stigma that stands between willing workers and
jobs needing to be filled.

ADDRESSING MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES FOR ALL AGES

Meeting Special Needs of Children, Adolescents and Families. The Clinton-Gore
Administration helps fund a wide range of programs designed to protect or improve the mental
health of our children. Some programs focus on preventive interventions that promote resilience,
while other programs reach out to children with serious emotional disturbances to help point them
on the road toward a healthier, productive adult future.

      Promoting Healthy Development. In response to President Clinton's call to action during
       the White House Conference on School Safety, the Administration creating two important
       grant programs for communities around the country: (1) the Safe Schools/ Healthy Students
       Program; and (2) the School Action Grant Program. Through the first program, grants
       totaling more than $180 million per year will be awarded to school districts in partnership
       with local mental health and law enforcement authorities to promote healthy childhood
       development and prevent violence. The second program, launched by SAMHSA's Center
       for Mental Health Services, complements the first by providing funds to communities to
       expand school-based programs to the broader community.

                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                  3              Hex-Dump Conversion
       children who grow up in homes where at least one parent suffers from significant mental
       illness and/or substance abuse demonstrate emotional, behavioral or relationship problems
       that ultimately hinder their readiness to enter school. HHS' "Starting Early, Starting Smart"
       initiative, a public-private partnership between SAMHSA and the Casey Family Foundation,
       seeks to fill this gap by reaching children at their most critical time for mental and physical
       development.

Meeting the Special Needs of Older Adults. The Clinton-Gore Administration supports a range of
services to meet the unique mental health needs of older Americans.

      Studying and Treating the Mental Health Needs of Seniors. The Administration
       supports a number of studies exploring the mental health needs of elderly Americans,
       including treating depression and reducing the risk of suicide. Older Americans are
       disproportionately more likely to commit suicide than any other group. NIMH-supported
       studies have found that major depression was the sole predictor of suicide among the
       elderly. These and other NIMH findings can lead to enhanced detection and treatment of
       depression in primary-care settings that reduces the risk of suicide among the elderly.

      Caring for the Caregivers. President Clinton and Vice President Gore supported the
       Administration on Aging (AoA) proposal for the National Family Caregiver Support
       Program to help families sustain their efforts to care for an older relative afflicted with a
       chronic illness or disability. The program would establish a multifaceted support system in
       each state for family caregivers. AoA also continues to provide grants to states to provide
       home and community-based, long-term care services -- important supplements to the care
       already provided by family members.

ADDRESSING MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES IN ALL COMMUNITIES

Supporting the National Resource Center on Homelessness and Mental Illness. SAMSHA
operates this center which develops and disseminates effective approaches to providing services and
housing to homeless people with mental illness. Thanks to these resources, states have been able to
improve treatment, housing and support services for adults with severe mental illness, so that they
can carry out ordinary day-to-day activities in their communities. In addition, the "Access to
Community Care and Effective Services and Supports" (ACCESS) program seeks to integrate
fragmented public mental health services by using proven strategies and fostering partnerships
among service agencies. ACCESS-evaluated interventions can lower days of homeless ness for
seriously at-risk individuals by as much as 75 percent over a 12-month period.

Providing Mental Health Services for the Homeless. The Health Care for the Homeless Program
provides a comprehensive approach to address the multitude of health problems faced by homeless
individuals. These services include referring homeless persons for needed mental health services
and providing primary care and substance abuse services at locations accessible to homeless people.
In addition, the President has proposed increasing the Projects for Assistance in Transition from
Homelessness (PATH) program. PATH provides links to community-based health, education,
employment and housing services.


                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                 4            Hex-Dump Conversion
Administration, the Department of Housing and Urban Development's (RUD) Continuum of Care
program uses a comprehensive approach to provide emergency, transitional and permanent housing
and services to help homeless people become self sufficient. Since 1994, the Continuum of Care
has devoted an average of $882 million each year toward solving homelessness, and in 1998, more
than half of the programs supported by homeless funding served people with mental illnesses under
the Continuum of Care's Supportive Housing, Safe Havens and Shelter Plus Care programs.
According to a 1996 Columbia University study: "The Continuum of Care approach has resulted in
significantly more assistance for homeless persons with disabilities (including, but not limited to,
severe mental illness, substance abuse problems, HIV/AIDS, and physical disabilities). The
numbers of persons with disabilities proposed to be served in programs specifically designed for
them increased 843 percent, from 2,816 to 26,565."

Providing Mental Health Services in Medically Underserved Areas. The Community Health
Center (CHC) Program provides primary and preventive health care services to people living in
rural and urban medically underserved areas throughout the U.S. and its territories. CHCs offer
services in 2,500 clinics and serve over 7 million people yearly. In addition, the Clinton-Gore
Administration is helping to train and recruit mental health professionals. The National Health
Service Corps (NHSC) loan repayment program is available for behavioral and mental health
professionals including clinical psychologists, clinical social workers, psychiatric nurse specialists,
and marriage and family therapists. Through NHSC, these clinicians are placed in health
professional shortage areas to improve access to mental health services for underserved people.

Enhancing Access and Decreasing Stigma Associated with Mental Illness. Under the Clinton-
Gore Administration, the DoD developed a pilot program at Tinker Air Force Base in which
specialty behavioral healthcare is provided in primary care clinics, thus enhancing access to mental
healthcare, decreasing stigma associated with seeking such care, and enhancing prevention efforts.

Helping Veterans Overcome Mental Illness. Under the Clinton Administration, the Veterans
Administration (V A) has redoubled its efforts to provide quality mental health services. The VA
instituted an accountability system and has increased its services to special populations, including
homeless veterans and veterans with PostTraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). The VA currently
treats over 25,000 homeless veterans per year and outcomes of those treated in residential facilities
have improved steadily from 1993-1999 in the areas of housing, employment and clinical status.
The VA also treats over 50,000 vets per year in specialized PTSD programs and inpatient PTSD
outcomes have improved in recent years.

PROTECTING ALL CITIZENS

Caring for Victims of Violence. SAMHSA has developed a grant program to identify, test and
evaluate new, more effective programs to care for female victims of violence and for their children.
In addition, the Violence Against Women Office supports a number of state and local efforts that
include components to provide mental health services to domestic violence victims and their
children and victims of sexual assault. And in fiscal year 1998, the Office for Victims of Crime
(OVC), through Victims of Crime Act (VOCA) funding, supported of over 4,000 victim assistance
agencies throughout the nation.


                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                   5           Hex-Dump Conversion
The Clinton Administration has worked hard to ensure proper care in our public residential
facilities. The Civil Rights Division Special Litigation Section has ongoing work investigating
allegations of inadequate care and treatment in public residential facilities (including mental
retardation facilities and adult and juvenile correction facilities) under the Civil Rights of
Institutionalized Persons Act. Since 1993, the Division has investigated mental health services and
monitored remedial settlements to improve the mental health services in more than 300 facilities in
42 states. The Department of Justice's (DOJ) efforts also include an ongoing Working Group on
Mental Health and Crime and a Suicide Prevention Program.

Addressing the Mental Health Needs of Youth. In fiscal year 1999, the Office ofJuvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) is funding a competitive grant to initiate a research
and demonstration effort to substantially increase the quality of mental health services provided to
detained and committed youth. In addition, a collaborative initiative between the Deputy Attorney
General and OJJDP focuses on the needs of children exposed to violence, including on law
enforcement and legislative reform, innovative programs, and raising public awareness.

Working to Improve the Justice System's Response. DOJ has supported studies that examine
and analyze police response to emotionally disturbed persons and that study the use of force in the
arrest of persons with impaired judgement, including people with mental illness. Other DOJ efforts
include: an ongoing Working Group on Mental Health and Crime, a number of projects supported
by the Bureau of Justice Assistance to improve the criminal justice system's response, and a Suicide
Prevention Program conducted by the National Institute of Corrections' (NIC) Jails Division.




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                 6
    LEGISLATION TO IMPROVE CARE AND SERVICES FOR PEOPLE WITH
                        MENTAL ILLNESS
                            June 7, 1999

At the first-ever White House Conference on Mental Health, The Clinton-Gore Administration
called on Congress to enact legislation to ensure quality care and services for Americans with
mental illness. The Clinton-Gore Administration challenged Congress to pass a number of
important bills to support people with mental illness including; allocating an unprecedented
increase in the mental health block grant, passing a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights, and
challenging Congress to hold hearings on mental health parity legislation. The proposals include:

Fund an historic increase in the mental health block grant. The Administration called on the
Congress to pass the President's FY 2000 budget proposal for a $70 million increase in the
mental health block grant. In addition, the Administration asked Congress to pass a 19 percent
increase in funds for the Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness (PATH)
program. In an era of surpluses, the Administration also called on states to expand their coverage
in this area.

Challenge Congress to hold hearings on mental health parity legislation. The
Administration urged the Congress to hold hearings right away on the strengths and weaknesses
of the current mental health parity law and to determine the feasibility of congressional
legislation that would expand mental health parity for private health plans.

Pass a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights. The Administration also challenged the
Congress to pass a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights that assures that consumers,
including those with mental health needs, receive critical protections such as access to
specialists, the continuity of care protections, and an independent appeals process to address
grievances with their health plans.

Pass the Jeffords-Kennedy-Roth-Moynihan legislation to enable people with disabilities
return to work. Access to affordable health insurance is the biggest barrier preventing people
with disabilities from returning to work. The President and Vice President encouraged Congress
to pass this legislation right away, which would help people with disabilities, including mental
illnesses, buy into Medicare and Medicaid so they can return to work.

Pass strong comprehensive privacy protections and legislation to eliminate genetic
discrimination. The President and Vice President also urged Congress to pass comprehensive
legislation to assure medical records privacy so that information, including sensitive information
about mental illness, is protected. In addition, as researchers continue to unlock the genetic code,
which enhances the potential to expand treatment options, the Administration urged the Congress
to pass legislation that prevents employers and health care plans from discriminating against
Americans based on their genetic information.



                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
budget includes a $50 million increase to support a Primary Education Intervention Program, for
early identification and intervention with children ages 5-9 years old who are experiencing
significant behavior or reading problems. Research has conclusively shown that early
intervention in these areas is strongly associated with elimination or reduction of behavioral and
mental health problems in adolescence and adulthood.

Establish a $1,000 tax credit for workers with disabilities~ Under this proposal, workers with
significant disabilities would receive an annual $1,000 tax credit to help cover the formal and
informal costs that are associated with and are even prerequisites for employment, such as special
transportation and technology needs.

Protect the health benefits of workers' and their families'. This proposal provides more than
$2.5 million for the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration's capabilities to interpret,
investigate and provide customer service to protect American workers' and their families' rights
under health laws govemingjob-based health benefits, which include mental health benefits
under the Mental Health Parity Act.

Improve access to assistive technology. This new $35 million initiative would accelerate the
development and adoption of information and communications technologies, which can improve
the quality of life for people with disabilities and enhance their ability to participate in the
workplace.

Enact Project Employ. Project Employ is a program initiated in 1996 by the President's
Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities to expand and enhance employment
opportunities for persons with cognitive disabilities. The program promotes the hiring of people
with disabilities in jobs that pay higher than minimum wage, include benefits, and promotional
opportunities. In the President's FY 2000 budget the President's Committee on Employment of
People with Disabilities has budgeted $200,000 to develop a similar program for persons with
psychiatric disability.

Expand funds for clinical and preventive programs. This proposal encourages Congress to
grant a 17 percent increase for Indian Health Service (lliS), which will support oriented clinical
and preventive services for Native American/Alaskan Native communities, enabling the mental
health needs of 31 ,000 individuals are met.




                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Rclt-Dump Conversion


