              RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

              CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

              CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JUN-1999 16:59:24.00

              SUBJECT:     wire story

              TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
              READ:UNKNOWN

              TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              TO: Jose Cerda III    ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@ EOP [ OPD I    )
              READ:UNKNOWN

              TEXT:
              Clinton Orders Study of Racial Profiling

                                   By Kevin Galvin
                                   Associated Press Writer
                                   Wednesday, June 9, 1999; 1:43 p.m. EDT

                                   WASHINGTON    Calling racial profiling by police a
              - -morally
                                 indefensible, deeply corrosive practice, " President
              Clinton today ordered
                                 federal law enforcement officials to collect data on the
              race and gender of
                                 the people they stop to question or arrest.

                                The president announced the executive order at a
              roundtable on civil rights
                                law enforcement, and said he hoped it would encourage
              state and local
                                officials to examine their own law enforcement agencies
              for evidence of
                                racial profiling.

                                   --While public confidence in the police has been growing
              steadily overall,
                                   people of color continue to have less confidence and
              less trust, and
                                   believe they are targeted for action, "   Clinton said.
              --We must stop the
                                morally indefensible, deeply corrosive practice of
              racial profiling. We all
                                have an obligation to move beyond anecdotes to find out
              exactly who is
                                being stopped and why. ' ,

                                   Clinton recounted how he once asked a group of black
              journalists how
                                   many of them had ever been stopped by police --in their
              minds for no
                                reason other than the color of their skin."       All of them
              raised their hands, he
                                said, reflecting a widespread problem.


                     --Members of Congress can tell this story. Students.
Professors. Even
                  off-duty police officers can tell this story, " Clinton
said. --No person of
                  color is immune from such humiliating experiences. ' ,

                  Clinton also said he supports legislation before
Congress that would
                  provide funds for states to collect similar data, a move
law enforcement
                  officials generally have resisted.

                     Questionable shootings this year by police that took the
lives of young
                  blacks in New York, Pittsburgh and Riverside, Calif.,
have revived debate
                  about how officers handle confrontations with
minorities. In New Jersey,
                  state troopers came under fire for conducting traffic
stops based on a
                  driver's race -- so-called racial profiling.

                     Clinton spoke out against such profiling in a recent
radio address.

                     - -While each specific allegation will have to be dealt
with on its own
                     merits, it is clear that we need a renewed determination
as a nation to
                     restore those bonds of trust that have been absolutely
critical to our
                     success at lowering the crime rate, '   , he said.

                     Clinton's executive order calls on the Treasury, Justice
and Transportation
                  departments to develop a proposal within 120 days to
collect data on the
                  race, gender and ethnicity of people they stop.

                     The study would affect, for example, Customs agents and
Immigration and
                    Naturalization officials at U.S. ports of entry, as well
as the police who
                    patrol U.S. parklands.

                                  . Copyright 1999 The Associated Press


