RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN;Jonathan H. Schnur/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-JUN-1999 17:55:22.00

SUBJECT:   weekly item on charters and desegregation (Also, it would be great to get

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
DRAFT (I'd like to show this to Counsel's office if you are OK with that,
Elena, so that they can edit for accuracy and comment on the analysis.)

The Justice Department's Civil Rights Division is involved in negotiations
over proposed expansions of predominantly Africa-American charter schools
in East Baton Rouge, Lousiana.   East Baton Rouge is a 56,000 student
school district under a longstanding desegregation case, and two thirds of
the district's students are African-American.   Last week, the East Baton
Rouge School District asked the Justice Department to sign on to a joint
motion requesting the Court to approve expansions at each school --
currently enrolling just under 100 students each -- by one additional
grade next year. The Justice Department has previously expressed concerns
about the impact of the proposed expansions on efforts to desegregate
other schools in the district and on the district's ability to comply with
the desegregation decree,but has made clear that they are open to
supporting the expansions if they receive information from the school
district that addresses their concerns. The information requested by the
Justice Department --which has not yet been supplied -- includes
information on the projected racial composition of the schools' student
population, the impact of the schools on the racial composition of other
schools from which students are drawn, assurances that the location and
size of the schools will not be changed without Court approval, and a
determination by the school board that the expansions will not impede the
ability of the district to comply with the consent decree.   While the
Justice Department is open to supporting the expansions, their specific
concerns appear to be that that the charter school expansions might 1)
draw minority students from predominantly white schools (or perhaps white
students from predominantly minority schools), thereby causing a few
schools that are now marginally desegregated to become one-race schools,
or 2) take away funding from the school district that would impede its
ability to make improvements in one-race schools that are required under
the consent decree (e.g., as wiring schools, fixing the school building).
Amidst rumors in East Baton Rouge that the Justice Department is going to
oppose the expansions, Clint Bolick and ~he Institute of Justice may be
preparing to file a lawsuit on behalf of the two charter schools.
Meanwhile, a private foundation may also step in to support the new grades
at these schools as private schools, given concerns that their expansion
as public schools may not be approved.    Bill Lee is recused from the case
because of his prior involvement with the NAACP legal defense fund, which
is also a part to the consent decree. But after Clint Bolick wrote a Wall
Street Journal editorial suggesting that Bill Lee not be confirmed because
of this and other charter school cases, Senator Landrieux requested and
received briefings on this case from the Justice Department.   This week,
Education Department Assistant Secretary Norma Cantu was asked by a House
Oversight committee to testify on charter schools and desegregation on
June 22 at a hearing that will also deal with high-stakes testing issues.
[ELENA-- IN ADDITION TO SUBMITTING A VERSION OF THIS AS A WEEKLY REPORT
ITEM, I ALSO WOULD LIKE TO DISCUSS THIS WITH YOU AND GET GUIDANCE ON WHAT
c.



     WE SHOULD DO. COULD WE DISCUSS THIS TONIGHT OR SOMETIME TOMORROW?]


