RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JUN-1999 16:49:43.00

SUBJECT:    ap

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN;Jose Cerda III/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Clinton Criticizes House Gun Bill

                     By David Espo
                     Associated Press Writer
                     Wednesday, June 9, 1999; 1:38 p.m. EDT

                     WASHINGTON (AP)      Bitterly evoking the Colorado school
massacre,
                     President Clinton accused House Republicans today of
pushing a
                     watered- down gun-control bill "plainly ghostwritten' ,
by the National
                     Rifle Association.

                     At the same time, internal Republican polling shows
strong support
                  nationwide for a series of gun-control measures,
including an increase in
                  the allowable age for handgun purchases from 18 to 21.

                  " I t is wrong to let the NRA call the shots on this
issue, " the president said
                  at an afternoon roundtable discussion with civil rights
and law enforcement
                  officials.

                  "If the American people care about it, if we can still
remember Littleton --
                  it hasn't even been two months -- then we ought to speak
up and be
                  heard. This is a classic, horrible example of how
Washington is out of
                  touch with the rest of America. ' ,

                     The Republicans' own polls suggested Clinton was
striking a popular
                  chord as he lobbed the first volley in what promises to
be a highly charged
                  political debate.

                     The GOP survey, conducted late last month in the wake of
the Littleton,
                     Colo., high school shootings, also found lopsided public
backing for
                     mandatory background checks for gun show sales, safety


devices for guns
                     and mandatory sentences for felons who commit their
crimes with a gun.

                     Backing for all these provisions was in the range of 80
percent, according
                  to the survey, which was taken for the National
Republican Congressional
                 Committee, the campaign arm of the House GOP. A copy of
the survey
                 was made available to The Associated Press.

                     The material is in circulation at the same time the
National Rifle
                     Association, a reliable financial backer of Republicans
in recent
                     campaigns, is mounting a lobbying effort to derail the
proposed mandatory
                     background check provision.

                     House GOP leaders reversed course on Tuesday, deciding
to send the
                  issue directly to the floor next week and bypass the
JUdiciary Committee.
                  "If you're a member (of Congress) one vote on these
issues is better than
                  two,"  said Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., the Judiciary
Committee chairman, in
                  a reference to the political potency of the issue.

                     Democratic leader Dick Gephardt said the decision by
Republicans
                     "indicates to me once again that the delay wasn't to go
through the
                     committee. The delay was to allow the NRA to lobby.' ,

                     Hyde dismissed that as "their typical knee-jerk
reaction. ' ,

                     Officials in both parties said the outcome of the debate
is unpredictable,
                     given the narrow party breakdown in the House and the
existence of
                     dissenting blocs within each party. Republicans hold 223
seats, and
                     Democrats hold 211, with one Democratic-leaning
independent. But
                  Democrats say roughly two or three dozen of their
rank-and-file can be
                  expected to oppose strong gun control provisions. A
similarly-sized group
                  of Republicans is likely to support them.

                     One GOP lawmaker, Rep. Marge Roukema of New Jersey, said
during
                     the day she wanted the House to pass "what the Senate
passed, at a
                     minimum.   I   I




                     That includes the proposed mandatory background check
     ,                                                                                Page30f3
·

    for all gun show
                         purchases; safety locks or other devices to be sold with
    guns; a ban on the
                         importation of high capacity ammunition clips; mandatory
    prison sentences
                         for felons committing crimes with guns, and a lifetime
    ban on gun
                         ownership for any juvenile convicted of a felony.

                         The Senate measure does not contain the provision to
    raise the minimum
                         age for possession of handguns from 18 to 21, and the
    issue appears to
                         divide Republicans in the House. Hyde supports such a
    provision, and
                         House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-III.,   spoke favorably of
    it last month.

                         The gun control debate will play out in the House as a
    part of a broader
                       response to the Littleton shootings. Republicans will
    bring legislation to the
                       floor to crack down on juvenile crime, and gun control
    provisions will be
                       debated as proposed amendments. Terms for debate have
    not been set,
                       but it is possible the GOP leadership will calIon the
    House to vote on
                       three or four competing packages of gun proposals,
    without possibility of
                       amending any of them.

                      Hyde also will seek votes on a variety of provisions
    aimed at curtailing the
                      violence that youth are exposed to.
                 '.


