      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Jose Cerda III   ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:I0-JUN-1999 14:10:50.00

      SUBJECT:

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I )
     READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I
      READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I    )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
                          Court Strikes Down 'Street Gang' Law

                          By Richard Carelli
                          Associated Press Writer
                          Thursday, June 10, 1999; 11:59 a.m. EDT

                          WASHINGTON 0* The Supreme Court today struck down a
     Chicago
                          law aimed at preventing gang members and their friends
     from hanging out
                          in public "with no apparent purpose." The 6-3 decision
     ended a
                      constitutional dispute that captured the attention of
     states and communities
                      across the nation.

                          The court said the 1992 anti-loitering ordinance, which
     resulted in 45,000
                       arrests in the three years it was enforced, violated the
     rights of the people
                       police arrested under it because it did not give them
     adequate notice what
                       was forbidden.

                       The ruling limits communities' options in battling
     problems caused by street
                       gangs.

                          In other decisions today, the court:

                       DO Limited the use of out-of-court statements as evidence
     in criminal trials.
                       In a divided ruling that revived a Virginia death row
     inmate's challenge of
                       his conviction, the justices made it harder for
     prosecutors to use as
                       evidence the earlier confession of an alleged accomplice
     who admitted
                       some wrongdoing but pinned the primary blame on the
     defendant.

                           Resolved a major patent-law dispute in the


government's favor today,
                  narrowing a specialized court's authority to
second-guess federal officials'
                  decisions on which inventions deserve patent protection.
The 6-3 ruling
                  said such decisions by the Patent and Trademark Office
must be given
                  more deference by a federal appeals court that
specializes in technical
                  cases.

                    DO Made it harder for prosecutors to prove federal cases
alleging bank,
                  wire or mail fraud. The court ruled unanimously that
prosecutors in such
                  cases must prove that an allegedly fraudulent act
affected the outcome of
                  the transaction.

                    The Chicago ordinance required police to order any group
of people
                    standing around "with no apparent purpose" to move along
if an officer
                    believed at least one of them belonged to a street gang.
Those who
                    disregarded the order would be arrested.

                   The Illinois Supreme Court had struck down the law,
calling its language
                   too vague and ruling that it gave police officers too
much discretion in
                   deciding whether there had been a violation.

                    Today's decision said the state court was right.

                   "Since the city cannot conceivably have meant to
criminalize each instance
                   a citizen stands in public with a gang member, the
vagueness that dooms
                   this ordinance is not the product of uncertainty about
the normal meaning
                   of 'loitering' but rather about what loitering is
covered by the ordinance
                   and what is not," Justice John Paul Stevens wrote for
the court.

                    Stevens, the highest court's only Chicago native, said
the law required
                    police to tell people to move on without inquiring about
their purpose in
                    standing around.

                  "It matters not whether the reason that a gang member
and his father, for
                  example, might loiter near Wrigley Field is to rob an
unsuspecting fan or
                  just to get a glimpse of Sammy Sosa leaving the
ballpark," he said. "In
                  either, if their purpose is not apparent to a nearby
police officer, she (the


                     officer) may 0) indeed, she "shall" 0) order them to
disperse."

                  In finding fault with Chicago's anti-loitering law,
Stevens was joined by
                  Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy, David
H. Souter,
                  Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen G. Breyer.

                     O'Connor, Kennedy and Breyer wrote separate opinions
explaining their
                     views.

                     Justice Antonin Scalia, who dissented along with Chief
Justice William H.
                     Rehnquist and Justice Clarence Thomas, took six minutes
to read aloud
                     from the bench part of his strongly worded opinion.

                     "The citizens of Chicago have decided that depriving
themselves of the
                     freedom to 'hang out' with a gang member is necessary to
eliminate
                  pervasive gang crime and intimidation. ) and that the
elimination of the one
                  is worth the deprivation of the other," he said. "This
court has no business
                  second-guessing either the degree of necessity or the
fairness of the
                  trade."

                  He called the invalidated ordinance "a perfectly
reasonable measure."

                  When the case was argued before the justices in
December, city lawyer
                  Lawrence Rosenthal called gang crime "different from
every other form of
                  criminal activity." He told the court, "Street gangs
rely on their ability to
                  terrorize the community," and that police officers most
often arrive on the
                  scene only to see gang members "pretending to innocently
loiter. "

                  But a majority of the justices had voiced concerns
during the argument
                  session over what O'Connor called the "arbitrariness of
the police."

                  The Clinton administration, 31 states, the National
League of Cities, U.S.
                  Mayors Conference and National Governors Association
sided with
                  Chicago and urged the court to reinstate the ordinance.

                     The ordinance's opponents included the NAACP and other
civil rights
                     groups, the National Law Center on Homelessness and
Poverty and the


                    National Black Police Association.

                    In striking down the ordinance as too vague, today's
decision
                    acknowledged "the serious and difficult problems" street
gangs cause for
                    Chicago.

                  "However, in this instance the city has enacted an
ordinance that affords
                  too much discretion to the police and too little notice
to citizens who wish
                  to use the public streets," Stevens wrote.

                  A more liberal Supreme Court in 1972 struck down a
Jacksonville, Fla.,
                  ordinance that prohibited "persons wandering around from
place to place
                  without any lawful purpose or object."

                    Such general anti-loitering ordinances, once common,
were viewed by
                    many as thinly veiled attempts to keep blacks out of
certain towns and
                    neighborhoods. Many civil rights lawyers had predicted
the Chicago
                    dispute would gauge the current court's continued
adherence to the
                    27-year-old precedent.

                    Stevens' opinion made only scant mention to the 1972
rUling.

                    While the justices had been warned in December about
"the enormous
                  evils associated with gang loitering," no one seemed
certain about just how
                  many street gang members reside in Chicago. City police
estimated that
                  gang membership might total 10,000 but the court was
told that federal
                  prosecutors believe the total might be closer to
100,000.

                    The case is Chicago vs. Morales, 97-1121.

                                   Copyright 1999 The Associated Press

                                             Back to the top


