RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-JUN-1999 00:28:36.00

SUBJECT:   Draft Rule/Amendments

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Courtney O. Gregoire ( CN=Courtney O. Gregoire/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays   ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
BR/EK:

The rule/list of amendments is finally out.  It seems reasonably fair to
me, but includes more "culture" amendments than we anticipated.  There are
a total of 55 amendments -- 11 to HR 2122, Hyde's problematic gun bill,
and 44 to HR 1501, the bipartisan juvie block grant bill. Below are some
of the highlights.  I'll leave a copy of the complete list by your desks
tonight.  We'll need to write/clear a SAP first thing in the morning, so
let's discuss.  I expect to be up on the Hill by lOam.

GUN AMENDMENTS (Thursday/Friday votes)

Gun Shows. Dingell's NRA alternative will be the first amendment up to
the gun bill, immediately followed by the McCarthy/Roukema amendment with
our gun shows language.

18-21. Hyde will offer an amendment to raise the handgun purchase age
from 18 to 21. It will not include long guns, and will not ban
possession.

Assaults/Clips. Hyde will have an amendment to ban juveniles under the
age of 18 from possessing grandfathered assault weapons and high-capacity
ammo clips. He'll also have an amendment to ban the importation of
grandfathered clips.

Safety Locks. Davis (R-VA) will have a safety locks amendment that we
think is a bit problematic.

Concealed Weapons.  Several Rs and Trafficant will have an amendment to
allow current and retired police officers to carry concealed weapons
across state lines. This is very big for FOP and NAPO, but opposed by
some of the Chiefs.

Pawnshops.  Sessions and Frost will have a bipartisan amendment to make
sure guns in hoc for more than year aren't returned w/out a background
check.



DC Gun Laws.   Two Rs will offer amendments to overturn the DC ban on
handguns.

Juvenile Brady. Rogan (R-CA) will offer a juvenile Brady provision that,
while not as strong as our own proposal, is an improvement over the
Senate's version.


JUVIE AMENDMENTS (Wednesday/Thursday votes)

Tough Juvie/HR 3. McCollum will offer an amendment to include many of his
tougher juvenile provisions (many of which we supported), including:
making it easier to try juveniles as adults in the federal system; new
mandatory penalties for youth gun and drug crimes; access to juvenile
records; $50 million to take Project Exile nationwide; background checks
for explosives; and numerous other criminal provisions.

Juvie Lite. Waters and Scott will have amendments to strike most of the
tougher provisions in McCollum's amendment.

Sex Offenders.  Five Rs will offer amendment to increase penalties for sex
offenses and crimes against children, including "Aimee's Law," which
passed the Senate and is supported by Mark Klaas.

Religion/Prayer in schools. Several Rs will offer amendments on this
controversial issue, including ones to allow religious memorials (as in
the Senate bill), clarify that voluntary school prayer is not prohibited,
allow display of the 10 commandments in schools, and ensure that students
expressing their first amendment rights to freedom of religious expression
are not government entities in violation of the Establishment Clause.

Culture. Hyde will offer a mega-culture amendment that prohibits the
distribution of any game, book, movie, CD, etc., to a minor that contains
"explicit sexual or violent material that fails to qualify for First
Amendment protection."   (EK, I understand that, as written, DOJ/OLC is not
overly concerned about this provision. Have you discussed w/Randy,
Robert.  Robert has already expressed to Julian that we might not be of
much help on this.) This amendment also expresses the Sense of the
Congress that adults should be able to review copies of lyrics that are
packaged w/sound recordings; authorizes NIH to study the,effects of video
violence on child development; grants the entertainment industry a 3-year
anti-trust exemption to develop a code of conduct; and authorizes $5
million for each of the next 5 year for the AG to fund a prevention demo
in 9 cities.

Additional culture amendments to be offered include: Sense of the Congress
condemning·the entertainment industry for its gratuitous violence; a study
on the gun industry's marketing practices; a Surgeon General's study on
media violence; and the creation of a mandatory violence labeling system
for all media.

Zero Tolerance.  Related amendments here include: applying the Gun-Free
Schools Act to students otherwise protected by IDEA (this is what Harkin
fought in the Senate); mandating expulsion for certain serious drug
offenses; suspending drivers' licenses until the age of 21 for kids who
carry a gun; and limiting teachers' liability for "reasonably"
disciplining a student.

Prevention, etc.    various amendments will be offered by Rs and Ds to allow


block grant funds to be used for additional purposes, but mostly
prevention. Also, Goodling will offer an amendment to consolidate
discretionary juvenile justice programs into a flexible block grant.

Democratic Substitute. The final amendment in order to the juvie bill
will be Conyers' Democratic substitute, which includes: HR 1501, the
bipartisan block grant; HR 1150, the bipartisan reauthorization of the
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (with the "core
protections" intact); and a COPS reauthorization.
  .,                                                                         Page I of 6


