 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-l MAIL)

 CREATOR: James Castello { CASTELLO J      (WHO)

 CREATION DATE/TIME:2l-JUL-l995 l4:3l:37.85

 SUBJECT: Is the Attached Revised Revision Any Better?

 TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E   (WHO)
 READ:22-JUL-l995 09:56:35.95

 TEXT:
 I've tried to simplify.
 ==================== ATTACHMENT   l ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:2l-JUL-l995 l4:30:00.00

 ATT BODYPART TYPE:p

 ATT CREATOR: James Castello

 TEXT:
 COMMENT
 AUTHOR : JEC
 OPERATOR   JEC
 COMMENT :


 PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN
 MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT
            DRAFT - 7/20/95
 FROM:    ABNER MIKVA, PAT GRIFFIN, CAROL RASCO,
          GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS
 THROUGH:                         LEON PANETTA
 CC:      ALICE RIVLIN, ALEXIS HERMAN, MELANNE VERVEER
          Earlier this week, the House Judiciary Committee reported
 out (by a party
 o
 -line vote, with three Democrats absent) a bill
 introduced by Congressman Canady (R
 o
 -Fla.) known as the "Partial
 Birth Abortion Ban Act." The Office of Legal Counsel at DOJ
 believes the bill is "constitutionally flawed." Given your own
 opposition to most post
 o
 -viability abortions and the controversy
 surrounding the topic, we thought you should decide how to
 respond to this bill.
 Background
         As you know, Roe v. Wade and its progeny forbid significant
 restrictions upon abortion prior to viability but permit the
 government to ban post
 o
 -viability abortions except those that
 protect maternal life or health.  As governor, you signed a law
 making abortion illegal after the 25th week of pregnancy, with an
 exception for life and health (as well as one for rape or incest,
 in the case of minors).
         The Canady bill criminalizes the conduct of any doctor who
 performs (but not of the mother who obtains) what is medically


 termed a "dilation and extraction" abortion.  D & X abortions are
 usually performed only after 20 weeks of pregnancy. At least
 some doctors regard it as the safest method of late
 o
 -term abortion
 under certain circumstances. The method involves bringing the
 lower part of the fetus out of the uterus before completing the
 abortion.   We are not aware that the medical community regards
 this method of abortion as morally distinct (or medically
 different in a meaningful way) from other late
 o
 -term methods.
 However, abortion foes have given the procedure a new,
 emotionally charged name of "partial birth abortions" in order to
 suggest otherwise.  Pro
 o
 -choice activists warn that the bill
 interferes with a doctor's choice of medical procedure, and they
 accuse right
 o
 -to
 o
 -life partisans of targeting this procedure in
 order to show disturbing pictures that will arouse general
 opposition to abortion.
         Only three or four doctors in the United States perform this

 specialized procedure, and the total number of D & X abortions
 annually is probably under 500. By contrast, about 1.5 million
 abortions are performed each year in the U.S., of which about
 13,000 are performed after 20 weeks.  We do not know what
 proportion of D & X abortions occur before rather than after
 viability (a point that usually arises at some time following the
 24th week), but D & X abortions seem to comprise a higher
 percentage of post
 o
 -viability procedures. A more traditional
 method of performing late
 o
 -term abortions is known as the D & E
 procedure, in which the fetus is dismembered within the uterus
 and then removed.
         Although the D & X procedure is sometimes used in
 pregnancies with health
 o
 -threatening complications such as for a
 mother who has severe diabetes, it is also used for purely
 elective abortions as well as for abortions when a severely
 deformed fetus is discovered late in the pregnancy.  During a
 subcommittee hearing on the Canady bill, the most emotional
 testimony was given by a mother whose severely deformed fetus was
 detected late in pregnancy.  She decided to have a D & X abortion
 because the trauma of watching a young child die a certain and
 painful death after birth was more excruciating.
 Discussion
         Mother's Health: The most significant constitutional
 objection to the Canady bill is that it permits D & X procedures
 only if the life of the mother is threatened. Extending the
 exception to include the health of the mother would be consistent
 with the bill that you signed in Arkansas and would probably be


 required by the Supreme Court, which· recently affirmed that "Roe
 forbids a State from interfering with a woman's choice to undergo
 an abortion procedure if continuing her pregnancy would
 constitute a threat to her health." The Court indicated that
 such health threats would have to be "substantial," which might
 include threats to mental health but only of a particularly
 serious nature. To the extent that barring D & X abortions would
 force women who needed abortions for health reasons to forgo what
 may be the safest abortion method, OLC believes the ban is
 constitutionally invalid.
         Pre
 o
 -Viability Abortions: A second constitutional problem is
 that the Canady bill bars D & X procedures even in the
 pre
 o
 -viability period.  The Court has held that states may not
 place an "undue burden" on a pre
 o
 -viability abortion decision,
 including any regulation that "has the purpose or effect of
 placing a substantial obstacle in the [woman's] path." OLC
 expresses its "concern" that barring access to a particular
 method of safe abortion would constitute an "undue burden." It
 is difficult to predict whether a court would find this to be an
 "undue burden," both because the contours of this recently
 announced legal standard are not fully known and because the
 risks of using other abortion methods instead of the D & X
 procedure are unclear.

 However, excluding pre
 D
 -viability abortions from the scope of the
 Canady bill would be consistent with the abortion views you
 expressed as governor.  In 1990, for example, you stated:   "While
 I have ... supported restrictions on public funding and a
 parental notification requirement for minors, I think the
 government should impose no further restrictions.  Until the
 fetus can live outside the mother's womb, I believe the decision
 on abortion should be the woman's not the government's."
         Post
 D
 -Viability Fetal Deformity: Severe fetal deformities
 are sometimes detected only after viability.  Thus, D & X
 abortions in such cases would not be covered by a pre
 D
 -viability
 exception in the Canady bill. They might, however, be covered by
 a health exception. We are told that many doctors have relied on
 maternal health exceptions in other statutes to justify
 post
 D
 -viability fetal deformity abortions.  It is unclear to what
 extent this view remains tenable, given the Supreme Court's
 suggestion in a 1992 ruling that it might construe more narrowly
 the range of health threats that give rise to the constitutional
 right to an abortion. More to the point, a health exception in
 the Canady bill would be narrowly construed by doctors, to avoid
 a risk of two years' imprisonment. This may explain why Rep.
 Schroeder's proposed exception to the Canady bill defined


 "health" to include "threats posed by severe fetal abnormality."
 Defining health in this way should be consistent with your prior
 positions. The health exception in the Arkansas law that you
 signed did not expressly encompass fetal deformity, but that law
 was enacted prior to the Court's 1992 decision potentially
 narrowing "health." Moreover, you have explained why you believe
 viability is important by noting the fetus' subsequent ability to
 survive, which is usually not true for a severely deformed fetus.
 Recommendation
          (1)    We believe you should take a position on the Canady
 bill. Many members of the Judiciary Committee (including
 pro
 o
-choice members) have asked for a statement, and the bill in
some form probably will pass the House and may well succeed in
the Senate.
         (2)    We also believe you should oppose the bill as drafted
but should at this point emphasize the strongest and narrowest
constitutional objection: the bill's failure to permit D & X
abortions for the health of the mother (including cases where
health is threatened by fetal abnormality.)  Probably, the
statement should also include a reference to the bill's
problematic application to pre
o
 -viability abortions. One way to
 combine both concepts would be to define "health of the mother"
 so that it also permits pre
o
-viability D & X abortions, provided
that the doctor believes this method is safer for the mother.   By
framing the overall issue as one of maternal health and safety,
you should be able to keep the debate at the level of principle.

On th~ other hand, by adopting this focus you will be relying
heavily on a factual predicate -- the medical superiority of the
D & X method    for which we do not have much evidence.
        (3)     It is possible that, in defending D & X abortions in
the pre
o
-viability period (when most such abortions are by other
methods), you may be placed in the position of defending a
particular procedure that is publicly controversial.  If,
however, you decided not to defend pre
o
-viability D &   X abortions
at the outset,   you could encounter greater difficulties later on.
The bill might   well be amended to protect the woman's health.
You would then   face the question whether to object to the
pre
o
-viability bar and, if you did not object, whether to sign a
bill that might well be unconstitutional.  It would be more
difficult to raise the pre
o
-viability objection at this later
point if you have not even mentioned it in an initial statement.
        Given all of these considerations, we recommend issuing a
statement along the lines indicated in the second paragraph
immediately above (option #3, below).
1.     Take no position on the bill


 2.     Oppose bill solely on grounds of mother's health
 3.     Oppose bill for reason in option #2 and because bill
 should permit pre
 o
 -viability D & X
         abortions when this is the safest method.
 4.     Let's discuss


 ==================   END ATTACHMENT


