RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-l MAIL)

CREATOR: Dinah Bear ( BEAR_D )   (CEQ)

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-SEP-1995 12:50:03.99

SUBJECT: 318 timber sales/status

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:26-SEP-1995 08:32:41.31

TEXT:

I'm sorry I didn't get back to you right away. A lot was
happening in real time re timber, as well as preparations for
Katie's confirmation hearing, which is this coming Wednesday!
At any rate, here's a brief up-date on the 318 sales (salvage was
relatively quiet during the past week) :
1) The attorney for industry plaintiffs threatened to file a
motion for contempt against Jim Lyons, Undersecretary for
Agriculture, and Tom Tuchmann, in the Northwest Regional Office,
for failure to execute what he alleged was an injunction from
Judge Hogan.   You will recall that Justice interprets Hogan's
decision to NOT be an injunction and to be an unappeable,
interlocutory decision. He also threatened to file Rule 11
sanctions against the Deputy Assist. A.G. and trial attorney for
allegedly misrepresenting that certain Bureau of Land Management
sales had been falsely portrayed as having been released.
2)  In regard to the contempt motion, Justice continues to
maintain that Judge Hogan's order is not an injunction.   Industry
plaintiffs did file the motion for contempt on Friday.   Our brief
is due a week from this coming Monday.   Plaintiffs are asking for
$50,000 a day damages for the first week; trebled each week after
that; compensatory damages and incarceration for the two federal
officials.
3) In regards to the threatened Rule 11 sanctions, there did
appear to be a bit of internal confusion about the release of
certain sales; that was immediately cleared up and the sa lese have
been released.   Plaintiffs' attorney has acknowledged that fact in
a letter sent on Friday and has proposed that he not file a Rule
11 sanction upon receipt of a factual statement by the government.

4) Briefs on transfer of the murrelet "known to be nesting" to
Judge Rothstein were filed at the end of the week. Briefs on the
merits will be filed this week.
5) A decision was made, based upon Justice's legal analysis, to
not withhold 318 sales for any reason other than "known to be
nesting" endangered and threatened birds (and reasons such as
physical impossibility). What this means is that we will be
making clear in a brief filed this coming Thursday that we will be
releasing 164 mbf of timber in sales that, among other things, are
likely to jeopardize several salmon runs.   We will get lots of
negative press on this from the enviro side and probably civil
disobedience on the ground. We tried very hard to find legal
grounds to withhold these sales on, but it appears clear that
Congress' intent was to release them.   (This information is not
being made public until the brief is filed on Thursday) .
6) A decision was also made, based upon recommendations from the
Department of Agriculture and the Administratin's goal of
preserving the integrity of the President's Forest Plan, not to


     look for alternative timber in sales that are already planned for
     in the President's Forest Plan - unless and until that idea is
     blessed by key Members of Congress. The agencies are presently in
     the process of calculating how much alterantive timber will be
     needed to replace sales that are being withheld for birds or for
     any other reason.
     7) EOP people involved in the above two decisions were T.J.
     Glauthier and Katie McGinty; T.J. also intended to brief Martha
     Foley on Friday. afternoon.
             I'll be out Monday morning. Hope this is helpful.   It's
     definitely a tough issue!


