RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas C. Jensen ( JENSEN_T     (CEQ)

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-0CT-1995 10:39:03.64

SUBJECT: Draft statement on non-318 filing today

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:13-0CT-1995 10:57:11.88

TEXT:

PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
This is the second draft of a joint USDA
o
-DOl press statement on
the court filing planned for today.  I've received and done what
I can to incorporate specific comments from Anne Kennedy and
George Frampton and a range of general strategic comments from
Justice.
Please review as soon as you can and send your comments back to
me .. My fax is 456
o
-6546.   Or call me at 395
o
-7415.

Federal forest managers today asked a federal court to stay its
ruling that could significantly expand harvest of old growth
timber in Oregon and Washington.
Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt explained that "The
federal district court in Eugene, Oregon interpreted a provision
of the 1995 Rescission Act very broadly, more broadly than we
believe was intended or that the law requires.  The court's
ruling could mean that every old growth sale that's been held up
or sidelined for any reason.over the last six years must be
released on its original terms. This really amounts to going
back to the archives and resurrecting dozens of environmentally
harmful timber sales proposed, but dropped, since fiscal year
1989.  We are going to ask the court to stay its ruling or issue
an injunction from which we could appeal."
According to Secretary of Agriculture Dan Glickman, "The Clinton
Administration is moving aggressively to implement the logging
provisions in the Rescission Act.  Despite claims otherwise, the
Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Mangement are on track to
meet or exceed both salvage and green timber sale targets.   In
compliance with the Rescission Act, BLM and the Forest Service
recently released 130 million board feet of primarly old growth
green timber sales, commonly known as the '318 sales' that do not
jeopardize marbeled murrelets. Under the President's Northwest
Forest Plan, the agencies have offered 610 million board feet of
timber for sale in 1995 -- exceeding the plan's target. We
expect to exceed targets again in 1996."
Babbitt added, "The President's Northwest Forest Plan is working.
The last thing that the Pacific Northwest needs is something that
would upset the fragile balance between forest use and protection
achieved under the President's plan.   We are deeply concerned
that the court's ruling, if allowed to stand, will trigger
environmental problems that would lead us backwards to the legal


    gridlock that former Administrations imposed on Northwest
    forests.  Nobody wins in that situation."
    According to Glickman, "The President has directed his

    Administration to implement the logging provisions of the 1995
    Rescission Act in an environmentally sound way.    We're going to
    move timber, but we are going to do it right.   We will continue
    to work under existing environmental law to try to find ways to
    reconfigure or modify the sales in question so that they can be
    released."


