RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas C. Jensen { JENSEN_T     (CEQ)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-NOV-1995 09:50:12.53

SUBJECT: Draft Garamendi Option memo

TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ: 3-NOV-1995 09:54:42.19

TO: Dinah Bear                                  BEAR D      (CEQ)
READ: 3-NOV-1995 10:55:12.27

TO: T J Glauthier                               GLAUTHIER T         (OMB)
READ: 3-NOV-1995 11:55:41.26

TO: Christine L. Nolin                          NOLIN CL      ( OMB)
READ: 3-NOV-1995 09:52:48.57

CC: Kathleen A. McGinty                         MCGINTY K      (CEQ)
READ: 3-NOV-1995 14:45:05.44

TEXT:

PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
E X E CUT I V E       0 F F ICE    0 F     THE       PRE SID E N T
COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

                                           \d
MEMORANDUM FOR HAROLD ICKES
FROM:           KATIE MCGINTY

RE:                     DRAFT ?GARAMENDI? PROPOSAL MEMO
Introduction
The proposal raised by John Garamendi at Wednesday?s timber
meeting amounts to the idea that timber marked or planned for
sale pursuant to the Forest Plan could be substituted for timber
released under section 2001{k) of the rescissions act.  Such
substitution could occur under several different circumstances,
but would generally be used to avoid logging of environmentally
sensitive timber. This memo discusses the policy and legal
implications of the proposal.
Background
Section 2001{k) of the rescissions act has required, or may in
the future be found to require release of old
o
-growth, green
timber in the following categories:
        1.      318 sales released under their original terms and
conditions, rather than in modified, environmentally responsible
forms;
        2.      Non
o
-318 (or ?Hogan?) sales, which exceed the geographic
or temporal scope of the ?pure? 318 sales; and
        3.      318 and non
o
-318 sales where listed bird species are
?known to be nesting.?


The agencies are working now to determine with precision which
timber sales, or portions of sales, released or subject to
release under 2001(k) present significant environmental concerns.

The Administration has discussed two means to prevent logging of
areas with environmental concerns, both of which assume that the
beneficiaries of sales released under 2001(k) would have to be
compensated in some way, either with money or timber, or both.
 [The Administration is also working to seek voluntary,
uncompensated harvest modifications or forbearance by
beneficiaries of 2001(k).J
Substitute Volume
The amount of timber available to be used in substitution for
environmentally problematic 2001(k) sales is unclear, as are the
terms under which it would be provided. The discussion so far
has tuned on the question whether timber sales planned for
release under the Northwest Forest Plan are ?available? as
substitute volume.
The Bureau of Land Management has stated that it has some as yet
unspecified volume of old
o
-growth timber not accounted for under
the Forest Plan available for substitution.   In contrast, the
Forest Service has maintained that it has no timber available for
substitution, because all volume under its jurisdiction is
accounted for in Forest Plan sales.
Whether to use Forest Plan timber as substitute volume for
problematic 2001(k) sales is both a policy and legal issue.
Policy Concerns
The first concern is one of distributional economics.   Timber
sales under 2001(k) and the Forest Plan apparently benefit
somewhat different groups of timber and related economic
interests. Allowing beneficiaries of 2001(k) to draw volume from
Forest Plan sales may displace, at least in the short term, other
companies and interests who expected to benefit from the plan.
The second concern is largely practical.   Preparation of Forest
Plan sales for this fiscal year has consumed virtually all
available Forest Service and BLM personnel resources.   The sales
have been designed (documented, marked, and so on) to meet plan
standards and guidelines. They are not configured as trade items
for undesirable 2001(k) sales. Volumes, species, location, and
other important features of Forest Plan sales do not necessarily
match what would be needed for substitution.
The Forest Service and BLM both have expressed concern that the
administrative effort required to go back and reconfigure Forest
plan sales would impede their ability to meet Forest Plan sale
volume targets for this and subsequent fiscal years.   In other
words, the land management agencies believe that, because of
limited administrative resources,   there might be a net reduction
in volume offered under the Forest plan this fiscal year if they
are asked to create "substitute" sales.


Legal Concerns (Preliminary; pending Department of Justice
review) :
Statutory Authorities
Section 2001(k) (3) of the Rescissions Act states that:
          "If for any reason a sale cannot be released and completed
under the terms of this subsection within 45 days after the date
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary concerned shall


provide the purchaser an equal.volume of timber, of like kind
and      value, which shall be subject to the terms of the original
contract and shall not countagainst current allowable sale quantities."
Section 2001(d) states that:
"Notwithstanding any other law (including a law under the
authority of which any judicial order may be outstanding on
or after the date of enactment of this
Act), the Secretary concerned shall expeditiously prepare,
offer, and award timber sale contracts on Federal lands
described in the "Record of Decision for Amendments to
Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management Planning
Documents Within the Range of the Northern Spotted Owl",
signed by the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of
Agriculture on April 13, 1994. The Secretary concerned may
conduct timber sales un this subsection notwithstanding any
decision, restraining order, or injunction issued by a
United States court before the date of the enactment of this
section. II

Legislative History
There appears to be no legislative history relevant to the issue
of whether the timber sales referred to in Section 2001(d) can be
used as replacement timber under Section 2001(k). Analysis and
opinions offered by proponents of the bill after it became law
(for example, the July 27th letter from six members of Congress
and the August 7th memo from Mark Rey to Senate Energy and
Natural Resources Committee) also fail to address this issue.

Authorities for Offering Sales Under President's Forest Plan
 (Option 9):
The Record of Decision (ROD) cited in Section 2001(d) supports
the adoption of standards and guidelines for management of
habitat for late successional and old growth forest related
species for a number of national forests and Bureau of Land
Management units in Oregon and Washington. The ROD amends
various Forest Service and BLM planning documents with which
timber sales offered in these areas must conform. However, while
anticipating timber sales in particular areas of those federal
lands, the ROD neither authorizes nor compels any particular
timber sales".
Arguments in Support of Using Sales Under the Forest plan as
Replacement Timber:
Whatever policy concerns may exist in regards to using Forest
Plan or "Option 9" sales as replacement timber, no legal barriers
to implementing this scheme appear to exist. Nothing in the
language of the Rescission Act or the legislative history limit
the land management agencies' legal ability to use these sales as
replacement timber, providing that they meet the statutory
requirements of: 1) eq).lal volume, 2)"like kind and value"; 3)
adhere to the terms of the original contract, and 4) do not count
against current ASQ.
The requirements in Section 2001(d) to expedite the preparation,
offering and award of the timber sale contracts within the
President's Forest Plan are not inherently inconsistent with
their use as replacement timber under Section 2001(k) (3).
Indeed, one could argue that there is a logical symmetry in using
sales which Congress wants expedited to meet another requirement
to provide replacement timber. At any rate, in the absence of
any articulated prohibition, the land management agencies are
legally free to substitute any timber sales on their lands for


Section 2001(k) sales so long as they meet the four criteria
outlined above.
Legal Arguments Against using Sales under the Forest Plan as
Replacement Timber:

Whatever policy concerns may suggest the desirability of
substituting one set of timber sales for another, the fact
remains that two sets of timber sales are required to be released
under Section 2001 of the Rescission Act. Congress intended the
holder of the Section 2001(k) sales to be entitled to their sale
contracts under original terms and contracts; it also intended
for the Forest Plan contracts to be expeditiously released.
Broadly speaking, there are two possible factual results from an
interpretation which allows Forest Plan contracts to be
substituted for Section 2001(k) sales:  first, if the holder of
a Section 2001(k) sale would happen to be the purchaser of a
Forest Plan sale, that purchaser would benefit from only one
timber sale instead of two sales.  Second, in the more probable
instance that the purchasers are different (or in the case of
future Forest Plan sales, unknown), there would be one less
purchaser of timber in the areas covered by this statute.
Congress intended for their to be two separate sets of timber
sales, not one.   A contrary reading makes Section 2001(d)
meaningless in those instances in which individual timber sales
are used as substitutes for timber under Section 2001(k), and
thus runs against the rule of construing statutes to give them
independent meaning.


