RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas C. Jensen ( JENSEN_T)    (CEQ)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-NOV-1995 15:00:38.13

SUBJECT: Redraft of Garamendi Proposal Memo

TO: Martha Foley                              FOLEY M    (WHO)
READ: 8-NOV-1995 18:09:33.38

TO: Jennifer M. O'Connor                      OCONNOR J )    (WHO)
READ: 8-NOV-1995 15:10:33.12

TO: T J Glauthier                             GLAUTHIER T       (OMB)
READ: 8-NOV-1995 16:32:10.72

TO: Kris Balderston                           BALDERSTON K       (WHO)
READ: 8-NOV-1995 16:05:27.97

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E    (WHO)
READ: 8-NOV-1995 15:33:05.57

TO: Dinah Bear                                BEAR D    (CEQ)
READ: 8-NOV-1995 16:22:15.49

TO: Alice E. Shuffield                        SHUFFIELD A       (OMB)
READ: 8-NOV-1995 16:28:26.27

TEXT:
Attached is a redraft of the memo on John Garamendi's proposal.
Hard copies are to be delivered to your offices prior to the 4:00
meeting today.
==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 8-NOV-1995 14:59:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Thomas C. Jensen

TEXT:

PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
E X E CUT I V E       0 F F ICE    0 F   THE       PRE SID E N T
COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

                                         \d
MEMORANDUM FOR HAROLD ICKES
FROM:           KATIE McGINTY

RE:                     ?GARAMENDI? PROPOSAL

Introduction and Summary
The proposal raised by John Garamendi at Wednesday?s timber
meeting amounts to the idea that timber planned for sale pursuant
to the Forest Plan could be substituted for timber released under
section 2001(k) of the rescissions act.  Such substitution could
occur under several different circumstances, but would generally
be used to avoid logging of environmentally sensitive timber.
The proposal would add a "tool" to the set of measures available
 ,                                                                     Page 2 of5


to the Administration (i.e., buy
D
-backs, negotiated modifications,
legislation) to reduce the adverse impacts of logging under the
rescissions act. This memo discusses the policy and legal
implications of the proposal.
As a matter of policy, the proposal could reduce harvest of
environmentally problematic timber, thus benefiting the
environment and, possibly, the Forest Plan. On the other hand,
the proposal could cause an unpopular redistribution of economic
benefit among timber interests, at least in the near term.  It
might also cause a net reduction in timber sales under the Forest
Plan.
Politically, the proposal would be supported by environmental
interests. The timber industry and related labor unions would
oppose.   It would initially be seen as constructive and
reasonable by the general public, although that perspective could
be seriously eroded by timber industry criticism that the
President was not meeting his commitments under the Forest Plan.
A preliminary analysis does not reveal any insurmountable legal
obstacles to the proposal, although our authority is not
clear
D
-cut.

Background
Section 2001(k} of the rescissions act has required release of
old
D
-growth, green timber in the following categories:


        1.       318 sales released under their original terms and
conditions, rather than in
modified, environmentally responsible forms; and
        2.     , Non
D
-318 (or ?Hogan?) sales, which exceed the geographic
or temporal scope                                                           of t
?pure? 318 sales.
In addition, the law allows the Administration to withhold such
sales where threatened or endangered bird species are "known to
be nesting," but requires that we provide replacement timber of
"like kind and value." The scope of this exclusion is in
litigation.
The agencies are working now to determine with precision which
timber sales, or portions of sales, released or subject to
release under 2001(k} present significant environmental concerns.
The Administration has discussed two means to prevent logging of
areas with environmental concerns.   First, the Forest Service and
BLM are asking beneficiaries of sales released under 2001(k}
voluntarily to forego or reduce problematic cutting.     Second; we
would offer beneficiaries of 2001(k} sales compensation in the
form of money or timber, or both, in exchange for not cutting
certain timber.    It is this latter approach that Mr.' Garamendi's
proposal applies to.
The Garamendi proposal could apply in three cases:

 1.      Green timber sales developed under the Forest Plan could be
·a source of equivalent timber under 2001(k} (3) [replacement
ARMS Email System
        .                                                             Page 3 of 5


volume for withheld "known to be nesting" sales];
2.      Green timber sales developed under the Forest Plan could be
used in exchange fo~ section 318 timber already released or some
of the additional timber sales released by Judge Hogan's
injunction, and;
3.      The volume of green timber sales developed and actually
released under the Forest Plan could be reduced by an amount
related to the volume released by section 200l(k».

Availability of Substitute Timber
The amount of timber available to be used in substitution for
environmentally problematic 200l(k) sales is unclear, as are the
terms under which it would be provided. The discussion so far
has turned largely on the question whether timber sales planned

for release under the Northwest Forest Plan are ?available? as
substitute volume.
The Bureau of Land Management has stated that it has some as yet
unspecified volume of old
D
-growth timber not accounted for under
the Forest Plan available for substitution.   In contrast, the
Forest Service has maintained that it has no timber available for
substitution, because all volume under its jurisdiction is
allocated toward Forest Plan sales.
Whether to use Forest Plan timber as substitute volume for
problematic 200l(k) sales is both a policy and legal issue.
Policy Concerns
The approach outlined by Mr. Garamendi offers the valuable
benefit of avoiding problematic sales, thus protecting the
environment and, possibly, the integrity of the Forest plan.    It
could also help fulfill the replacement mandate of 200l(k) (3).
It does, however, raise some concerns.
The first concern is one of distributional economics. Timber
sales under 200l(k) and the Forest Plan apparently benefit
somewhat different groups of timber and related economic
interests. Allowing beneficiaries of 200l(k) to draw volume from
Forest Plan sales may displace, at least in the short term, other
companies and interests who expected to benefit from the plan.
The second concern is largely practical.   preparation of Forest
Plan sales for this fiscal year has consumed virtually all
available Forest Service and BLM personnel resources. The sales
have been designed (documented, marked, and so on) to meet plan
standards and guidelines. They are not configured as trade items
for undesirable 200l(k) sales. Volumes, species, location, and
other important features of Forest Plan sales do not necessarily
match what would be needed for substitution.
The Forest Service and BLM both have expressed concern that the
administrative effort required to go back and reconfigure Forest
Plan sales would impede their ability to meet Forest Plan sale
volume targets for this and subsequent fiscal years.   In other
words, the land management agencies believe that, because of
limited administrative resources,   there might be a net reduction
in volume offered under the Forest Plan this fiscal year if they
are asked to create "substitute" sales.
Finally, the Forest Service has argued that using Forest Plan
sales to substitute for problematic 200l(k) sales will lead some
to charge that the Administration is engaged in "double
counting." That is, the agency believes that Congress intended
the legislation to lead to additive timber harvest above Forest



Plan levels, rather than a zero
o
-sum process.
Political Concerns
Any step by the Administration that eases the environmental
impacts of logging authorized by the rescissions bill would be
welcomed by the 'environmental community. Such measures also
should help preserve the Forest Plan itself from litigation,
reducing (though not eliminating) the likelihood that we find our
management plan for the region's forests enjoined and gridlock
thereby reestablished.
Conversely, the timber industry and related labor unions will
condemn use of Forest Plan timber.  Their view is that the
logging provisions of the rescission act were meant to create a
net increase in logging activity, regardless of environmental
impacts.  They will forcefully argue that use of Forest plan
timber means that the President is failing to live up to his
commitments under the Forest Plan.
The general public would be receptive to a problem
o
-solving
effort and message. However, it would be difficult to rebut
timber industry assertions regarding the Administration's failure
to fulfill Forest Plan promises. The perception, merited or not,
that we've failed to fulfill the plan may be as harmful as
actually losing the plan in court.
Legal Concerns
No version of the Garamendi proposal is free from legal
difficulties. But there is a perfectly credible, if not
necessarily winning, argument that the Administration has
authority either to use Forest Plan timber as replacement timber
under 2001(k} (3) (Version I) or to offer Forest plan timber in
exchange for other timber recently or soon to be released under
2001(k} (I) (Version 2). By contrast, the legal support for
simply reducing the volume of Option 9 timber by the amount of
timber released under 2001(k} (Version 3) is much more scanty.
The legality of the various Garamendi schemes rests largely on
two,sections of the Rescissions Act -- 2001(d} and 2001(k} -- and
the relationship between them. Section 2001(d} -- the Option 9
section -- provides that the Administration "shall expeditiously
prepare, offer, and award timber sale contracts" covered by the
Forest Plan, often referred to as Option 9.   Section 2001(k} (I)
-- the Section 318 section -- provides that the Administration
shall release all contracts previously offered or awarded in the
area subject to Section 318 of a prior appropriations bill.    (The
scope of this provision -- specifically, whether it orders the
release only of the particular sales referenced in Section 318 or

of all sales ever awarded in the area covered by that section
is currently before the Ninth Circuit.)  Section 2001(k} (3)
provides that if any of the sales under 2001(k} (I) cannot be
awarded -- most notably, because of the existence of an
endangered bird species known as the marbled murre let -- the
Administration shall provide the purchaser "an equal volume of
timber, of like kind and value."
The question whether the Administration (pursuant to Version I)
can use Option 9 timber as replacement timber under 2001(k} (3),
should the Administration win the marbled murrelet case and thus
come under an obligation to provide replacement timber, is


 genuinely difficult.  No language in 2001(d) or 2001(k)
 specifically prevents the Administration from using Option 9
 timber as the source of replacement timber. Nor is there any
 legislative history specifically addressing this issue.  The
 Administration, it might be argued, thus has the discretion to
 implement the statute in this way.  (Of course, the Option 9
 timber substituted -- like any other timber substituted -- will
 have to be of equal volume and like kind and value, as required
 by 2001(k) (3).) Timber industry lawyers will argue, however,
 that such a scheme subverts the broadest goals of the statute.
 Congress, it will be argued, intended for two sets of sales

o
 -Option 9 sales and 318 sales -- to go forward as expeditiously
 and completely as possible: to use one as substitution for the
 other is a form of double
o
-counting that undermines this purpose.
Reasonable people can disagree as to the strength of these
arguments. DOJ lawyers handling this issue believe that industry
lawyers will have the better of this argument.   (See DOJ memo
attached.)   Lawyers from the White House Counsel's Office and CEQ
think this analysis slightly overstates the strength of the
industry's position. What is clear, as DOJ lawyers agree, is
that there is at least a credible claim that the Administration
has authority to adopt Version 1 of the Garamendi proposal.
The legal analysis relating to Version 2 of the Garamendi
proposal proceeds in a similar manner, but with one prefatory
caution.   It is important to note that the Administration has no
authority to force purchasers of timber released or soon to be
released under 2001(k) to take Option 9 timber in its place. The
purchasers of these sales have a property right to them; the most
the Administration can do is to offer the purchasers the
opportunity to take Option 9 timber instead. The ability of the
Administration to make this offer turns on the same arguments
discussed above. Again, nothing in the statute or legislative
history specifically prevents this approach; but the approach
does undermine the apparent intention of Congress to get out two
separate sets of timber sales.


The proposal to reduce Option 9 output by the amount of timber
released under 2001(k) (Version 3 of the Garamendi plan) presents.
a different set of questions; the legality of such an approach is
far more dubious.   First, this proposal might be thought to
violate the specific directive of 2001(d) to award Option 9
contracts expeditiously.   Second, the proposal appears to violate
2001(1), which prevents any revisions to land management plans,
including the President's Forest Plan (Option 9), "because of
implementation or impacts" of sales required by 2001. And even
if this action were legal, adopting it might invite further
challenge to the President's Forest Plan, because the action
seems to concede that significant new circumstances, vitally
affecting. the Plan, have arisen.
================== END ATTACHMENT    1 ==================


