 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

 CREATOR: Thomas C. Jensen ( JENSEN_T    (CEQ)

 CREATION DATE/TIME:29-NOV-1995 11:26:56.08

 SUBJECT: The memo you requested

 TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
 READ:29-NOV-1995 11:34:15.75

 TEXT:


 \d
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
MEMORANDUM FOR KATIE McGINTY AND T.J. GLAUTHIER
CC:                        SHELLEY FIDLER
                           RUTH SAUNDERS
                           JANET MINKLER
FR:                        TOM JENSEN
SUBJECT:                   OPTIONS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS TO ENCOURAGE
ADOPTION OF AMENDMENTS TO LOGGING PROVISONS OF
RESCISSIONS ACT
As you requested, the following is a brief description of the
principal options the Administration may wish to consider using
to encourage the timber industry and some in Congress to accept
the Administration's proposed amendments to the rescissions act.
OMB and CEQ staff are collecting additional information about
these measures in order to identify leverage points with greater
precision.
We should discuss how the Administration might signal its intent
to pursue these options so as to build momentum for our
legislative efforts without unnecessarily antagonizing any
significant parties.
Suspension or reconsideration of Administration efforts to help
timber land owners comply with the Endangered Species Act
The Administration has made significant efforts to use
discretionary authorities available under the Endangered Species
Act (ESA) to help non
 o
-federal Northwest timber land owners comply
with ESA
 o
-mandated protections for the northern spotted owl and
marbled murrelet.
We could suspend these efforts or signal our intent to reconsider
existing arrangememnts.
The Administration's inititatives, referred to generally as the
"4(d) rule" and "habitat conservation plans," have benefitted or,
if pending negotiations are completed, will benefit several of
the largest private timber companies in the Northwest.   State
forests in Oregon and Washington (and the private companies who
benefit from the forest products harvested from those lands) also
have used or plan to take advantage of our ESA
o
-related
initiatives.  Suspension of Administration efforts in these areas
would be a source of great concern to those timber companies,
some members of congress, and to the governors and legislatures


of Oregon and Washington.   It is noteworthy that the timber

companies who have benefited from the Administration initiatives
in this area do not appear to be direct beneficiaries of the old
growth provisions of the rescissions act, and thus may be more
open to new legislation.
Suspension or delay in implementation of timber salvage program
The Administration has broad discretion over the pace and scope
of the timber salvage programs operated by the Forest Service and
Bureau of Land Management. The Administration has, as a matter
of policy, set a priority on moving aggressively to release
salvage sales on forests around the country. The
Administration's policy could be changed in ways that would slow
the salvage program. Depending on measures taken, this could
affect the interests of timber companies and members of congress
from around the country, most of whom do not benefit from the old
growth provisions of the rescissions act.  These parties, ·too,
could be open to new legislation.
Suspension of timber sale program under Northwest Forest Plan

The Administration has discretion over the pace and scope of
timber sales under the Northwest Forest plan. As a matter of
policy, the Administration has placed a high priority on reaching
an average annual sale quantity of 1.1 billion board feet,
although specific sale or harvest levels are not established
under the plan. The rescissions act requries the Administration
to move expeditiously to release sales under the plan, but does
not set specific targets.
 The Administration could change current policy in ways that
would slow or suspend release of sales under the Forest Plan.
Many (probably all) of the timber interests who benefit from the
old growth provisions of the rescissions act expect also to
benefit from timber sales under the Forest Plan.
Other measures
The federal government regulates the timber industry in a variety
of ways, such as highway transportation, worker safety,
helicopter logging (noise, aircraft safety), and import and
export. We have not explored these regulatory regimes to
determine the scope of administrative discretion available or the
nexus to rescissions act logging.


