 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

 CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg ( KONIGSBERG_C         (OMB)

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-DEC-1995 11:23:10.43

 SUBJECT: ITEM VETO

 TO: Alice M. Rivlin                           RIVLIN A         (OMB)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 16:10:16.33

 TO: Charles E. Kieffer                        KIEFFER C         (OMB)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995.14:36:59.43

 TO: Lisa Kountoupes                           KOUNTOUPES L )           (OMB)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 13:23:24.40

 TO: Robert G. Damus                      . ( DAMUS R ) (OMB)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:41:59.34

 TO: Joseph Minarik                            MINARIK J         (OMB)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:42:28.34

 TO: Barry B. Anderson                         ANDERSON B            (OMB)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:26:54.62

 TO: James J. Jukes                            JUKES J ) (OMB)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:49:43.13

 TO: Jill M. Blickstein                        BLICKSTEIN J            (OMB)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 12:57:19.25

 TO: James C. Murr                             MURR J       ) (OMB)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:48:04.81

 TO: Jacob J. Lew                              LEW J    )    (OMB)
 READ: NOT READ

 TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) (WHO)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:23:45.77

 TO: Patrick J. Griffin                        GRIFFIN P         (WHO)
 READ: NOT READ

 TO: Barbara C. Chow                           CHOW B ) (WHO)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 14:18:56.33

 TO: Paul J. Weinstein, Jr                     WEINSTEIN P            (OPD)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 14:24:32.14

 TO: Laura D. Tyson                            TYSON L ) Autoforward to: Thomas O'Donnel
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:45:06.77

 TO: John C. Angell                            ANGELL J         (WHO)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:57:14.34

 TO: Martha Foley                              FOLEY M ) (WHO)
 READ: 8-DEC-1995 16:37:34.87

 TO: Robert E. Litan                           LITAN R)        (OMB)


READ: 8-DEC-1995 14:18:05.04

TO: T J Glauthier                           GLAUTHIER T        (OMB)
READ: 8-DEC-1995 13:27:10.97

TO: Gordon Adams                            ADAMS G     (OMB)
READ: 8-DEC-1995 13:41:41.41

TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                        APFEL K     (OMB)
READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:27:22.31

TO: Nancy-Ann E. Min                        MIN N     (OMB)
READ: 8-DEC-1995 12:01:49.53

TO: Stacey L. Rubin                         RUBIN S     (WHO)
READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:36:39.19

TO: Dena B. Weinstein                       WEINSTEIN D        (WHO)
READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:44:01.28

TO: Chantale Wong                           WONG C     (OMB)
READ: 9-DEC-1995 13:38:44.76

TO: Charles S. Konigsberg                   KONIGSBERG C        (OMB)
READ: 8-DEC-1995 11:23:42.92

TEXT:
Attached are the item veto recommendations I'm delivering this
morning to staff for Domenici, Stevens, Exon, and Glenn -- on the
understanding that this is for their use as they respond to the
House and is NOT intended, at this time, for distribution as an
official Administration position.   (The idea is that these
recommendations have more chance of acceptance by the House if
presented to them as part of a Senate counter-offer -- rather than
as Administration recommendations in a conference letter.)
==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 8-DEC-1995 11:15:00.00

ATT BODYPART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 10- POINT- COURIER
TOP ODD
DRAFT -- \d
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT COURIER
Summary of comments on House item veto offer #1:
1.  Update the "special rule for fiscal year 1995," so that item veto
authority also applies to FY 1996 appropriations.
2. Drop the Senate's mandatory "lockbox" language;      the language is
technically unclear and could impair the ability to pay for necessary
supplementals.
3. In order to make the application to tax benefits more workable and
effective, use the more generic definition of targeted tax benefit recommended
in the attachment.
4. Constitutional concern:      In applying the authority to direct spending and
taxes, use "suspend" instead of "veto".
5. Constitutional concern: giving JCT authority to determine targeted tax
benefits raises Chadha concerns.



6. In applying the authority to direct spending, use the terminology "new
direct spending."
7. The language defining "item" is unnecessary and confusing.
8. Drop the Senate provision prohibiting the inclusion of non
o
-emergency items
in an emergency bill.
9. Add conforming amendments to the BEA to clarify that OMB discretionary
spending reports and PAY
o
-GO reports, required under current law to be issued 5
days after enactment of legislation, need to be adjusted following a
rescission of discretionary appropriations or suspension of new direct
spending or targeted tax benefits.
10. Enhance the ability of the Administration to review carefully all tax and
spending provisions by increasing the window for transmittal of special
messages from 10 days to 20 days.
11. Delete the 3
o
-judge court judicial review mechanism but retain the
requirement for expedited consideration (considerable litigation experience
has shown that 3
o
-judge courts are often inefficient and cumbersome and can
actually cause considerable delay).
12. Include a severability provision in the legislation.
o
TOP EVEN
DRAFT -- \d
Comments on the House Offer:

? HOUSE OFFER: Include new direct spending.
The attached legislative language reflects two technical
corrections. First, the authority should be applied to "new
direct spending" rather than "any item of direct spending."
The legislative draft defines "item of direct spending" as
"any section that increases direct spending." This
definition is problematic because direct spending is often
the result of the interactive effects of many provisions and
cannot be isolated in a section or sections of a bill.   It
is therefore more workable to permit the President simply to
identify and suspend "new direct spending."
Second, the Department of Justice continues to urge, for
constitutionality reasons, that the bill use the term
"suspend" in lieu of "veto". The Presentment Clause of the
Constitution provides that the President only can exercise
his "veto" power before a provision becomes law, i.e. when a
bill is presented for approval or disapproval -- whereas
this legislation calls for a "veto" after a bill is signed.
By contrast, the Supreme Court has long upheld the
constitutionality of provisions that delegate to the
President the power to suspend the operation of particular
laws. This alternative approach is reflected in the
attached language.

? HOUSE OFFER: Use JCT approved compromise language on new
targeted tax benefits.

The Justice Department continues to urge that the bill use


the term "suspend" in lieu of "veto" (for the reasons
described above); and the Treasury Department urges that a
provision be added to authorize the IRS to take enforcement
action against individuals or entities seeking to use a
targeted tax benefit when that benefit has been suspended.
Language reflecting these suggestions is set forth in the
attachment.
The House offer would define targeted tax benefit as "any
revenue
o
-losing provision that provides a federal income tax
deduction, credit, exclusion or preference to 100 or fewer
beneficiaries" with several exceptions; the definition also
includes transition rules that provide special treatment to
5 or fewer taxpayers, with exceptions.
The Treasury Department notes that it will be difficult, if

not impossible for anyone, including JCT, to determine the
number of persons affected by any particular tax provision.
This test requires too much precision and is too easy to
avoid or manipulate in the drafting process and by
taxpayers.   It creates an incentive for tax benefit
provisions to be drafted too broadly.   In addition, it
provides no time limit within which this "100 or fewer"
standard must be met.
A definition of targeted tax benefit closer to the Senate
definition is preferable -- i.e., causing a revenue loss and
"having the practical effect of providing more favorable tax
treatment to a particular taxpayer or limited group of
taxpayers when compared with other similarly situated
taxpayers." Language to accomplish this is set forth in the
attachment.
In addition, the Justice Department notes that the language
of the House offer presents a constitutional problem. The
JCT determinations of what is a "targeted tax benefit" would
apparently not be incorporated into bills. As a result, the
scope of the President's "veto" authority would be
established by JCT alone.   In short, law would be made by a
committee of Congress in a report, not by Congress as a
whole in legislation.   This would appear to violate the
"[e]xplicit and unambiguous provisions" of the Constitution
that prescribe "a single, finely wrought and exhaustively
considered, procedure," by which laws are to be made:
bicameral passage by both Houses of Congress followed by
presentment to the President for his approval.   INS v.
Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 945 (1983). This problem is remedied
in the attached'legislative draft which would give the
President authority to determine when an item is a targeted
tax benefit.    However, even if this determination is to be
made by the Congress it would, at a minimum, have to be made
through the normal legislative process -- not by a committee
of Congress acting unilaterally.
?   HOUSE OFFER: Use Senate definition of "item" (including
specific exceptions for limitations and reductions in BA)

o
-unnumbered paragraph

o
-numbered section



o
-allocation or suballocation within an unnumbered
          paragraph or numbered section
This proposal appears to be unnecessary and problematic.   It
was necessary -- as part of the Senate's separate enrollment
legislation -- to very carefully identify "items" which were
to be separately enrolled by congressional clerks. However,
no such necessity exists under the House enhanced rescission
legislation, since the President would be sending detailed

messages to Congress identifying amounts of budget authority
being rescinded, as well as new direct spending and targeted
tax benefits being suspended.
Moreover, the Senate definition is problematic.  "Allocation
or suballocation within a an unnumbered paragraph or
numbered section" is unclear.
? HOUSE OFFER: Accept Senate lockbox language.
The Senate approach would require the President to reduce
the statutory discretionary spending caps to reflect
rescissions of discretionary budget authority and to reduce
PAY
o
-GO balances under the Budget Enforcement Act to reflect
suspended direct spending or targeted tax benefits. This
proposal is unclear and unworkable.
Technical concern: The bill language is unclear on two
counts. First, it requires a reduction in discretionary
caps "by the amount by which the Act would have increased
the deficit .... " Since the rescission authority is applied
to items of discretionary spending, what does it mean to
refer to the amount by which "the Act" increases the
deficit?   Second, since the amount of the cap reduction is
tied to a deficit calculation, does this mean that only the
outlay caps are to be affected?
Policy concern: with regard to discretionary spending -- a
mandatory cap reduction would make it very difficult for
Congress to provide necessary supplemental appropriations
later in the year (as it did this year in response to the
Oklahoma City bombing and the Northridge earthquake). Or,
it could have the perverse effect of encouraging the
increased use of emergency designations.
In addition, since the caps on total discretionary spending
are carefully negotiated as part of multiyear budget plans,
serious thought should be given as to whether it makes sense
for an automatic budget mechanism to be changing the caps on
an ad hoc basis.
Therefore, the language of the House
o
-passed bill, which
authorizes the President to propose reductions in the
discretionary caps without making the reductions automatic,
is preferable.
With regard to the mandatory reductions in PAYGO balances,
the House conferees are apparently proposing that any
amounts saved by the President by suspending new direct
spending or targeted tax benefits should not be added back
to the PAYGO balances, and would thereby not be available to

offset other legislation.   However, this is contrary to the


pay
o
-as
o
-yeu
o
-ge cencept .of the Budget Enfercement Act, which
has .operated effectively, new, fer 5 years.    If mandatery
funds .or revenues are saved by rea sen .of suspending tax
benefits .or new direct spending, it weuld be censistent with
the BEA fer these savings te be credited te the PAY
o
-GO
scerecard te be available as .offsets fer ether legislatien.

? HOUSE OFFER: Accept Senate emergency spending peint .of .order,
with a majerity waiver requirement.
This refers te the Senate previsien prehibiting the
inclusien .of nen
o
-emergency items in an emergency bill
(except fer rescissiens and reductiens te pay fer the
emergency previsiens) and previding a peint .of .order against
legislatien that includes such items.  This weuld impair an
Administratien's ability te develep apprepriatiens packages
which include beth supplemental and emergency previsiens, as
was the case in the FY 1995 supplemental/rescissien bill.

Additienal Cemments:
In additien te the issues raised in the Heuse cenferees' prepesal
te the Senate, the fellewing changes te the Heuse
o
-passed bill are
recemmended (and are reflected in the attached legislative
language) :
1. Enhance the ability .of the Administratien te review carefully
all tax and spending previsiens by increasing the windew fer
transmittal .of special messages frem 10 days te 20 days.
2.  Include a severability previsien in the legislatien.
3. Delete the 3
o
-judge ceurt judicial review mechanism but retain
the requirement fer expedited censideratien (censiderable
litigatien experience has shewn that 3
o
-judge ceurts are .often
inefficient and cumberseme and can actually cause censiderable
delay) .
4.  Update the "special rule fer fiscal year 1995," se that item
vete autherity alse applies te FY 1996 apprepriatiens (i.e. bills
enacted prier te enactment .of line
o
-item vete autherity).  Previde
twenty days fellewing enactment fer such autherity te be
exercised.
5. Make cenferming changes te the Budget Enfercement Act te
clarify that OMB discretienary spending reperts and PAY
o
-GO


reports, required under current law to be issued 5 days after
enactment of legislation, need to be adjusted following a
rescission of discretionary appropriations or suspension of new
direct spending or targeted tax benefits.  This is reflected in
the attached language.

o
            RECOMMENDED AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE OFFER NUMBER 1
    REGARDING S. 4 (Line
o
-item veto) :
(Following is the legislative language proposed by the House
conferees; proposed changes are indicated with line
o
-type and
bold
o
-face. )

PRINTER FONT 10- POINT- COURIER
104TH CONGRESS
1ST SESSION

                                      S. 4




                                    AN ACT

An Act to give the President item veto authority respecting
appropriations, increases in new direct spending, and tax benefits.

   Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
the United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the "Line Item Veto Act of 1995".

SEC. 2. LINE ITEM VETO AUTHORITY.

     (a) IN GENERAL.-
o
-Notwithstanding the provisions of part B of
title X of The Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of
1974, and subject to the provisions of this section, the President
may rescind in whole or in part any dollar amount of any item of
discretionary budget authority provided in an appropriation act, veto
suspend any item of new direct spending, or veto suspend any targeted
tax benefit which is subject to the terms of this Act if the President--
         (1) determines that--
             (A) such rescission or item veto suspension would help
reduce     the Federal budget deficit;
             (B) such rescission or item veto suspension will not impair
  any essential Government functions; and
             (C) such rescission or item veto suspension will not harm
the
           national interest; and
         (2) notifies the Congress of such rescission or item veto
suspension by a special message not later than ten twenty calendar days


(not including Sundays) after the date of enactment of an appropriation
or authorization Act providing such budget authority or a revenue or
reconciliation other Act containing a targeted tax benefit or new
direct spending.

     (b) DEFICIT REDUCTION.--In each special message, the President may
also propose to reduce the appropriate discretionary spending limit set
forth in section 601(a) (2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 by an
amount that does not exceed the total amount of discretionary budget
authority rescinded by that message.
           (1) IN GENERAL.-
o
-Not later than 45 days of continuous session
after the President rescinds an item in an appropriations Act or vetoes

an item in an authorization, revenue, or reconciliation Act, the
President shall--
          (A) with respect to appropriations Acts, reduce the
     discretionary spending limits under section 601 of the
     Congressional Budget Act of 1974 for the budget year and each
     out year by the amount by which the Act would have increased
     the deficit in each respective year; .
          (B) with respect to a veto of direct spending or of a targeted
tax        benefit, reduce the balances for the budget year and each
out year          under section 252(b) of the Balanced Budget and
Emergency Deficit           Control Act of 1985 by the amount by which the
Act would have               increased the deficit in each respective
year.

     (2) EXCEPTIONS.--
         (A) This subsection shall not apply if the rescinded item in an
 appropriation Act or the vetoed item in an authorization, revenue,
or reconciliation Act becomes law, over the objections of the
President, before the President orders the reduction required by
paragraph (1) (A) or (1) (B) .
         (B) If the rescinded item in an appropriation Act or the vetoed
item in an authorization, revenue, or reconciliation Act becomes law
over the objections of the President, after the President has ordered
the reductions required by paragraph (1) (A) or (1) (B), then the
President shall restore the discretionary spending limits under section
601 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 or the balances under
section 252(b) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act
of 1985 to reflect the limits and balances existing before the
reduction ordered by the President in compliance with paragraph (1).

     (c) SEPARATE MESSAGES.--(l) The President shall submit a separate
special message for each appropriation Act, for each authorization Act,
and for each revenue or reconciliation Act under this section.
     (2) In the case of any such special message regarding an
appropriation Act, that message shall specify--
         (A) the amount of budget authority which he proposes to be
rescinded, the direct spending to be suspended, or the targeted tax
benefit to be suspended;
         (B) any account, department, or establishment of the
    Government to which such budget authority is available for
    obligation, or which has jurisdiction over the direct spending or
targeted tax benefit affected, and the specific project or
governmental functions involved;
         (C) the reasons why the budget authority should be rescinded, or
the direct spending or targeted tax benefit should be suspended;


         (D) to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal,
    economic, and budgetary effect of the proposed rescission or
suspension; and
         (E) all facts, circumstances, and considerations relating to or
bearing upon the proposed rescission or suspension and the decision to
effect the proposed rescission or suspension and to the maximum extent
practicable, the estimated effect of the proposed rescission or
suspension upon the objects, purposes, and programs for which the
budget authority, direct spending, or tax benefit is provided.
    (d) SPECIAL RULE FOR FISCAL YEAR 1995 and FISCAL YEAR 1996
APPROPRIATION MEASURES.-- Notwithstanding subsection (a) (2), in the case
of any unobligated discretionary budget authority provided by any
appropriation Act for fiscal year 1995 and for fiscal year 1996, the

President may rescind all or part of that discretionary budget authority
under the terms of this Act if the President notifies the Congress of
such rescission by a special message not later than ten twenty calendar
days (not including Sundays) after the date of enactment of this Act.
     (e) Amendments to the Budget Enforcement Act.--
           (1) Section 251(a) (7) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency
Deficit       Control Act of 1985 is amended by inserting in the second
sentence,        following "within 5 calendar days after the enactment of
any               discretionary appropriations," the following:   "or
following a             special message rescinding any amount of
discretionary spending             pursuant to the Line Item Veto Act of
1995 or after a disapproval           bill relating thereto is enacted,".
           (2) Section 252(d) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit
Control Act of 1985 is amended by inserting in the second sentence,
following "within 5 calendar days after the enactment of any
direct spending or receipts legislation enacted after the date of
enactment of this section," the following:    "or following a
special message suspending any new direct spending or targeted tax
benefit pursuant to the Line Item Veto Act of 1995 or after a
disapproval bill relating thereto is enacted,".


SEC. 3. LINE ITEM VETO EFFECTIVE UNLESS DISAPPROVED.

     (a) (1) Discretionary Budget Authority.--Any amount of discretionary
budget authority rescinded under this Act as set forth in a special
message by the President shall not be made available unless, during the
period described in subsection (b), a disapproval bill making available
all or part of the amount rescinded is enacted into law.

    (2) New Direct Spending and Targeted Tax Benefits.--

           (A) Any provision of law which increases provides new direct
spending or provides a targeted tax benefit vetoed which has been
suspended under this Act, as set forth in a special message by the
President, shall take effect only if a disapproval bill restoring that
provision is enacted into law during the period described in
subsection (b).    [Should "suspend" be further defined?]
           (B) In the case of a suspension of a targeted tax benefit, the
Internal Revenue Service is authorized and directed to take
appropriate enforcement actions against individuals or entities
seeking to use a targeted tax benefit that has been suspended.

    (b) The period referred to in subsection (a) is--
        (1) a congressional review period of twenty calendar days
    of session, beginning on the first calendar day of session after


     the date of submission of the special message, during which
     Congress must complete action on the disapproval bill and present
such        bill to the President for approval or disapproval;
          (2) after the period provided in paragraph (1), an
     additional ten days (not including Sundays) during which the
     President may exercise his authority to sign or veto the
     disapproval bill; and
          (3) if the President vetoes the disapproval bill during the
period       provided in paragraph (2), an additional five calendar days
of session       after the date of the veto is, provided for congressional
review.

    [(c) If a special message is transmitted by the President under

this Act and the last session of the Congress adjourns sine die
before the expiration of the period described in subsection (b), the
rescission or veto suspension, as the case may be, shall not take
effect. The message shall be deemed to have been retransmitted on the
first
calendar day of session in February of the succeeding Congress and the
review period referred to in subsection (b) (with respect to such
message) shall run beginning after such first day.]    (The House offer
displays this paragraph in brackets.]

SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

    As used in this Act:
           (1) The term "item" means--
                 (A) with respect to an appropriation Act--
                 (i) any numbered section, or
              (ii) any unnumbered paragraph;
    but shall not include a provision which does not appropriate funds,
~irect the President to expend funds for any specified project, or
create an express or implied obligation to expend funds and shall not
include a provision that--
                      (I) rescinds or cancels existing budget authority;
                      (II) only limits, conditions, or otherwise restricts
             the President's authority to spend otherwise appropriated
      funds; or
                     (III) imposes conditions on an item of appropriation not
      involving a positive allocation of funds by explicitly
prohibiting the. use of any funds; and
                 (B) with respect to an authorization, revenue, or
reconciliation Act, any section that increases direct spending or
provides a targeted tax benefit.
           (2) The term "direct spending" means--
              (A) budget authority provided by law other than
appropriation              Acts;
                 (B) entitlement authority as defined in section 3(9) of the
  Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974; and
                 (C) the food stamp program.

        (3) (A) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term
"targeted tax benefit" means any revenue
o
-losing tax provision which is
identified by the Joint Committee on Taxation President as--
              (i) a provision which provides a Federal tax
  deduction, credit, exclusion, or preference to 100 or fewer
beneficiaries, a particular taxpayer or limited group of


taxpayers, or
              (ii) a transitional rule or other provision which provides
a          special treatment for 5 or fewer beneficiaries to a
particular               taxpayer or limited group of taxpayers, or any
portion of a                  provision that has substantially the same
effect.
        (B) A provision shall be treated as not described in
subparagraph       (A) (i) if the Joint Committee on Taxation President
determines that--
              (i) all persons engaged in the same type of activity
receive           the same treatment under the provision,
              (ii) all persons owning the same type of property, or
issuing           the same type of investment, receive the same treatment
under               the provision, or
              (iii) any difference in the treatment of persons is based
  solely on--

                   (I) in the case of entities, the size or type of the
       entities involved,
                   (II) in the case of individuals, their filing status,
                   (III) the amount involved, or
                   (IV) a generally
o
-available election made by
taxpayers.             (C) A provision shall be treated as not described in
subparagraph        (A) (ii) if the Joint Committee on Taxation President
determines that         it provides for the retention of prior law with
respect to all binding         contracts in existence on the date of first
public notice that a             change in law is actively being considered
by a committee of either          House of Congress, either House of
Congress, or a conference                 committee.
         (D) For purposes of subparagraph (A)--
              (i) all entities which are related shall be treated as I
  entity;
              (ii) all qualified plans of an employer shall be treated as
  1 plan;
              (iii) all holders of tax
o
-exempt bonds which are part of the
  same issue shall be counted as i beneficiary, and
              (iv) shareholders of a corporation, partners in a
  partnership, and beneficiaries of a trust or estate, shall not be
treated as beneficiaries if the corporation, partnership, trust,
or estate is treated as a beneficiary.
         (D) For purposes of subparagraph (A), a provision is "revenue-
losing" when the Secretary of the Treasury determines that the
provision, when compared to the rest of the bill if the provision were
not included, reduces governmental receipts for anyone of the four
following periods--
              (1) the first fiscal year for which the most recent budget
  has been submitted by the president;                                                        ·
              (2) the fiscal year immediately preceding the first fiscal
  year for which the most recent budget has been submitted by the
President;
              (3) the period comprised of the first fiscal year for which
  the most recent budget has been submitted by the President and the
four immediately succeeding fiscal years; or
                 (4) the period comprised of the five fiscal years
immediately           succeeding the period described in paragraph (3).


         (4) The term "disapproval bill" means a bill or joint resolution
which only disapproves, in whole, rescissions of discretionary budget
authority or only disapproves vetoes suspensions of increases in new
direct spending or of targeted tax benefits in a special message
transmitted by the President under this Act and--
              (A) which does not have a preamble;
              (B) (i) in the case of a special message regarding
         rescissions, the matter after the enacting clause of which
         is as follows: "That Congress disapproves each rescission of
         discretionary budget authority of the President as submitted
         by the President in a special message on         ", the blank
         space being filled in with the appropriate date and the
         public law to which the message relates; and
                 (ii) in the case of a special message regarding item vetoes
of          increases in suspensions of new direct spending, the matter
after             the enacting clause of which is as follows:  "That
Congress                  disapproves each item veto of increases in
suspension of new                 direct spending of the President as
submitted by the President in             a special message on         "
the blank space being filled in               with the appropriate date and
the public law to which the message             relates; and
              (iii) in the case of a special message regarding item vetoes


         suspensions of targeted tax benefits, the matter after the
   enacting clause of which is as follows: "That Congress disapproves
each item veto suspension of targeted tax benefits of the
President as submitted by the President in a special message on
-,-___ ", the blank space being filled in with the appropriate
date and the public law to which the message relates; and
              (C) the title of which is as follows: "A bill
         disapproving the recommendations submitted by the President
         on         ", the blank space being filled in with the date of
         submission of the relevant special message and the public
         law to which the message relates.
          (5) The term "calendar days of session" shall mean only
     those days on which both Houses of Congress are in session.
          (6) The term "appropriation Act" means any general or
     special appropriation Act, or any Act or joint resolution
     making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations.

SEC. 5. CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF LINE ITEM VETOES.

    (a) TRANSMISSION OF MESSAGES TO HOUSE AND SENATE.--
         (1) Each special message transmitted under this Act shall
    be transmitted to the House of Representatives and the Senate on
    the same day, and shall be delivered to the Clerk of the House
    of Representatives if the House is not in session, and to the
    Secretary of the Senate if the Senate is not in session. Each
    special message so transmitted shall be referred to the
    appropriate committees of the House of Representatives and the
    Senate. Each such message shall be printed as a document of each
    House.
         (2) Any special message transmitted under this Act shall be
    printed in the first issue of the Federal Register published
    after such transmittal.

    (b) INTRODUCTION OF DISAPPROVAL BILLS.-
o
-The procedures set forth in


subsection (c) shall apply to any disapproval bill introduced in the
House of Representatives not later than the third calendar day of
session beginning on the day after the date of submission of a special
message by the President under section 2.

     (c) CONSIDERATION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.--(l) The
committee of the House of Representatives to which a
disapproval bill is referred shall report it without amendment, and with
or without recommendation, not later than the seventh calendar day of
session after the date of its introduction. If the committee fails to
report the bill within that period, it is in order to move that the
House discharge the committee from further consideration of the bill. A
mot.ion to discharge may be made only by an individual favoring the bill
(but
only at a time or place designated by the Speaker in the legislative
schedule of the dat (typo?) after the calendar day on which the Member
offering the motion announces to the House his intention to do so and
the form of the motion).   The motion is highly privileged. Debate
thereon shall be limited to not more than one hour, the time to be
divided in the House equally between a proponent and an opponent. The
previous question shall be considered as ordered on the motion to its
adoption without intervening motion. A motion to reconsider the vote by

which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.

     (2) After a disapproval bill is reported or the committee has been
discharged from further consideration, it is in order to move that the
House resolve into the Committee of the Whole House on the State of the
Union for consideration of the bill.    If the bill is reported by a
committee, it shall not be considered in the House until the first
calendar day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) on which
the report of that committee has been available to the Members of the
House. All points of order against the bill and against consideration
of
the bill are waived. The motion is highly privileged. A motion to
reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to
shall not be in order. During consideration of the bill in the Committee
of the
Whole, the first reading of the bill shall be dispensed with.
General debate shall proceed, shall be confined to the bill, and shall
not exceed two hours equally divided and controlled by a proponent and
an opponent of the bill. One motion to rise shall be in order. No
amendment to the bill is in order, except any Member may move except
from [unclear what is intended here?]   the disapproval bill any item or
items if supported by one
o
-fifth of the Members of the Committee of the
Whole (a quorum being present). At the conclusion of the consideration
of the bill for amendment, the Committee shall rise and report the bill
to the House. The previous question shall be considered as ordered on
the bill and amendments thereto to final passage without intervening
motion. A motion to reconsider the vote on passage of the bill shall not
be in order.

    (3) Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the
application of the rules of the House of Representatives to the
procedure relating to a bill described in subsection (b) shall be
decided without debate.

    (4) It shall not be in order to consider more than one bill


described in subsection (b) or more than one motion to discharge
described in paragraph (I) with respect to a particular special
message.

    (5) Consideration of any disapproval bill under this subsection is
governed by the rules of the House of Representatives except to the
extent specifically provided by the provisions of this Act.

      (d) CONSIDERATION IN THE SENATE.--
          (I) Any disapproval bill received in the Senate from the House
shall be considered in the Senate pursuant to the provisions of this
Act.
          (2) Debate in the Senate on any disapproval bill and debatable
motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not
more than ten hours. The time shall be equally divided between, and
controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their
designees.
          (3) Debate in the Senate on any debatable motions or appeal
     in connection with such bill shall be limited to one hour, to be
     equally divided between, and controlled by the mover and the
     manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager of the
     bill is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in
     opposition thereto shall be controlled by the minority leader or
     his designee. Such leaders, or either of them, may, from the
     time under their control on the passage of the bill, allot
     additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any

    debatable motion or appeal.
         (4) A motion to further limit debate is not debatable. A
    motion to recommit (except a motion to recommit with
    instructions to report back within a specified number of days
    not to exceed one, not counting any day on which the Senate is
    not in session) is not in order.

     (e) CONSIDERATION IN CONFERENCE--
           (I) In the case of any disagreement between the two Houses of
Congress with respect to a disapproval bill passed by both Houses,
conferees shall be promptly appointed and a conference promptly
convened.   If the committee of conference makes and files a report
with respect to the bill not later than two calendar days before the
expiration of the 20 calendar days of session period set forth in this
section for congressional consideration, the conference report on the
bill shall be highly privileged for consideration in both Houses until
the expiration of the 20
o
-day period. Notwithstanding any other rule
in either House concerning the printing of conference reports in the
Record or concerning any delay in the consideration of such reports,
such report shall be acted on by both Houses not later than the
expiration of such 20
o
-day period.
         (2) Debate in the House of Representatives on the conference
report on any disapproval bill shall be limited to not more than one
hour equally divided and controlled by a proponent and an opponent.
A motion to further limit debate is not debatable. A motion to
recommit the conference report is not in order, and it is not in order
to move to reconsider the vote by which the conference report is
agreed to or disagreed to.
        (3) The conference report on the disapproval bill shall be


highly       privileged for consideration in the Senate. Debate in the
Senate on       any conference report on a disapproval bill shall be
limited to no          more than 2 hours equally divided and controlled by
the majority            leader and the minority leader or their designees.
         (4) Complete congressional consideration of the disapproval bill
and any conference report thereon shall not exceed the expiration of
the 20 calendar days of session provided for this purpose as set forth
in this section.
     (f) POINTS OF ORDER.--
         (1) It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any
    disapproval bill that relates to any matter other than the
rescission       of budget authority or veto suspension of the provision
of law              transmitted by the President under this Act.
         (2) It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any
    amendment to a disapproval bill.
         (3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) may be waived or suspended in
    the Senate only by a vote of three
o
-fifths of the members duly
    chosen and sworn.

SEC. 6. REPORTS OF THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE.

    Beginning on January 6, 1997, and at one
o
-year intervals
thereafter, the Comptroller General shall submit a report to each
House of Congress which provides the following information:
        (1) A list of each proposed Presidential rescission of
    discretionary budget authority and veto suspension of an increase in
new direct spending or of a targeted tax benefit submitted through
special messages for the fiscal year ending during the preceding
calendar year, together with their dollar value, and an indication of
whether each rescission of discretionary budget

authority or veto          suspension of an increase in new direct
spending or of a targeted tax       benefit was accepted or rejected by
Congress.
         (2) The total number of proposed Presidential rescissions
    of discretionary budget authority and vetoes suspensions of an
increase in new direct spending or of a targeted tax benefit submitted
through special messages for the fiscal year ending during the
preceding calendar year, together with their total dollar value.
         (3) The total number of Presidential rescissions of
    discretionary budget authority or vetoes suspensions of an increase
in      new direct spending or of a targeted tax benefit submitted
through         special messages for the fiscal year ending during the
preceding           calendar year and approved by Congress, together with
their total          dollar value.
         (4) A list of rescissions of discretionary budget authority or
vetoes suspensions of an increase in new direct spending or of a
targeted tax benefit initiated by Congress for the fiscal year ending
during the preceding calendar year, together with their dollar value,
and an indication of whether each such rescission was accepted or
    rejected by Congress.
         (5) The total number of rescissions of discretionary budget
authority or vetoes suspensions of an increase in new direct spending
or of a targeted tax benefit initiated and accepted by Congress for
the fiscal year ending during the preceding calendar year, together
with their total dollar value.


         (6) A summary of the information provided by paragraphs (2),
    (3) and (5) for each of the ten fiscal years ending before the
    fiscal year during this calendar year.
SEC. 7. DUTIES OF CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES ADVISORY REPORT ON TARGETED
TAX BENEFITS.
    (a) IN GENERAL.-
o
-Any report accompanying a bill or joint resolution
or a joint explanatory statement accompanying a conference report in
which there is any Federal income tax benefit shall include a
determination report by the Joint Committee on Taxation of whether it
contains any targeted tax benefit and an identification of each such
benefit.
    (b) STATEMENT BY JOINT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION.-
o
-The Joint Committee
on Taxation shall determine whether any bill, joint resolution, or
conference report described in subsection (a) contains a targeted tax
benefit.
    (c) LEGISLATION SUBJECT TO POINT OF ORDER.-
o
-It shall not be in order
in the Senate or the House of Representatives to consider any bill,
joint resolution, or conference report that is not in compliance with
subsection (a).
     [(d) CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO THE RULES OF THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATlVES.-
o
-Clause 2(1} of rule XI of the Rules of the House of
Representatives is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (5), (6), and
(7) as subparagraphs (6), (7), and (8), respectively, and by inserting
after subparagraph (4) the following new subparagraph:
    "(5) Each report of a committee that includes any Federal income tax
benefit shall comply with section 7(a} of the Line Item Veto Act."]
     [House offer shows this paragraph in brackets.]
SEC. 8. TREATMENT OF EMERGENCY SPENDING.


    (a) EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS.-
o
-Section 251 (b) (2) (D) (i) of the
Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 is amended
by adding at the end the following new sentence: "However, OMB shall
not adjust any discretionary spending limit under this clause for
any statute that designates appropriations as emergency requirements
if that statute contains an appropriation for any other matter,
event, or occurrence, but that statute may contain rescissions of
budget authority.".

    (b) EMERGENCY LEGISLATION.-
o
-Section 252(e} of the Balanced
Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 is amended by
adding at the end the following new sentence: "However, OMB shall
not designate any such amounts of new budget authority, outlays, or
receipts as emergency requirements in the report required under
subsection (d) if that statute contains any other provisions that
are not so designated, but that statute may contain provisions that
reduce direct spending.".


    (c) NEW POINT OF ORDER.-
o
-Title IV of the Congressional Budget
Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new
section:

                    "POINT OF ORDER REGARDING EMERGENCIES

    "SEC. 408. It shall not be in order in the House of
Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill or joint
resolution, or amendment thereto or conference report thereon,
containing an emergency designation for purposes of section
251{b) (2) (D) or 252{e) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit
Control Act of 1985 if it also provides an appropriation or direct
spending for any other item or contains any other matter, unless it
rescinds budget authority or reduces direct spending, or reduces an
amount for a designated emergency."

    (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.-
o
-The table of contents set forth in
section l{b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act
of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section
407 the following new item:

"Sec. 408. Point of order regarding emergencies.".

SEC. 9. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

    (a) EXPEDITED REVIEW.--
         (I) Any Member of Congress may bring an action, in the
    United States District Court for the District of Columbia, for
    declaratory judgment and injunctive relief on the ground that
    any provision of this Act violates the Constitution.
         (2) A copy of any complaint in an action brought. under
    paragraph (I) shall be promptly delivered to the Secretary of
    the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives, and
    each House of Congress shall have the right to intervene in such
    action.
         (3) Any action brought under paragraph (I) shall be heard
    and determined by a three
o
-judge court in accordance with section
    2284 of title 28, United States Code.

    Nothing in this section or in any other law shall infringe upon
the right of the House of Representatives to intervene in an action

brought under paragraph (I) 'without the necessity of adopting a
resolution to authorize such intervention.

    (b) APPEAL TO SUPREME COURT.-
o
-Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, any order of the United States District Court for
the District of Columbia which is issued pursuant to an action
brought under paragraph (I) of subsection (a) shall be reviewable by
appeal directly to the Supreme Court of the United States. Any such
appeal shall be taken by a notice of appeal filed within 10 days
after such order is entered; and the jurisdictional statement shall


be filed within 30 days after such order is entered. No stay of an
order issued pursuant to an action brought under paragraph (1) of
subsection (a) shall be issued by a single Justice of the Supreme
Court.
         (c) EXPEDITED CONSIDERATION.-
o
-It shall be the duty of the
District Court for the District of Columbia and the Supreme Court of
the United States to advance on the docket and to expedite to the
greatest possible extent the disposition of any matter brought under
subsection (a).
         (d) SEVERABILITY.-
o
-If any provision of this Act, an amendment made
by this Act, or the application of such provision or amendment, is held
to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act, the amendments made
by this Act, and the application of the provisions of this Act shall not
be affected thereby.

==================   END ATTACHMENT   1   ==================
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 054 - FOLDER -005


[12/12/1995-01/11/1996]
