    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

    bREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg ( KONIGSBERG_C        (OMB)

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-DEC-1995 19:41:42.24

    SUBJECT: SENDING AGAIN ....

    TO: Charles S. Konigsberg                       KONIGSBERG C )        (OMB)
    READ: 6-DEC-1995 19:50:36.73

    TO: Charles E. Kieffer                          KIEFFER C      (OMB)
    READ: 6-DEC-1995 19:43:55.80

    TO: Lisa Kountoupes                             KOUNTOUPES L          (OMB)
    READ: 6-DEC-1995 21:39:07.37

    TO: Robert G. Damus                             DAMUS R      ( OMB)
    READ: 7-DEC-1995 08:24:50.57

    TO: Joseph Minarik                              MINARIK J      (OMB)
    READ: 7-DEC-1995 08:27:48.00

    TO: Barry B. Anderson                           ANDERSON B       (OMB)
    READ: 6-DEC-1995 21:44:31.23

    TO: James J. Jukes                              JUKES J      (OMB)
    READ: 6-DEC-1995 19:54:47.97

    TO: Jill M. Blickstein                          BLICKSTEIN J )        (OMB)
    READ: 7-DEC-1995 15:46:21.60

    TO: James C. Murr                               MURR J ) (OMB)
    READ: 6-DEC-1995 19:42:32.26

    TO: Jacob J. Lew                                LEW J ) (OMB)
    READ: NOT READ

    TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E      (WHO)
    READ: 7-DEC-1995 08:52:41.39

    TO: Patrick J. Griffin                          GRIFFIN P      (WHO)
    READ: NOT READ

    TO: Barbara C. Chow                             CHOW B )    (WHO)
    READ: 7-DEC-1995 09:10:37.38

    TO: Paul J. Weinstein, Jr                       WEINSTEIN P )       (OPD)
    READ: 7-DEC-1995 10:10:24.54

    TO: Laura D. Tyson                              TYSON L ) Autoforward to: Thomas O'Donnel
    READ:NOT READ

    TO: John C. Angell                              ANGELL J      (WHO)
    READ: 6-DEC-1995 19:59:40.13

    TO: Martha Foley                                FOLEY M      (WHO)
    READ: 6-DEC-1995 21:11:56.18

    TO: Robert E. Litan                             LITAN R      (OMB)


READ: 6-DEC-1995 21:06:03.68

TO: T J G1authier                          GLAUTHIER T     (OMB)
READ: 6-DEC-1995 23:10:06.52

TO: Gordon Adams                           ADAMS G )   (OMB)
READ: 7-DEC-1995 14:41:08.54

TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                       APFEL K)    (OMB)
READ: 6-DEC-1995 19:44:41.95

TO: Nancy-Ann E. Min                       MIN N   (OMB)
READ: 6-DEC-1995 20:08:41.41

TO: Stacey L. Rubin                        RUBIN S )   (WHO)
READ: 6-DEC-1995 20:45:03.19

TO: Dena B. Weinstein                      WEINSTEIN D     (WHO)
READ: 6-DEC-1995 19:53:02.43

TEXT:

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 6-DEC-1995 18:52:00.00

ATT BODYPART TYPE:B

ATT CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg

ATT SUBJECT: ITEM VETO

ATT TO: Charles S. Konigsberg                  KONIGSBERG C

ATT TO: Charles E. Kieffer                     KIEFFER C )

ATT TO: Lisa Kountoupes                        KOUNTOUPES L

ATT TO: Robert G. Damus                        DAMUS R )

ATT TO: Joseph Minarik                         MINARIK J

ATT TO: Barry B. Anderson                     ANDERSON B

ATT TO: James J. Jukes

ATT TO: Jill M. Blickstein                    BLICKSTEIN J

ATT TO: James C. Murr                         MURR J )

ATT TO: Jacob J. Lew                          LEW J

ATT TO: Elena Kagan                            KAGAN E

ATT TO: Patrick J. Griffin                    GRIFFIN P

ATT TO: Barbara C. Chow                       CHOW B )

ATT TO: Paul J. Weinstein, Jr                 WEINSTEIN P

ATT TO: Laura D. Tyson                        TYSON L



ATT TO: John C. Angell                            ANGELL J    )

ATT TO: Martha Foley                              FOLEY M )

ATT TO: Charles S. Konigsberg                     KONIGSBERG C

ATT TO: Robert E. Litan                           LITAN R )

ATT TO: T J Glauthier                             GLAUTHIER T

ATT TO: Gordon Adams                              ADAMS G

ATT TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                          APFEL K

ATT TO: Nancy-Ann E. Min                          MIN N

ATT CC: Stacey L. Rubin                           RUBIN S

ATT CC: Dena B. weinstein                         WEINSTEIN D

TEXT:
Attached are the informal line-item veto comments I hope to take
to the Senate late on Thursday. Senate staff are this week
preparing a counter-offer to the House item veto proposal. Our
best opportunity to affect the legislation is to give our comments
-- this week -- to Senate staff who are preparing the
counter-offer.  Several key staffers have indicated an interest in
our substantive comments. Note that the comments are NOT
labeled as Administration comments.    Please let me know by 3pm
Thursday if you have any additional comments.    (This has been
vetted by Treasury, DOJ, OMB, DPC, AND WH/COUNSEL.)    I know that
everyone is very busy right now, but this is our best opportunity
to affect the process.   (Since this is not a formal conference
letter, we can certainly communicate additional comments later
on . ) Thanks.
================== END ATTACHMENT 1 ==================
==================== ATTACHMENT 2 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 6-DEC-1995 18:52:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg

TEXT:
WPCd.
2
BJZCourier#!ex6X@'7X@HP LaserJet 4HPLAS4,PRS 4xD
@\hZX@#!e2$<DZ'vpOCourierCourier BoldCourier ItalicHP LaserJet 4HPLAS4,PRS 4xD
@\hZX@aBDocumentgDocument Style StyleXX-

a4DocumentgDocument Style StyleD.     D2kk=vMa6DocumentgDocument Style StyleGX

aSDocumentgDocument Style Style}X(#

a2DocumentgDocument Style Style<o
D?DDA,

Da7DocumentgDocument Style StyleyXX'               (#-



2Mti
BibliogrphyBibliography:X
(#

alRight ParRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers:'S@OI,
X(#

a2Right ParRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers          c                   A.   '            (#'

a3DocumentgDocument Style Style
B
b
O7OD!.
02g
0+
          a3Right ParRight-Aligned Paragraph NumbersL!
                  @P
1.    '           (#


a4Right ParRight-Aligned Paragraph NumbersOUj'               @Oa.'      (#

a5Right ParRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers
 o              @h(l) hh#(#h

a6Right ParRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbersh'                 hh#@$ (a) hh# ( (#

29
iBO+
a7Right ParRight-Aligned Paragraph NumberspfJ'               hh#(@*i)    (h-(#

a8Right ParRight-Aligned Paragraph NumbersyW"3!'                        hh#(-@p/a) -pp2(#p

alDocumentgDocument Style StyleXqq
DlOA)DI.

ODoc InitInitialize Document Style

0*0*0 I. A. 1. a. (1) (a) i) a) I. 1. A. a. (1) (a) i) a) Documentg2' kkyTech Il'litIni
tia1ize Technical Style.
k 1. A. 1. a. (1) (a) i) a) 1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 Techn
icala5TechnicalTechnical Document Style)WDO(1) . Oa6TechnicalTechnical Documen
t Style)DO(a)      Oa2TechnicalTechnical Document Style<6
O7ODA.

02Yha3TechnicalTechnical Document Style9Wg
D20Dl.
Oa4TechnicalTechnical Document StyleBbv{0200a.
Oa1TechnicalTechnical Document StyleF!<
07001.

Oa7TechnicalTechnical Document Style(@DOi) . 02 jaBTechnicalTechnical Document
 Style (DOa) . OPleadingHeader for numbered pleading paperP@nO OSjOXOX' hp x (#
%'O*,.8135@8:<H?A y*dddyy*dddy

HHl

HH2

HH3



HH4

HH5

HH6

HH7

HHB

HH9

HID

Hll

HI2

HI3

HI4

HI5

HI6

HI7

HIB

HI9

H2O

H2I

H22

H23

H24

H25

H26

H27

H2B     +       HeadingChapter HeadingJOd
0
)DI.

ORight ParRight-AIigned Paragraph Numbers>a@
01.             X{#

2       - p!q3"eSubheadingSubheadingO\EDA.0

ODocument[8]<!tDocument StyleE   77!t2107 .


Document[4)<!tDocument Style02t 7!t2I07!
O.
ODocument[6)<!tDocument Style02t_7!t2I07"

25#e;$%p3&Document[5)<!tDocument Style02t 7!t2I07#

Document[2)<!tDocument Style02t 7!t2I07$*

o
ODocument[7)<!tDocument Style02t_7!t2I07%0'

Right Par[l] <!tRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers7!t2I07&B
@


2 'g(}*; Right Par[2] <!tRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers7!t2I07'A@'

Document[3)<!tDocument Style02t            7!t2ID7(O
o
ORight Par[3)<!tRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers7!t2I07}J'                        @



Right Par[4] <!tRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers7!t2I07*S'                        @



2($+!, !-l1.W#Right Par[5] <!tRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers7!t2I07+\'
hh

Right Par[6J<!tRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers7!t2I07,e'                         hhh@

Right Par[7J<!tRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers7!t2I07-n-                         hhh@

Right Par[B] <!tRight-Aligned Paragraph Numbers7!t2I07.w'                        hhh@

2&/Z$O%1%2&Document[l)<!tDocument Style02t 7!t2I07/F
o
DTechnical[5)<!tTechnical Document Style7!t2I070&!"0
DTechnical[6)<!tTechnical Document Style7!t2I071&#$0
DTechnical[2)<!tTechnical Document Style7!t2I072*%&
o
D2J}3&4'5(6(Technical[3)<!tTechnical Document Style7!t2I073"    (
o
DTechnical[4)<!tTechnical Document Style7!t2I074&}*0
DTechnical[l)<!tTechnical Document Style7!t2I0754+$,
o
DTechnical[7)<!tTechnical Document Style7!t2I076&-,0 .
D2o+71)Be*9f*:*Technical[B)<!tTechnical Document Style7!t2I077&/OO
DHeading 2Underlined Heading Flush LeftB14
Heading lCentered Headingcal Style9
4GOYO*0

DBullet Listlndented Bullet List:*MOOYOXX'
2;g+Z,FZb."1?_lngBHSmall Circle:#lg:Kc:l_n#H_T:lH-LG_l;"?xxx,Gx6X@-7X@D?xxx,}x
'7Xr5ddd,Oed6X@'7@Ds4ddd,d '7r5ddd,d6Nhez7HE«<,<6X@'7,@DE«<,hw< '7,0?0



OOs400#d6X@'70e@#PRELIMINARY STAFF DRAFT NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION#x6X@'7GX@#00XOOO
DSummary of comments on House item veto offer #10:



1. Provide a special rule for FY 1996 appropriations so that
amounts may be re
scinded in bills enacted prior to enactment of
1ineitem veto authority.

2. Drop the Senate's mandatory "lockbox" language;    the language
is technicall
y unclear and could impair the ability to pay for
O?@Onecessary supplementals.O
    o
3. In order to make the application to tax benefits more workable
and effectiv
e, use the more generic definition of targeted tax
benefit recommended in the a
ttachment.

4. constitutional concern: In applying the authority to direct
spending and t
axes, use "suspend" instead of "veto," and include
language explaining the effe
ct of suspension.

5. constitutional concern: giving JCT authority to determine
O?Otargeted tax
benefits raises Chadha concerns.O
o
O?h0006.  In applying the authority to direct spending, use the
terminology "ne
w direct spending."

0?000007.   The language defining "item" is unnecessary and confusing.

8. Drop the Senate provision prohibiting the inclusion of nonemergency items i
n an emergency bill.

9. Add conforming amendments to the BEA to clarify that OMB
discretionary spen
ding reports and PAYGO reports, required under
current law to be issued 5 days
after enactment of legislation,
need to be adjusted following a rescission of d
iscretionary
appropriations or suspension of new direct spending or targeted ta
x
benefits.

10. Enhance the ability of the Administration to review carefully
all tax and
spending provisions by increasing the window for
transmittal of special message
s from 10 days to 20 days.

11. Delete the 3judge court judicial review mechanism but retain
the requireme
nt for expedited consideration (considerable
litigation experience has shown th
at 3judge courts are often
inefficient and cumbersome and can actually cause co


nsiderable
delay) .

12.   Include a severability provision in the legislation.

%,**0
Comments on the House Offer:

DO
O? DO HOUSE OFFER: Include new direct spendingOO.O

XThe attached legislative language reflects two technical
corrections.  First,
the authority should be applied to "new
direct spending" rather than "any item
of direct spending."
The legislative draft defines "item of direct spending" a
s
"any section that increases direct spending." This definition
is problematic
 because direct spending is often the result of
the interactive effects of many
 provisions and cannot be
isolated in a section or sections of a bill.  It is t
here fore
more workable to permit the President simply to identify and
suspend "
new direct spending."(#

XSecond, the Department of Justice continues to urge, for
constitutionality rea
sons, that the bill use the term
"suspend" in lieu of "veto".   The Presentment
Clause of the
Constitution provides that the President only can exercise his
"v
eto" power before a provision becomes law, i.e. when a bill
is presented for ap
proval or disapproval whereas this
legislation which calls for a "veto" after
 a bill is signed.
By contrast, the Supreme Court has long upheld the
constitu
tionality of provisions that delegate to the President
the power to suspend the
 operation of particular laws.   This
alternative approach is reflected in the a
ttached language.   (#


O?pOO HOUSE OFFER: Use JeT approved compromise language on new targeted
D?80tax
 benefits.O

XThe Justice Department continues to urge that the bill use the
term "suspend"
in lieu of "veto" (for the reasons described
above); and the Treasury Departmen
t urges that a provision be
added to authorize the IRS to take enforcement acti


on against
individuals or entities seeking to use a targeted tax benefit
when t
hat benefit has been suspended. Language reflecting
these suggestions is set f
orth in the attachment. (#

XThe House offer would define targeted tax benefit as "any
revenuelosing provis
ion that provides a federal income tax
deduction, credit, exclusion or preferen
ce to 100 or fewer
beneficiaries" with several exceptions;  the definition also

includes transition rules that provide special treatment to 5
or fewer taxpaye
rs, with exceptions. (#

XThe Treasury Department notes that it will be difficult, if
not impossible for
 anyone, including JCT, to determine the
number of persons affected by any part
icular tax provision.
This test requires too much precision and is too easy to
 avoid
or manipulate in the drafting process and by taxpayers.  It
creates an i
ncentive for tax benefit provisions to be drafted
too broadly.   In addition, it
 provides no time limit withinO*,**which this "100 or fewer" standard must be m
et. (#

XA definition of targeted tax benefit closer to the Senate
definition is prefer
able i.e., causing a revenue loss and
"having the practical effect of providin
g more favorable tax
treatment to a particular taxpayer or limited group of
tax
payers when compared with other similarly situated
taxpayers. " Language to acc
omplish this is set forth in the
attachment. (#

XIn addition, the Justice Department notes that the language of
the House offer
 presents a constitutional problem.   The JeT
determinations of what is a "targe
ted tax benefit" would
apparently not be incorporated into bills. As a result,
 the
scope of the President's "veto" authority would be established
by JCT alon
e.   In short, law would be made by a committee of
Congress in a report, not by
Congress as a whole in
legislation. This would appear to violate the "[e]xplic
it and
unambiguous provisions" of the Constitution that prescribe "a
single, fi


nely wrought and exhaustively considered,
procedure," by which laws are to be m
ade: bicameral passage by
both Houses of Congress followed by presentment to th
e
President for his approval.   INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 945
{19B3}. This p
roblem is ~emedied in the attached legislative
draft which would give the Presi
dent authority to determine
when an item is a targeted tax benefit.    However,
even if
this determination is to be made by the Congress it would, at
a minimum
, have to be made through the normal legislative
process not by a committee of
  Congress acting unilaterally. {#

O?pOOOO HOUSE OFFER: Use Senate definition of "item" (including specific
excep
tions for limitations and reductions in BA)
unnumbered paragraph
numbered section
allocation or suballocation within an unnumbered
O?XO paragraph or numbered sectionO

O?OOOXThis proposal appears to be unnecessary and problematic.   It
was necessar
y as part of the Senate's separate enrollment
legislation to very carefully i
dentify "items" which were
to be separately enrolled by congressional clerks.
However,
no such necessity exists under the House enhanced rescission
legislati
on, since the President would be sending detailed
messages to Congress identify
ing amounts of budget authority
being rescinded, as well as new direct spending
 and targeted
O?(#Otax benefits being suspended.OO(#

XMoreover, the Senate definition is problematic.   "Allocation
or suballocation
within a an unnumbered paragraph or numbered
section" is unclear. {#
00
O?'OOOO HOUSE OFFER: Accept Senate lockbox languageO.

XThe Senate approach would require the President to reduce the
statutory discre
tionary spending caps to reflect rescissionsO*,**of discretionary budget author
ity and to reduce PAYGO
balances under the Budget Enforcement Act to reflect su
spended
direct spending or targeted tax benefits.   This proposal is
unclear and
 unworkable.  {#

XTechnical concern:   The bill language is unclear on two


counts.   First, it req
uires a reduction in discretionary caps
"by the amount by which the Act would h
ave increased the
deficit .... " Since the rescission authority is applied to
it
ems of discretionary spending, what does it mean to refer to
the amount by whic
h "the Act" increases the deficit?    Second,
since the amount of the cap reduct
ion is tied to a deficit
calculation, does this mean that only the outlay caps
are to
be affected?#(#

XPolicy concern: with regard to discretionary spending a
mandatory cap reduct
ion would make it very difficult for
Congress to provide necessary supplemental
 appropriations
later in the year (as it did this year in response to the
Oklah
oma City bombing and the Northridge earthquake).  Or, it
could have the pervers
e effect of encouraging the increased
use of emergency designations. (#
X'      hp x (#%'0*, .8135@8:<H?A!
XThe language of the Housepassed bill, which authorizes the
President to propos
e reductions in the discretionary caps
without making the reductions automatic,
 is preferable. (#

XIn addition, since the caps on total discretionary spending
are carefully nego
tiated as part of mUltiyear budget plans,
serious thought should be given as to
 whether it makes sense
for an automatic budget mechanism to be changing the ca
ps on
an ad hoc basis. (#

xwith regard to the mandatory reductions in PAYGO balances, the
House conferees
 are apparently proposing that any amounts
saved by the President by suspending
 new direct spending or
targeted tax benefits should not be added back to the P
AYGO
balances, and would thereby not be available to offset other
legislation.
 However, this is contrary to the payasyougo
concept of the Budget Enforcement
Act, which has operated
effectively, now, for 5 years.  If mandatory funds or r
evenues
are saved by reason of suspending tax benefits or new direct
spending,
it would be consistent with the BEA for those
savings to be credited to the PAY


GO scorecard to be available
as offsets for other legislation.   (#


D?$DD HOUSE OFFER: Accept Senate emergency spending point of order,
D?%Dwith a
majority waiver requirement.D

XThis refers to the Senate provision prohibiting the inclusion
of nonemergency
items in an emergency bill (except for
rescissions and reductions to pay for th
e emergency
provisions) and providing a point of order against legislation
that
 includes such items.  This would impair anO*,**Administration's ability to dev
elop appropriations packages
which include both supplemental and emergency prov
isions, as
was the case in the FY 1995 supplemental/rescission bill. (#

DO

D?DDAdditional CommentsD:!!U

In addition to the issues raised in the House conferees' proposal
to the Senate
, the following changes to the Housepassed bill are
recommended (and are reflec
ted in the attached legislative
language) :

1. Enhance the ability of the Administration to review carefully
all tax and s
pending provisions by increasing the window for
transmittal of special messages
 from 10 days to 20 days.

2.   Include a severability provision in the legislation.

3. Delete the 3judge court judicial review mechanism but retain
the requiremen
t for expedited consideration (considerable
litigation experience has shown tha
t 3judge courts are often
inefficient and cumbersome and can actually cause con
siderable
delay) .

4.   Provide a special rule for FY 1996 appropriations so that
amounts may be re
scinded in bills enacted prior to enactment of
lineitem veto authority (similar
 to the Housepassed provision for
FY 1995 appropriations).   Provide twenty days
 following enactment
for such authority to be exercised.

5. Make conforming changes to the Budget Enforcement Act to clarify
that OMB di


scretionary spending reports and PAYGO reports,
required under current law to b
e issued 5 days after enactment of
legislation, need to be adjusted following a
 rescission of
discretionary appropriations or suspension of new direct spendin
g
or targeted tax benefits.     This is reflected in the attached
language.



  ,**OO?OORecommended amendments to House Offer Number 1 Regarding S. 4
070 (Line
item veto)O:

(Following is the legislative language proposed by the House
conferees; propos
ed changes are indicated with linetype and boldface.)
#d6X@'70e@#
104TH CONGRESS
ODIST SESSION

                                        S.   4




                                      AN ACT

An Act to give the President item veto authority respecting
Os50appropriations,

increases in
 OnewO direct spending, and tax benefits.

   Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
the United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

Os500    This Act may be cited as the "Line Item Veto Act Oof 19950".

SEC. 2. LINE ITEM VETO AUTHORITY.

     (a) IN GENERAL.--Notwithstanding the provisions of part B of
title X of The Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of
1974, and subject to the provisions of this section, the President
may rescind in whole or in part any
dollar amount of any item of

Os50discreti
onary budget authority Oprovided in an appropriation actO,
veto

Os5POOsuspend
o  any
item of
 OnewO direct spending, or
veto
 OsuspendO any targeted tax


ben
efit which is subject to the terms of this Act if the President
         (I) determines that--
DsSFD              (A) such rescission or
item veto
  DsuspensionD would help red
uce
   the Federal budget deficit;
DsSD              (B) such rescission or
item veto
 DsuspensionD will not impair

         any essential Government functions; and
DsSD             (C) such rescission or
item veto
 DsuspensionD will not harm t
he
   national interest; and
         (2) notifies the Congress of such rescission or
item veto

DsSDDsuspen
sionD by a special message not later than
ten
 DtwentyD calendar days
(not inc
luding Sundays) after the date of enactment of an appropriation or
authorizatio
n Act providing such budget authority or a revenue or
DsSD
reconciliation
 Doth
erD Act containing a targeted tax benefit Dor new direct
DsSxDspendingD.

DsS 0    (b) DEFICIT REDUCTION.--DIn each special message, the President may
Os
4o!Dalso propose to reduce the DDappropriate discretionary spending limit set
o
s4"Dforth in section 601(a} (2) DDof the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 by an
Ds4"Damount that does not DDexceed the total amount of discretionary budget
DsS
d#Dauthority rescinded by DDthat message.D


(I) IN GENERAL.Not later than 45 days of continuous session
after the Presid
ent rescinds an item in an appropriations Act or vetoes an
item in an authoriza
tion, revenue, or reconciliation Act, the President
shall

(A) with respect to appropriations Acts, reduce the


discretionary spending limits under section 601 of the


Congressional Budget Act of 1974 for the budget year and each



out year by the amount by which the Act would have increased


the deficit in each respective year;
 ) , **
(B) with respect to a v
eto of direct spending or of a targeted tax


benefit, reduce the balances
 for the budget year and each out year


under section 252(b) of the Bal
anced Budget and Emergency Deficit


Control Act of 1985 by the amount
by which the Act would have


increased the deficit in each respect
ive year.



(2) EXCEPTIONS.--


(A) This subsection shall not apply if the rescinded item in an



appropriation Act or the vetoed item in an authorization, revenue,


or reconciliation Act becomes law, over the objections of the


Pre
sident, before the President orders the reduction required by


paragr
aph (1) (A) or (1) (B) .


(B) If the rescinded item in an appropriation Act or the vetoed



item in an authorization, revenue, or reconciliation Act becomes law


ov
er the objections of the President, after the President has ordered


the r


eductions required by paragraph {ll {Al or {ll {Bl, then the


Presiden
t shall restore the discretionary spending limits under section


601 of th
e Congressional Budget Act of 1974 or the balances under


section 252{
bl of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act


of 1985 to re
flect the limits and balances existing before the


reduction ordere
d by the President in compliance with paragraph {ll.


    {cl SEPARATE MESSAGES.--{ll The President shall submit a separate
special message for each appropriation Act, for each authorization Act,
and for
 each revenue or reconciliation Act under this section.
    {2l In the case of any such special message
regarding an appropriation
Act

 that message shall specify
         {Al the amount of budget authority which he proposes to be
os5Do
    rescindedo, the direct spending to be suspended, or the 0             o   0
o
s50       otargeted tax benefit to be suspendedo;

00
         {Bl any account, department, or establishment of the
     Government to which such budget authority is available for
0550     obligation, oor which has jurisdiction over the direct spending or 0

0550       otargeted tax benefit affected,o and the specific project or

       governmental functions involved;
os5o           {el the reasons why the budget authority should be rescindedo, or 0

0550       othe direct spending or targeted tax benefit should be suspendedo;
           {Dl to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal,
0550       economic, and budgetary effect of the proposed rescission oor 0

o55xo       o5uspensiono; and
           {El all facts, circumstances, and considerations relating to or
0550
   bearing upon the proposed rescission oor suspensiono and the decision to
os5
00    effect the proposed rescissionOo oor suspensiono and to the maximum extent

0550      practicable, the estimated effect of the proposed rescission oor 0



Os50     OsuspensionO upon the objects, purposes, and programs for which the

Os5g0    budget authorityO, direct spending, or tax benefitO is provided.

Os50      (d) SPECIAL RULE FOR FISCAL YEAR 1995 Oand FISCAL YEAR 19960
APPROPRIAT
ION MEASURES.-- Notwithstanding subsection (a) (2), in the case
of any unobligat
ed discretionary budget authority provided by any
Os5 Oappropriation Act for fi
seal year 1995 Oand for fiscal year 19960, the
President may rescind all or par
t of that discretionary budget authority
under the terms of this Act if the Pre
sident notifies the Congress of such
Os5"Orescission by a special message not 1
ater than
ten
  DtwentyO calendar days
 (not including Sundays) after the date 0
f enactment of this Act.

Os5$0    O(e) Amendments to the Budget Enforcement Act.
Os5@%0000 0(1) Section 251(a) (7) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit
o
Os5%0     OControl Act of 1985 is amended by inserting in the second sentence,
 o
Os5&0     Ofollowing "within 5 calendar days after the enactment of any 0

Os58'0     Odiscretionary appropriations," the following:   "or following a
 o
Os5'0    Ospecial message rescinding any amount of discretionary spend
ing 0
Ds5(0    Opursuant to the Line Item Veto ODAct of 1995 or after a di
sapproval 0
Os50)0    Obill relating thereto is OOenacted,".O
Os5)000 0(2) Section 252(d) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit 0 ),*
*Os50    OControl Act of 1985 is amended by inserting in the second sentence, 0

Os50     Ofollowing "within 5 calendar days after the enactment of any 0

Os5PO     Odirect spending or receipts legislation enacted after the date of
o
Os50     Oenactment of this section," the following:   "or following a 0

Os50    Ospecial message suspending any new direct spending or targeted t
ax 0
Os5HO    Obenefit pursuant to the Line Item Veto OOAct of 1995 or after
a 0
Ds50    Odisapproval bill relating thereto· is OOenacted,".O
Dr5000       o
Or5?00DDDD
Or50SEC. 3. LINE ITEM VETO EFFECTIVE UNLESS DISAPPROVED.OO

Os540    (a) (1) ODiscretionary Budget Authority.OAny amount of discretionary
bu
dget authority rescinded under this Act as set forth in a special
message by th
e President shall not be made available unless, during the


period described in
subsection (b), a disapproval bill making available
all or part of the amount r
escinded is enacted into law.

Os50       (2) ONew Direct Spending and Targeted Tax Benefits.

Os5nOOOOO O(A}OAny provision of law which
increases
 Oprovides newO direct

Os5
o     spending or provides a targeted tax benefit
vetoed
 Owhich has be
en 0
Os5
o     OsuspendedO under this ActO,O as set forth in a special messag
e by the
Os5fO     PresidentO,O shall take effect only if 0000 a disapproval b
ill restoring that
     provision is enacted into law during the period describ
ed in
Os50     subsection (b). OFor purposes of this Act, the suspensi
on of newO
Os5]0     Odirect spending or targeted tax benefits shall be dee
med to extinguish 0
Os50     Oany legal entitlement to benefits or other rights
deriving therefrom.O

Os5TO O(B} In the case of a suspension of a targeted taxO Obenefit, the         0
Os
50    OInternal Revenue Service is authorized and directed to OOtake 0

Os50      Oappropriate enforcement actions against individuals or entities 0
00
Os5LO      Osee king to use a targeted tax benefit that has been suspended.
000000
Or500       (b) The period referred to in subsection (a) is--
           (l) a congressional review period of twenty calendar days
       of session, beginning on the first calendar day of session after
       the date of submission of the special message, during which
       Congress must complete action on the disapproval bill and present such

 bill to the President for approval or disapproval;
        (2) after the period provided in paragraph (l), an
    additional ten days (not including Sundays) during which the
    President may exercise his authority to sign or veto the
    disapproval bill; and
        (3) if the President vetoes the disapproval bill during the period

provided in paragraph (2), an additional five calendar days of session
Os500
 after the date of the veto
is
0,0 provided for congressional review.

    [(c) If a special message is transmitted by the President under
this Act and the last session of the Congress adjourns sine die
before the expiration of the period described in subsection (b), the


Os5 Orescission or
veto
 OsuspensionO, as the case may be, shall not take effe
ct.
The message shall be deemed to have been retransmitted on the first
calendar day of session in February of the succeeding Congress and the
review p
eriod referred to in subsection (b) (with respect to such message)
Or5P#Oshall
run beginning after such first day.]   (The House offer displays
Or5#Othis para
graph in brackets.]

SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

    As used in this Act:

(1) The term "item" means

(A) with respect to an appropriation Act

(i) any numbered section, or

(ii) any unnumbered paragraph;

but shall not include a provision which does not appropriate funds,
  ) ,**

direct the President to expend funds for any specified project, or



create an express or implied obligation to expend funds and shall not


include a provision that

(I) rescinds or cancels existing budget authority;

(II) only limits, conditions, or otherwise restricts

the President's authority to spend otherwise appropriated



funds; or

(III) imposes conditions on an item of appropriation not



involving a positive allocation of funds by explicitly



prohibiting the use of any funds; and

(B) with respect to an authorization, revenue, or

Or5-0



reconciliation Act, any section that increases DDdirect spending or


provides a targeted tax benefit.

DrS"         o   (2) The term "DDdirect spending" means
                  (A) budget authority provided by law other than appropriation

    Acts;
      (B) entitlement authority as defined in section 3(9) of the
        Con
gressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974; and
      (C) the food stamp program.

         (3) (A) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term
   "t
argeted tax benefit" means any revenuelosing tax provision which is
DsSD   ide
ntified by the
Joint Committee on Taxation
 DPresidentD as
                (i) a provision which provides a Federal tax

deduction, credit, exclusion, or preference to
100 or fewer

DsSD

beneficiaries,
 Da particular taxpayer or limited group.ofD
DsSD
     Dtaxpayers,D or
              (ii) a transitional rule or other provision which provides
a

Os
50        special treatment
for 5 or fewer beneficiaries
 Dto a particularD

DsSD             Dtaxpayer or limited group of taxpayers, or any portion of aD

DsS>D             Dprovision that has substantially the same effectD.
             (B) A provision shall be treated as not described in subparagraph
DsSD
    (A) (i) if the
Joint Committee on Taxation
 DPresidentD determines that
              (i) all persons engaged in the same type of activity receive

       the same treatment under the provision,
                (ii) all persons owning the same type of property, or issuing

       the same type of investment, receive the same treatment under
         t
he provision, or
              (iii) any difference in the treatment of persons is based

     solely on


                     (I) in the case of entities, the size or type of the

          entities involved,
                     (II) in the case of individuals, their filing status,
                     (III) the amount involved, or
                     (IV) a generallyavailable election made by taxpayers.

    (C) A provision shall be treated as not described in subparagraph
Ds5D      (
A) {iiI i f the
Joint Committee on Taxation
 DPresidentD determines that
     it
 provides for the retention of prior law with respect to all binding
     contr
acts in existence on the date of first public notice that a
     change in
law is actively being considered by a committee of either
     House of Congre
ss, either House of Congress, or a conference
     committee.

(D) For purposes of subparagraph (A)

(i) all entities which are related shall be treated as 1



entity;

(iiI all qualified plans of an employer shall be treated as



1 plan;

(iii) all holders of taxexempt bonds which are part of the



same issue shall be counted as 1 beneficiary, and

(iv) shareholders of a corporation, partners in a



partnership, and beneficiaries of a trust or estate, shall not be



treated as beneficiaries if the corporation, partnership, trust,



or estate is treated as a beneficiary.
Ds5)D
D         {DJ For purposes of subparagraph (A), a provision is "revenueD
  )     ,**Ds5DDD     Dlosing" when the Secretary of the Treasury determines that the
D
Ds5D      Dprovision, when compared to the rest of the bill if the provi


sion were 0
OsSPO    Onot included, reduces governmental receipts for OOany one
 of the fourO
OsSO    Ofollowing periods--
OsSO              (1) the first fiscal year for which the most recent budge to
OsSHO         Ohas been submitted by the President;OO
OsSO              (2) the fiscal year immediately preceding the first fiscal 000

OsSO           Oyear for which the most recent budget has been submitted by the
o
OsS@O           OPresident;
Os4DOO                (3) the period comprised of the first fiscal year for which
o
OsSO           Othe most recent budget has been submitted by the President and t
he
OsS700           Ofour immediately succeeding fiscal years; or
Os40           00(4) the period comprised of the five fiscal years immediately
OsS
DO           Osucceeding the period described in paragraph (3).00
Os4.      o  DO   0
           (4) The term "disapproval bill" means a bill or joint resolution
   wh
ich only disapproves, in whole, rescissions of discretionary budget
OsS#O   au
thorityO;O
or
 only disapproves
vetoes
 OsuspensionsO of
increases in
 OnewO

Dr SO    direct spending or of targeted tax benefits OOOOin a special message

   transmitted by the President under this Act and--
              (A) which does not have a preamble;
              (B) (i) in the case of a special message regarding
         rescissions, the matter after the enacting clause of which
         is as follows: "That Congress disapproves each rescission of
         discretionary budget authority of the President as submitted
         by the President in a special message on         ", the blank
         space being filled in with the appropriate date and the
         public law to which the message relates; and
       (ii) in the case of a special message regarding
item vetoes of
OsSOOO


increases in
 Osuspensions of newO direct spending, the matter after

         the enacting clause of which is as follows:   "That Congress
OsSGO
      disapproves each
item veto of increases in
 Osuspension of newOOO

       direct spending
of the President
 as submitted by the President in



        a special message on           the blank space being filled in

with the appropriate date and the public law to which the message
         rela
tes; and
              (iii) in the case of a special message regarding
item vetoes

Ds52D           DDDsuspensionsD of targeted tax benefitsDD, the matter after the

         enacting clause of which is as follows:   "That Congress disapprove
s
Ds5D        each
item veto
  DsuspensionD of targeted tax benefits 0
Oaf the


President
 as submitted by the President in a special message
 on
                 the blank space being filled in with the appropriate

Dr5wD         date and the public law to which the message relates; DDDDand
               (C) the title of which is as follows: "A bill
          disapproving the recommendations submitted by the President
          on        ", the blank space being filled in with the date of
          submission of the relevant special message and the public
          law to which the message relates.

           (S) The term "calendar days of session" shall mean only
      those days on which both Houses of Congress are in session.

          (6) The term "appropriation Act" means any general or
      special appropriation Act, or any Act or joint resolution
      making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations.


SEC. 5. CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF LINE ITEM VETOES.

      (a) TRANSMISSION OF MESSAGES TO HOUSE AND SENATE.--
           (I) Each special message transmitted under this Act shall
      be transmitted to the House of Representatives and the Senate on
      the same day, and shall be delivered to the Clerk of the House
      of Representatives if the House is not in session, and to the
      Secretary of the Senate if the Senate is not in session. Each}
 **      special message so transmitted shall be referred to the
      appropriate committees of the House of Representatives and the
      Senate. Each such message shall be printed as a document of each
      House.
           (2) Any special message transmitted under this Act shall be
      printed in the first issue of the Federal Register published
      after such transmittal.

     (b) INTRODUCTION OF DISAPPROVAL BILLS.--The procedures set forth in
subsect
ion (c) shall apply to any disapproval bill introduced in the House
of Represen                     I
tatives not later than the third calendar day of session


beginning on the day a
fter the date of submission of a special message by
the President under section
 2.

     (c) CONSIDERATION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.--(l) The
committee of the House of Representatives to which a
disapproval bill is referred shall report it without amendment, and with
or wit
hout recommendat'ion, not later than the seventh calendar day of
session after t
he date of its introduction. If the committee fails to
report the bill within t
hat period, it is in order to move that the House
discharge the committee from
further consideration of the bill. A motion
to discharge may be made only by an
 individual favoring the bill (but
only at a time or place designated by the Speaker in the legislative
DsSDschedu
Ie of the dat D(typo?)D after the calendar day on which the Member
offering the
 motion announces to the House his intention to do so and the
form of the motio
n).   The motion is highly privileged. Debate thereon
shall be limited to not mo
re than one hour, the time to be divided in the
House equally between a propone
nt and an opponent. The previous question
shall be considered as ordered on the
 motion to its adoption without
intervening motion. A motion to reconsider the
vote by which the motion is
agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.

     (2) After a disapproval bill is reported or the committee has been
discharg
ed from further consideration, it is in order to move that the
House resolve in
to the Committee of the Whole House on the State of the
Union for consideration
 of the bill.    If the bill is reported by a
committee, it shali not be cons ide
red in the House until the first
calendar day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, an
d legal holidays) on which
the report of that committee has been available to t
he Members of the
House. All points of order against the bill and against cons
ideration of
the bill are waived. The motion is highly privileged. A motion to
reconsider th
e vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall
not be in order.
During consideration of the bill in the Committee of the
Whole, the first reading of the bill shall be dispensed with.
General debate shall proceed, shall be confined to the bill, and shall not
exce
ed two hours equally divided and controlled by a proponent and an
opponent of t


he bill.   One motion to rise shall be in order.  No amendment
Os5Dto the bill i
s in order, except any Member may move except from O[unclear
Os5ROwhat is inten
ded here?]   Othe disapproval bill any item or items if
supported by onefifth of
 the Members of the Committee of the Whole (a
quorum being present). At the co
nclusion of the consideration of the bill
for amendment, the Committee shall ri
se and report the bill to the House.
The previous question shall be considered
as ordered on the bill and
amendments thereto to final passage without interven
ing motion. A motion
to reconsider the vote on passage of the bill shall not be
 in order.

     (3) Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the
application of the rules of the House of Representatives to the
procedure relating to a bill described in subsection (b) shall be
decided without debate.

    (4) It shall not be in order to consider more than one bill
described in subsection (b) or more than one motion to discharge
described in paragraph (I) with respect to a particular special
message. },**
    (5) Consideration of any disapproval bill under this subsection is
governed
 by the rules of the House of Representatives except to the extent
specifically
 provided by the provisions of this Act.

    (d) CONSIDERATION IN THE SENATE.--
         (I) Any disapproval bill received in the Senate from the House
    s
hall be considered in the Senate pursuant to the provisions of this
    Act.
         (2) Debate in the Senate on any disapproval bill and debatable
   m
otions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not
    more t
han ten hours. The time shall be equally divided between, and
    controlled
by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their
    designees.
         (3) Debate in the Senate on any debatable motions or appeal
    in connection with such bill shall be limited to one hour, to be
    equally divided between, and controlled by the mover and the
    manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager of the
    bill is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in
    opposition thereto shall be controlled by the minority leader or
    his designee. Such leaders, or either of them, may, from the
    time under their control on the passage of the bill, allot
    additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any
    debatable motion or appeal.
         (4) A motion to further limit debate is not debatable. A
    motion to recommit (except a motion to recommit with
    instructions to report back within a specified number of days
    not to exceed one, not counting any day on which the Senate is


   not in session) is not in order.

     (e) CONSIDERATION IN CONFERENCE
  (1) In the case of any disagreement between the two Houses of
    Congres
s with respect to a disapproval bill passed by both Houses,
    conferees sh
all be promptly appointed and a conference promptly
    convened.   If the
 committee of conference makes and files a report
    with respect to the bi
11 not later than two calendar days before the
    expiration of the 20 calend
ar days of session period set forth in this
   section for congressional consi
deration, the conference report on the
    bill shall be highly privileged for
 consideration in both Houses until
   the expiration of the 20day period. No
twithstanding any other rule
   in either House concerning the printing of co
nference reports in the
   Record or concerning any delay in the consideratio
n of such reports,
   such report shall be acted on by both Houses not later
than the
   expiration of such 20day period.
         (2) Debate in the House of Representatives on the conference
    r
eport on any disapproval bill shall be limited to not more than one
    hour e
qually divided and controlled by a proponent and an opponent.
    A motion to
 further limit debate is not debatable. A motion to
    recommit the con
ference report is not in order, and it is not in order
   to move to reconside
r the vote by which the conference report is
   agreed to or disagreed to

        (3) The conference report on the disapproval bill shall be highly

privileged for consideration in the Senate. Debate in the Senate on
    any c
onference report on a disapproval bill shall be limited to no
    more than
2 hours equally divided and controlled by the majority
    leader and the
minority leader or their designees.
         (4) Complete congressional consideration of the disapproval bill
    a
nd any conference report thereon shall not exceed the expiration of
    the 20
 calendar days of session provided for this purpose as set forth
   in this se
ction.

   (f) POINTS OF ORDER.--
        (1) It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any
   disapproval bill that relates to any matter other than the rescission


Ds5)
D     of budget authority or
veto
 OsuspensionD of the provision of law
D,**     transmitted by the President under this Act.
         (2) It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any
     amendment to a disapproval bill.
         (3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) may be waived or suspended in
     the Senate only by a vote of three-fifths of the members duly
     chosen and sworn.

SEC. 6. REPORTS OF THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE.

     Beginning on January 6, 1997, and at one-year intervals
thereafter, the Comptroller General shall submit a report to each
House of Congress which provides the following information:
         (1) A list of each proposed Presidential rescission of
Ds5{D     discretionary budget authority and
veto
 OsuspensionO of
an increase
 in
 o
Ds5#     DO    DnewD direct spending or of a targeted tax benefit DDsubmitte
d through
     special messages for the fiscal year ending during the precedi
ng
     calendar year, together with their dollar value, and an indication
of
     whether each rescission of discretionary budget authority or
veto


Ds5D     DsuspensionD of
an increase in
 OnewD direct spending or of a targete
d tax
     benefit was accepted or rejected by Congress.
         (2) The total number of proposed Presidential rescissions
Ds5
D     of discretionary budget authority and
vetoes
 OsuspensionsD of
an


Ds5"D
increase in
 OnewD direct spending or of     a targeted tax benefit
 ODsubmitted
     through special 'messages    for the fiscal year ending during t
he
     preceding calendar year,    together with their total dollar value.
          (3) The total number   of Presidential rescissions of
Ds5D     discretionary budget    authority or
vetoes
 OsuspensionsD of
an increas
e in


OsSO     OnewO direct spending or of a targeted tax benefit OOsubmitted t
hrough
     special messages for the fiscal year ending during the preceding

        calendar year and approved by Congress, together with their total
        dollar value.
            (4) A list of rescissions of discretionary budget authority or
Os SO

OOvetoes
 OsuspensionsO·of
an increase in
 OnewO direct spending or of a

        targeted tax benefit initiated by Congress for the fiscal year ending
        during the preceding calendar year, together with their dollar value,

and an indication of whether each such rescission was accepted or
     rejected by Congress.
         (5) The total number of rescissions of discretionary budget or
OsSO

ODvetoes
 DsuspensionsO of
an increase in
 DnewO direct spending or of a

        targeted tax benefit initiated and accepted by Congress for the fiscal

   year ending during the preceding calendar year, together with their
   t
otal dollar value.
        (6) A summary of the information provided by paragraphs (2),
    (3) and (5) for each of the ten fiscal years ending before the
    fiscal year during this calendar year.

SEC. 7. DUTIES OF CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES.

    (a) IN GENERAL.Any report accompanying a bill or joint resolution or
a join
t explanatory statement accompanying a conference report in which
there is any
Federal income tax benefit shall include a
determination

DsSN!ODreportO by th
e Joint Committee on Taxation of whether it contains any
targeted tax benefit a
nd an identification of each such benefit.


(b) STATEMENT BY JOINT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION. The Joint Committee on
DrS#DT
axation shall determine OOwhether any bill, joint resolution, or conference
rep
ort described in subsection (a) contains a targeted tax benefit.

     (c) LEGISLATION SUBJECT TO POINT OF ORDER.It shall not be in order
in the S
enate or the House of Representatives to consider any bill, joint


resolution, 0
r conference report that is not in compliance with subsection
(a) .


     [(d) CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO THE RULES OF THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.Clau
se 2(1) of rule XI of the Rules of the House of)
,**Representatives is amended
by redesignating subparagraphs (5), (6), and
(7) as subparagraphs (6), (7), and
 (8), respectively, and by inserting
after subparagraph (4) the following new s
ubparagraph:
    "(5) Each report of a committee that includes any Federal income tax
        b
enefit shall comply with section 7(a) of the Line Item Veto Act."


SEC. 8. TREATMENT OF EMERGENCY SPENDING.

    (a) EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS.--Section 251(b) (2) (D) (i) of the
Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 is amended
by adding at the end the following new sentence: "However, OMB shall
not adjust any discretionary spending limit under this clause for
any statute that designates appropriations as emergency requirements
if that statute contains an appropriation for any other matter,
event, or occurrence, but that statute may contain rescissions of
budget authority.".


(b) EMERGENCY LEGISLATION.--Section 252(e) of the Balanced
Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 is amended by
adding at the end the following new sentence: "However, OMB shall
not designate any such amounts of new budget authority, outlays, or
receipts as emergency requirements in the report required under
subsection (d) if that statute contains any other provisions that
are not so designated, but that statute may contain provisions that
reduce direct spending.".


(c) NEW POINT OF ORDER.--Title IV of the Congressional Budget
Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new
section:


"POINT OF ORDER REGARDING EMERGENCIES


"SEC. 408'. It shall not be in order in the House of
Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill or joint
resolution, or amendment thereto or conference report thereon,
containing an emergency designation for purposes of section
251(b) (2) (D) or 252(e) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit
Control Act of 1985 if it also provides an appropriation or direct
spending for any other item or contains any other matter, unless it
rescinds bu
dget authority or reduces direct spending, or reduces an amount
for a designate
d emergency."



(d) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.--The table of contents set forth in
section l{b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act
of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section
407 the following new item:



"Sec. 408. Point of order regarding emergencies.".


SEC. 9. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

     (a) EXPEDITED REVIEW.-~
          (I) Any Member of Congress may bring an action, in the
     United States District Court for the District of Columbia, for
     declaratory judgment and injunctive relief on the ground that
     any provision of this Act violates the Constitution.
          (2) A copy of any complaint in an action brought under
     paragraph (I) shall be promptly delivered to the Secretary of
     the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives, and
     each House of Congress shall have the right to intervene in such
     action.

(3) Any action brought under paragraph (I) shall be heard


and determined by a three-judge court in accordance with section


2284 of title 28, United States Code.
 ) ,**
     Nothing in this section or in any other law shall infringe upon
the right of the House of Representatives to intervene in an action
brought under paragraph (I) without the necessity of adopting a
resolution to authorize such intervention.

     (b) APPEAL TO SUPREME COURT.--Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, any order of the United States District Court for
the District of Columbia which is issued pursuant to an action
brought under paragraph (I) of subsection (a) shall be reviewable by
OOappeal directly to the Supreme Court of the United States. Any such
appeal s
hall be taken by a notice of appeal filed within 10 days
after such order is entered; and the jurisdictional statement shall
be filed within 30 days after such order is entered. No stay of an
order issued pursuant to an action brought under paragraph (I) of
subsection (a
) shall be issued by a single Justice of the Supreme
Court.

(c) EXPEDITED CONSIDERATION.It shall be the duty of the
District Court for the District of Columbia and the Supreme Court of
the United States to advance on the docket and to expedite to the
greatest possible extent the disposition of any matter brought under
subsection
 (a) .

Os400{d) SEVERABILITY.If any provision of this Act, an amendment made
by this A


ct, or the application of such provision or amendment, is held to
be unconstitu
tional, the remainder of this Act, the amendments made by
this Act, and the app
lication of the provisions of this Act shall not be
Ds4DDaffected thereby.D

==================   END ATTACHMENT   2   ==================


