RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Dinah Bear ( BEAR_D ) (CEQ)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 24-JAN-1996 20:02:06.99

SUBJECT: Timber meeting: labor and industry comes in

TO: Martha Foley                              FOLEY M      (WHO)
READ:25-JAN-1996 10:57:05.70

TO: Jennifer M. O'Connor                      OCONNOR J      (WHO)
READ:25-JAN-1996 12:50:44.76

TO: Barbara C. Chow                           CHOW B      (WHO)
READ:25-JAN-1996 09:41:03.32

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ:25-JAN-1996 08:42:58.76

TO': Thomas C. Jensen                         JENSEN T      (CEQ)
READ:25-JAN-1996 09:29:32.72

TEXT:
Katie asked that I fill you in on this morning's meeting that had
been requested by Mike Draper from the Carpenters Union.   It
turned out to be more of more potential significance than we had
perhaps anticipated.
The group consisted of representatives from both labor and
industry, including individuals directly associated with the old
growth sales in litigation (for example, Jim Geisinger, Northwest
Forestry Association, who is quoted in current articles on the
recent Hogan murre let ruling as saying that eventually all of the
sales would be harvested.)   Draper made an opening pitch,
emphasizing their concerns that:
o        the Administration had made a conscious decision to swing
strictly to the environmentalists' side of timber for political
reasons;
o        that the Administration might be seeking full repeal of the
rider;
o       that if, in fact, we were serious about solving the problem
we were approaching the situation backwards by talking only to our
friends on the hill and not talking to the affected parties
(industry) ;
o       that the rapidly escalating situation in the Pacific NW was
bad for us, bad for workers, bad for the country;
o       that they wanted this to end;
o       that they didn't think we were getting correct information
about what was really happening on the ground;
o       they they were interested in talking about starting a
dialogue.
Katie responded by identifying common sentiments we shared -
wanting to end the polarization, start a dialogue, etc.   She also
explained that rather than the picture they painted of the Admin.
lobbying "our friends" on the hill for a full repeal, we had been
trying - without success - to have serious talks with key Members
of the Pac. NW delegation about provisions focused on specific
problems. She indicated that if we weren't able to achieve
that goal, the initial strategy would have to be reconsidered.
A number of other issues were touched on in the course of
 .'
                                                                      Page 2 of2


conversation, including:
o       why does the Forest Service say it doesn't have replacement
timber when - at the same time - we keep repeating that we have
all of this timber planned for sale in the Forest Plan?
        We explained that while we have that timber, there were
genuine concerns on our part that committing timber already
planned for sale under the Plan would generate cries of
"double-counting". Their response was that they doubted we would
ever reach the amounts we had set out in the Plan and hadn't for
the last two years, and if we could move some of the quantities
designated for the past two FY years out as replacement timber,
that might might make sense.
o       on the issue of "like kind" replacement timber, there
seemed to be some tentative agreement that there was a problem,
although, as Draper put it, given the level of trust between
various parties, there was fear that without that, they'd be
offered "a patch of dandelions" to harvest.
o       there was recognition that the Forest Service was suffering
from a resource problem. The Northwest Forest Assoc. rep. stated
that forest supervisors are telling him that if they have to offer
replacement timber, they won't be able to get sales out under the
Plan for this year simply because of the workload.
o       there was great interest in hearing us say that we found
the salvage side of this to be helpful. No one did (as T.J. put
it, "it would be hard to find anyone here to say this bill had
been helpful!!). Mark Gaede from USDA explained that the Forest
Service had already been ramping up salvage and the bill really
hadn't helped that process. However, we acknowledged that we were
more comfortable - while not thrilled - with the salvage side of
the bill.
o       The industry rep. also acknowledge that the Endangered
Species Act was NOT the problem and that in fact the real,
on-the-ground picture in terms of cooperation with the Fish and
willdife Service was at least as good "if not better" than
Interior painted it.  Instead, he targeted the real problem as
resource and management problems in the Forest Service.

o       Towards the end of the discussion, both Mark Gaede and Don
Barry pointed out that all the talk in the world wouldn't help
matters if DOl appros. and the budget wasn't resolved.   Mark
mentioned having to riff 2,600 Forest Service employees and Don
mentioned shutting down the consultation process if there's a
permanent CR. At least one of them jumped visibly at this.
o       The conclusion was that everyone agreed we should begin to
talk. There was discussion about various goals, topics and types
of people that the talks might involve. There seemed to be
general agreement that the timber rider had to be dealt with
before we got to broader issues, although some industry reps.
wanted to talk about the future of forestry and others wanted to
talk about the "reality check - what's happening the ground" kind
of issues.  Katie left it in'Mike Draper's hands to think about
who should involved on their side in these talks, and to give her
a call back at the end of 'the week or beginning of next week.


