RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg ( KONIGSBERG_C)     (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-JAN-1996 15:57:59.00

SUBJECT: Item veto language ....

TO: Charles S. Konigsberg                     KONIGSBERG C )       (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:00:59.43

TO: Charles E. Kieffer                        KIEFFER C ) (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 18:01:55.08

TO: Lisa Kountoupes                           KOUNTOUPES L )       (OMB)
READ:30-JAN-1996 10:09:07.20

TO: Robert G. Damus                           DAMUS R )    (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:35:40.36

TO: Joseph Minarik                            MINARIK J )    (OMB)
READ:'30-JAN-1996 09:04:37.70

TO: Barry B. Anderson                         ANDERSON B)        (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:12:38.03

TO: James J. Jukes                            JUKES J )    (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:08:19.88

TO: Jill M. Blickstein                        BLICKSTEIN J )       (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:13:20.56

TO: James C. Murr                             MURR J )    (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:05:29.16

TO: Jacob J. Lew                              LEW J )    (OMB)
READ:NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E )    (WHO)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:03:34.56

TO: Patrick J. Griffin                        GRIFFIN P )    (WHO)
READ: NOT READ

TO: Barbara C. Chow                           CHOW B )    (WHO)
READ:30-JAN-1996 10:13:48.59

TO: Paul J. Weinstein, Jr                     WEINSTEIN P)        (OPD)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:20:50.88

TO: John C. Angell                            ANGELL J ) (WHO)
READ:29-JAN-1996 17:36:15.49

TO: Martha Foley                              FOLEY M ) (WHO)
READ:29-JAN-1996 19:13:31.52

TO: Robert E. Litan                           LITAN R ) (OMB)
READ: NOT READ

TO: T J Glauthier                             GLAUTHIER T)        (OMB)


READ:31-JAN-1996 10:21:28.00

TO: Gordon Adams                           ADAMS G )    (OMB)
READ:NOT READ

TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                       APFEL K      (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 17:18:51.04

TO: Nancy-Ann E. Min                       MIN N     (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:15:51.32

TO: Stacey L. Rubin                        RUBIN S      (WHO)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:00:06.78

TO: Laura D. Tyson                         TYSON L ) Autoforward to: Thomas O'Donnel
READ: NOT READ

TO: Dena B. Weinstein                      WEINSTEIN D        (WHO)
READ:29-JAN-1996 17:56:40.27

TO: Betty I. Bradshaw                      BRADSHAW B        (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 16:48:06.62

TEXT:

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:29-JAN-1996 15:57:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 10- POINT- COURIER
TOP ODD
DRAFT -- NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION


Subtitle     - Line
o
-item Veto Authority

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This subtitle may be cited as the "Line Item Veto Act of 1996".

SEC. 2. LINE ITEM VETO AUTHORITY.

    (a) IN GENERAL.-
o
-Notwithstanding the prov1s10ns of part B of
title X of The Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of
1974, and subject to the provisions of this section, the President
may rescind in whole or in part any discretionary budget authority
provided in an appropriation act, cancel any new direct spending, or
cancel any targeted tax benefit which is subject to the terms of this
Act if the President--
         (1) determines that--
             (A)' such rescission or cancellation would help reduce
the Federal budget deficit;


             (B) such rescission or cancellation will not impair any
  essential Government functions; and
             (C) such rescission or cancellation will not harm the
        national interest; and
        (2) notifies the Congress of such rescission or cancellation by
a      special message not later than twenty calendar days (not
including         Sundays) after the date of enactment of an
appropriation or                authorization Act providing such budget
authority or a revenue or          other Act containing a targeted tax
benefit or new direct spending.

    (b) DEFICIT REDUCTION.-
o
-In each special message, the President may
also propose to reduce the appropriate discretionary spending limit set
forth in section 601(a) (2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 by an
amount that does not exceed the total amount of discretionary budget
authority rescinded by that message.
      (c) SEPARATE MESSAGES.--(l) The President shall submit a separate
special message for each appropriation Act, for each authorization Act,
and for each revenue or other Act under this section.
          (2) In the case of any such special message that message shall
specify--
               (A) the amount of budget authority 'which he proposes to be
   rescinded, the direct spending to be cancelled, or the targeted
tax benefit to be cancelled;
               (B) any account, department, or establishment of the
          Government to which such budget authority is available for
          obligation, or which has jurisdiction over the direct spending
or            targeted tax benefit affected, and the specific project or
        governmental functions involved;

TOP EVEN
DRAFT -- NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION
              (C) the reasons why the budget authority should be
rescinded,             or the direct spending or targeted tax benefit
should be                     cancelled;
              (D) to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal,
         economic, and budgetary effect of the proposed rescission or
  cancellation; and
              (E) to the maximum extent practicable, all facts,
  circumstances, and considerations relating to or bearing upon the
proposed rescission or cancellation and the decision to effect the
proposed rescission or cancellation, and the estimated effect of
the proposed rescission or cancellation upon the objects,
purposes, and programs for which the budget authority, direct
spending, or tax benefit is provided.
     (d) SPECIAL RULE FOR FISCAL YEAR 1996 APPROPRIATION MEASURES.--
Notwithstanding subsection (a) (2), in the case of any unobligated
discretionary budget authority provided by any appropriation Act for
fiscal year 1996, the President may rescind all or part of that
discretionary budget authority under the terms of this Act if the
President notifies the Congress of such rescission by a special message
not later than twenty calendar days (not including Sundays) after the
date of enactment of this Act.
     (e) Amendments to the Budget Enforcement Act.--
           (1) Section 251(a) (7) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency
Deficit        Control Act of 1985 is amended by inserting in the second
sentence,         following "within 5 calendar days after the enactment of
any                discretionary appropriations," the following:   "or
 ,                                                                           Page 4 of?


following a             special message rescinding any amount of
discretionary spending           pursuant to the Line Item Veto Act of
1996 or after a disapproval          bill relating thereto is enacted,".
          (2) Section 252(d) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit
Control Act of 1985 is amended by inserting in the second sentence,
following "within 5 calendar days after the enactment of any
direct spending or receipts legislation enacted after the date of
enactment of this section," the following:   "or following a
special message cancelling any new direct spending or targeted tax
benefit pursuant to the Line Item Veto Act of 1996 or after a
disapproval bill relating thereto is enacted,".


SEC. 3. LINE ITEM VETO EFFECTIVE UNLESS DISAPPROVED.

    (a) (1) Discretionary Budget Authority.-
o
-Any amount of discretionary
budget authority rescinded under this Act as set forth in a special
message by the President shall not be made available unless, during the
period described in subsection (b), a disapproval bill making available
all or part of the amount rescinded is enacted into law.

    (2) New Direct Spending and Targeted Tax Benefits.--

           (A) Any provision of law which provides new direct spending or
provides a targeted tax benefit which has been cancelled under this
Act, as set forth in a special message by the President, shall take
effect only if a disapproval bill restoring that provision is enacted
into law during the period described in subsection (b).
          (B) In the case of a cancellation of a targeted tax benefit, the
Internal Revenue Service is authorized and directed to take
appropriate enforcement actions against individuals or entities
seeking to use a targeted tax benefit that has been cancelled.

      (b) The period referred to in subsection (a) is--
          (1) a congressional review period of twenty calendar days
     of session, beginning on the first calendar day of session after
     the date of submission of the special message, during which
     Congress must complete action on the disapproval bill and present
such        bill to the President for approval or disapproval;
          (2) after the period provided in paragraph (1), an
     additional ten days (not including Sundays) during which the
     President may exercise his authority to sign or veto the
     disapproval bill; and
          (3) if the President vetoes the disapproval bill during the
period       provided in paragraph (2), an additional five calendar days
of session       after the date of the veto, provided for congressional
review.

    (c) If a special message is transmitted by the President under
this Act and the last session of the Congress adjourns sine die
before the expiration of the period described in subsection (b), the
rescission or cancellation, as the case may be, shall not take effect.
The message shall be deemed to have been retransmitted on the first
calendar day of session in February of the succeeding Congress and the
review period referred to in subsection (b) (with respect to such
message) shall run beginning after such first day.

SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.



    As used in this Act:

          (1) The term "direct spending" means--
             (A) budget authority provided by law other than
appropriation             Acts;
                (B) entitlement authority as defined in section 3(9) of the
  Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974; and
                (C) the food stamp program.

        (2) (A) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term
"targeted tax benefit" means any revenue
o
-losing tax provision which is
identified by the President as--
              (i) a provision which provides a Federal tax
  deduction, credit, exclusion, or preference to a particular
taxpayer or limited group of taxpayers, or
              (ii) a transitional rule or other provision which provides

          special treatment to a particular taxpayer or limited group of
   taxpayers, or any portion of a provision that has substantially
the same effect.
         (B) A provision shall be treated as not described in
subparagraph       (A) (i) if the President determines that--
               (i) all persons engaged in the same type of activity
receive            the same treatment under the provision,
              (ii) all persons owning the same type of property, or
issuing            the same type of investment, receive the same treatment
under               the provision, or
              (iii) any difference in the treatment of persons is based
  solely on--
                      (I) in the case of" entities, the size or type of the
        entities involved,
                      (II) in the case of individuals, their filing status,
                      (III) the amount involved, or
                      (IV) a generally
o
-available election made by
taxpayers.
         (C) A provision shall be treated as not described in
subparagraph        (A) (ii) if the President determines that it provides
for the retention         of prior law with respect to all binding contracts
in existence on the         date of first public notice that a change in law
is actively being            considered by a committee of either House of
Congress, either House of         Congress, or a conference committee.
         (D) For purposes of subparagraph (A), a provision is "revenue-
losing" when the Secretary of the Treasury determines that the
provision, when compared to the rest of the bill if the provision were
not included, reduces governmental receipts for anyone of the four
following periods--
              (1) the first fiscal year for which the most recent budget
  has been submitted by the President;
              (2) the fiscal year immediately preceding the first fiscal
  year for which the most recent budget has been submitted by the
President;
              (3) the period comprised of the first fiscal year for which
  the most recent budget has been submitted by the President and the
four immediately succeeding fiscal years; or
                 (4) the period comprised of the five fiscal years


immediately          succeeding the period described in paragraph (3).

        (3) The term "disapproval bill" means a bill or joint resolution
which only disapproves, in whole, a special message transmitted by the
President under this Act, setting forth rescissions of discretionary
budget authority or cancellations of new direct spending or targeted
tax benefits, and--
             (A) which does not have a preamble;
             (B) (i) in the case of a special message regarding
        rescissions, the matter after the enacting clause of which
        is as follows: "That Congress disapproves each rescission of
        discretionary budget authority of the President as submitted
        by the President in a special message on         ", the blank
        space being filled in with the appropriate date and the

         public law number to which the message relates; and
                 (ii) in the case of a special message regarding
cancellations             of new direct spending (and/or targeted tax
benefits), the matter             after the enacting clause of which is as
follows:    "That Congress           disapproves each cancellation of new
direct spending (and/or                 targeted tax benefits) as submitted
by the President in a special             message on         ", the blank
space being filled in with the                appropriate date and the
public law number to which the message               relates; and
              (C) the title of which is as follows: "A bill disapproving
   the recommendations submitted by the President on          ", the
blank space being filled in with the date of submission of the
relevant special message and the public law number to which the
message relates.
          (4) The term "calendar days of session" shall mean only
     those days on which both Houses of Congress are in session.
          (5) The term "appropriation Act" means any general or
     special appropriation Act, or any Act or joint resolution
     making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations.
   (6) The term "cancel" means--
              (A) with respect to "new direct spending," withholding the
authority to obligate the United States pertaining thereto, and
suspension of legal entitlement to claim any benefits or payments
deriving therefrom; and
              (B) with respect to "targeted tax benefits," the suspension
of       legal entitlement to claim any Federal tax deduction, credit,
   exclusion, preference or other tax benefit deriving therefrom.

SEC. 5. CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF DISAPPROVAL BILLS.
     [to be inserted by the Congress]

SEC. 6. REPORTS OF THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE.

    [to be inserted by the Congress]

SEC. 7. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

   (a) EXPEDITED REVIEW.--
       (1) Any Member of Congress may bring an action, in the
   United States District Court for the District of Columbia, for
   declaratory judgment and injunctive relief on the ground that
   any provision of this Act violates the Constitution.
       (2) A copy of any complaint in an action brought under
   paragraph (1) shall be promptly delivered to the Secretary of
   the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives, and



     each House of Congress shall have the right to intervene in such
     action.
_Nothing in this section or in any other law shall infringe upon
 the right of the House of Representatives to intervene in an action
 brought under paragraph (1) without the necessity of adopting a
 resolution to authorize such intervention.

     (b) APPEAL TO SUPREME COURT.-
o
-Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, any order of the United States District Court for
the District of Columbia which is issued pursuant to an action
brought under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) shall be reviewable by
appeal directly to the Supreme Court of the United States. Any such
appeal shall be taken by a notice of appeal filed within 10 days
after such order is entered; and the jurisdictional statement shall
be filed within 30 days after such order is entered. No stay of an
order issued pursuant to an action brought under paragraph (1) of
subsection (a) shall be issued by a single Justice of. the Supreme
Court.
         (c) EXPEDITED CONSIDERATION.-
o
-It shall be the duty of the
District Court for the District of Columbia and the Supreme Court of
the United States to advance on the docket and to expedite to the
greatest possible extent the disposition of any matter brought under
subsection (a).
         (d) SEVERABILITY.-
o
-If any provision of this Act, an amendment made
by this Act, or the application of such provision or amendment, is held
to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act, the amendments made
by this Act, and the application of the provisions of this Act shall not
be affected thereby.
================== END ATTACHMENT 1 ==================


