RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Todd Stern ( STERN_T)     (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-FEB-1996 16:16:56.33

SUBJECT: telecom statement

TO: Gregory C. Simon                            SIMON G ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: James C. Murr                               MURR J    (OMB)
READ: 8-FEB-1996 16:20:21.07

TO: Kathleen M. Wallman                         WALLMAN KM      (WHO)
READ: 8-FEB-1996 17:12:30.11

TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ: 8-FEB-1996 16:20:01.35

TEXT:
I have done some editing of the statement.  It's getting quite
late in the day, so please look this over ASAP to see if you're ok
with it. todd
==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 8-FEB-1996 16:15:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Todd Stern

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT

        Today I have signed into law S. 652, the "Telecommunications
Act of 1996." This landmark legislation fulfills my
Administration?s promise to reform our telecommunications laws in
a manner that leads to competition and private investment,
promotes universal service and open access to information
networks, and provides for flexible government regulation. The
Act opens up competition between local telephone companies, long
distance providers and cable companies; expands the reach of
advanced telecommunications services to schools, libraries, and
hospitals; and requires the use of new V
o
-chip technology to
enable families to exercise greater control over the television
programming that comes into their homes.
        For nearly two decades, Vice President Gore has worked to
spur the creation of a national information superhighway. This
Act lays the foundation for the robust investment and development
that will create such a superhighway to serve both the private
sector and the public interest.
        Over the past 3 years my Administration has worked
vigorously to produce legislation that would provide consumers
greater choices and better quality in their telephone, cable, and
information services. This legislation puts us squarely on the
road to a brighter, more productive future.
        In the world of the mass media, this Act seeks to remove
 .~




unnecessary regulation and open the way for freer markets.     I
support that philosophy. At the same time, however, my
Administration has opposed measures that would allow undue

concentration in the mass media.  I am very pleased that this Act
retains reasonable limits on the ability of one company or
individual to own television, radio, and newspaper properties in
local markets and retains national ownership limits on television
stations. My Administration will continue its efforts to ensure
that the American public has access to many different sources of
news and information in their communities.
        The Act increases from 25 to 35 percent the cap on the
amount of the national audience that television stations owned by
one person or entity can reach.  This cap will prevent a single
broadcast group owner from dominating the national media market.
        While the Act removes the statutory ban on ownership of a
cable system and a broadcast station in the same local market, it
does not eliminate the Federal Communications Commission's (FCC)
regulatory ban on such cross
o
-ownership.     This ownership
restriction    continues to be very important in maintaining
competition    in local markets and should be maintained by the FCC.
In addition,    while certain regulatory cross
o
-ownership bans are no
longer necessary and have been eliminated, others that are
critical to maintaining the diversity of local news and
information sources have been retained by s. 652. For example,
the regulatory ban on common ownership of a newspaper and a
broadcast television or radio station is maintained.
        With regard to the ban on ownership of more than one
television station in a local market, the Act directs the FCC to
conduct a rulemaking to review its regulation and its waiver
policy. Currently, while the FCC allows ownership of more
than one television station in certain circumstances, such as
when

a station would otherwise go dark, it does so only in
narrow and compelling circumstances and where local diversity
would not be reduced. Any changes in this policy should allow
ownership of two stations only when doing so would clearly not
reduce the diversity of independent outlets of news and
information in a community. My Administration will continue to
support a fair balance between economic viability and diversity.
        Rates for cable programming services and equipment used
solely to receive such services will, in general, be deregulated
in about 3 years. Cable rates will be deregulated more quickly
in communities where a phone company offers programming to a
comparable number of households, providing effective competition
to the cable operator. In such circumstances, consumers will be
protected from price hikes because the cable system faces real
competition.
        This legislation also places a strong emphasis on
competition in both local and long distance telephone markets,
making it possible for the regional Bell companies to offer
long
o
-distance service, provided that, in the judgment of the FCC,
they have opened up their local networks to competitors such as
    \.



long
o
-distance companies, cable operators and others.
        To protect the public, the FCC must evaluate any application
for entry into the long distance business in light of its public
interest test, giving the FCC discretion to consider a broad
range of issues, such as the adequacy of interconnection
arrangements to permit vigorous competition. Moreover, in
deciding whether to grant the application of a regional Bell
company to offer long
o
-distance service, the FCC must accord

"substantial weight" to the views of the Attorney General. This
special legal standard, which I consider essential, ensures that
the FCC and the courts will accord full weight to the special
competition expertise of the Justice Department's Antitrust
Division -- especially its expertise in making predictive
judgments about the effect that entry by a Bell company into long
distance may have on competition in local and long distance
markets.
         Further, when a regional Bell company establishes a long
distance or manufacturing affiliate, the Act bars it from
discriminating in favor of its own affiliates and against the
interests of competing long distance providers or manufacturers,
when such outside companies seek to do business with the regional
Bell's local network.
         The Act's emphasis on competition is also reflected in
its antitrust savings clause. This clause ensures that even
for activities allowed under or required by the legislation, or
activities resulting from FCC rulemakings or orders, the
antitrust laws continue to apply fully.
         I am also pleased that the Act requires interstate
telecommunications carriers to contribute to a fund to preserve
and advance universal service. The fund would be spent to
provide and upgrade facilities and services, as prescribed by the
FCC. And carriers would receive credit toward their contribution
by providing discount service to schools, libraries and health
care providers in rural areas.
         I am especially pleased that the Act requires new
televisions to be outfitted with the V
o
-chip, which will empower

families to choose the kind of programming suitable for their
children. The V
o
-chip provision relies on the broadcast networks
to produce a rating system and to implement the system in a
manner compatible with V
o
-chip technology.  By relying on the
television industry to establish and implement the ratings, the
Act serves the interest of families without infringing on the
First Amendment rights of the television programmers and
producers.
        I do object to one provision in the Act concerning the
transmittal of abortion
o
-related speech and information.   Current


law, 18 U.S.C 1462, prohibits such transmittal, and the Act would
extend that law to cover transmittal by interactive computer
services. The Department of Justice has advised me of its
longstanding policy that this and related abortion provisions in
current law are unconstitutional and will not be enforced because
they violate the First Amendment. The Department has reviewed
this provision of S. 652 and advises me that it provides no basis
for altering that policy. Therefore, the Department will
continue to decline to enforce that provision of current law,
amended by this legislation, as applied to abortion
o
-related
speech.
        The Telecommunications Act of 1996 will strengthen our
economy, our society, our families, and our democracy.  It
promotes competition as the key to opening new markets and new
opportunities.  It will help connect every classroom in America,
to the information superhighway by the end of the decade. It
will protect consumers by regulating the remaining monopolies
for a time and by providing a roadmap for deregulation in the

future.   I am pleased to sign this historic legislation.

THE WHITE HOUSE,
    February 8, 1996.
================== END ATTACHMENT,   1 ==================


