RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-l MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas C. Jensen ( JENSEN_T )   (CEQ)

CREATION DATE!TIME:23-FEB-l996 l4:29:02.92

SUBJECT: Second Draft Timber Options

TO: Kathleen A. McGinty                       MCGINTY K      (CEQ)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l5:ll:56.46

TO: T J Glauthier                             GLAUTHIER_T )       (OMB)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l7:54:35.55

TO: Martha Foley                              FOLEY M )    (WHO)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l4:40:47.l8

TO: Jennifer M. O'Connor                      OCONNOR J      (WHO)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l4:49:28.80

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E )    (WHO)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l4:3l:59.9l

TO: Kathryn Higgins                           HIGGINS K      (WHO)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l6:27:52.44

TO: Ron Klain                                 KLAIN R ) Autoforward to: Remote Addres,se
READ: NOT READ

TO: Ray Martinez                              MARTINEZ R )    (WHO)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l7:02:39.67

TO: Kris Balderston                           BALDERSTON K         (WHO)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l4:36:l6.67

TO: Shelley N. Fidler                         FIDLER S )    (CEQ)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l5:2l:34.52

TO: Barbara C. Chow                           CHOW B      (WHO)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l7:l3:26.99

TO: Dinah Bear                                BEAR D      (CEQ)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l4:30:27.25

CC: Alice E. Shuffield                        SHUFFIELD A         (OMB)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l4:35:08.5l

CC: Robert C. Vandermark                      VANDERMARK R         (CEQ)
READ:23-FEB-l996 l5:22:08.38

TEXT:
The WP 5.2 file attached is the second draft of the timber options
paper.
You should be advised that Congo Dicks and Sen. Murray and their
staffs are actively discussing policy options at this time. Though
matters are less than fully clear, it appears that they are headed
toward agreement on a position supporting repeal of the green
provisions, elimination of the sufficiency provisions on the
salvage section, and establishment of a long-term forest health
law.


You may send comments back to me via e-mail.
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====~===============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:23-FEB-1996 14:23:00.00

ATT BODYPART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Thomas C. Jensen

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
TIMBER POLICY OPTIONS
DRAFT # 2 - February 23, 1996 - 2:00 p.m.
Each of the three options outlined below should be announced or
explained in the context of the attached talking points.  In
particular, regardless of the option selected, we need to
emphasize those points that may help deter any additional cutting
of old
o
-growth timber.  In this regard, we should pledge to ensure
that holders of old
o
-growth sales will be given access to
replacement volume on mutually agreeable terms.
In exchange for our commitment to respect their property rights,
we should calIon the industry to "lay down its saws," leave the
ancient forests standing, and work with the Administration to
find solutions that avoid more damage and strife. We should
insist that the leaders in the industry show leadership
immediately on this matter.
Option 1 - Partial Repeal
Under this approach, the Administration would support repeal of
those provisions of the logging rider that pertain to old
o
-growth
sales and the Northwest Forest Plan (these are the provisions the
courts have interpreted so broadly). The policy would include
buy
o
-back and replacement timber provisions, giving the
Administration tools to address environmentally problematic sales
already released.  The salvage program would not be repealed, but
we would announce significantly intensified management oversight
of the program and the establishment of special boards or other
mechanisms to handle citizen complaints about particular sales
during the remaining 10 months of the rider.
PROS
?       White House and agency staff agree that this is the most
logical and reasonable approach as a matter of policy.
?       May be seen by general public as ?balanced?
?       No patent flip
o
-flop from previous support for salvage
program
?        Previous, possibly out
o
-dated, indications of support from
Governor Kitzhaber, Congo DeFazio, and then
o
-Congressman
Wyden.


CONS
?        No presently identified firm support from any Northwest or
other political leader, although it may be possible to build
support.
?        will be criticized by environmental community because it
falls short of full repeal of all provisions of the rider
Option 2 - Full Repeal


Under this approach, the Administration would support repeal of
all provisions of the logging rider (i.e., old
o
-growth, Forest
Plan, and salvage).   As in Option 1, the policy would include
buy
o
-back and replacement timber provisions. We would commit to
propose some form of permanent ?forest health? legislation
without sufficiency language in lieu of the salvage provision.
PROS
?       Patterned after expected legislative ,strategy from Sen.
Murray
?       May be supported by Senator Wyden
?       Less extreme than Congo Furse? legislation and probable
Bradley/Boxer legislation
?       Closest of the options to the environmental community's
position and they likely will applaud it. They will be
skeptical toward any new forest health legislation, however.
CONS
?       Repeal of salvage provision may anger labor and timber
industry, although Sen. Murray contends that they will be
mollified by promise of long
o
-term forest health/salvage
legislation.
?       May go beyond what Gov. Kitzhaber will support
?       Nationwide implications for forest management
Option 3 - Heightened POTUS criticism and generalized call for
reform
[This option is the staff recommendation] .
Under this approach, the President would sharply criticize the
impacts of the logging rider. He would emphasize the
environmental damage and social conflict, the renewed gridlock,
and the erosion of public confidence in the forest management
process. He would emphasize problems in the ?old
o
-growth? arena,
but also note concern over possible problems with the salvage
program.
In order to go beyond what the President said in his October
statement, he would cite unsuccessful efforts in court and the
Congress to fix the logging rider. The President would say that
?something must be done? and would speculate that the appropriate
response could include repeal of some or all of the provisions of
the law. He would announce that he will work with Senator Murray
and other members of the delegation, and the governors to define
exactly the correct approach. He would also announce that he is
directing the Secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture to
investigate allegations of abuse in the salvage program.
The President would also refer to the example set by the Seventh


American Forest Congress (now underway in Washington, DC) as

representing the type of broad cooperation and consensus
o
-seeking
that should characterize forest policymaking.
PROS
?        Allows us time to reach policy agreement with Sen. Murray
and others
?        Reduces perception that we are being reactive to
environmenalists' rally in Seattle
CONS
?        May be seen as irresolute or redundant by all sides
?        Environmentalists will be dissatisfied by lack of clear
commitment to ?full repeal?

o
ADMINISTRATION POLICY ON LOGGING RIDER
TALKING POINTS

?       The Administration is convinced that the "logging rider" has
to be changed.
?       Ancient forests are being clearcut. Critical habitat for
fish and wildlife is being destroyed.    wild places that
almost everyone in the Northwest and the country want to
protect are being lost forever. This has to stop.
?       The logging rider has reopened wounds that were just
beginning to heal. It is dividing people and communities.
This has to stop.
?       In addition to the problems with the old growth provisions,
a significant number of concerns have been raised regarding
implementation of the salvage logging program.
?       The Northwest deserves better.    Forest policy should be
predictable and fair.   Environmental protections should be
solid. Harvest levels should be sustainable. Agencies
should be accountable for their actions. Most of all, the
people who own the forests need to know that their values
and their voices are being heard.
?       This Administration's Northwest Forest Plan is the right way
to run federal forests in the Northwest. We have to get
back to that plan. We also have to make sure that the
salvage program meets the President's directive to obey
environmental law.
?       We have to change the logging rider.    The Administration
believes that we must:
                 [Insert policy option when selected]
?       The Administration wants to work with the companies that
hold contracts for old growth timber to make sure that their
property rights are honored. But we want to find means to
fulfill their rights without any more environmentally
harmful logging.
?       We call on companies with controversial sales to forbear
from any further cutting until we have a full opportunity to
explore together alternative means of fulfilling their
rights, whether through replacement timber under the Forest
Plan, financial compensation, or other mutually acceptable
means.
?       We call on the leaders of the timber industry to take

responsibility for ensuring that no more ancient forests are


     cut under the logging rider.
     ?       We will work with Senator Murray, Senator Wyden, Senator
     Bradley, Congressman Dicks, Congresswoman Furse, and others
     in the Northwest delegation to win passage of these changes.
     We know there will be opposition. But we are determined to
     get Northwest forest management back on track and to restore
     the balanced and reasonable approach that is achieved under
     the Northwest Forest Plan.




     C:\WORK\WP\TMBRPTS.TCJ
     ================== END ATTACHMENT   1   ==================


