RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Ruth D. Saunders ( SAUNDERS_R )   (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME:27-FEB-1996 09:58:36.46

SUBJECT: try again

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:27-FEB-1996 10:09:26.68

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
Draft Amendments to ? 2001, Pub. L. 104
o
-19


         Section         Amendments to the Rescissions Act
   (a)  FINDING. -- The Congress finds and declares that it is in
the national interest to ensure that valuable natural resources
in Oregon and Washington are protected to prevent environmental
injury to forest resources, chinook salmon and other wildlife,
and rivers and streams, and jeopardy to the livelihoods of those
who depend on commercial and sport fisheries and other natural
resources; and that the Secretaries of Agriculture and the
Interior will use the authority provided in this section with
discretion, and in conjunction with a continuation of agency
efforts to reach mutually agreeable accommodations with timber
purchasers to protect these resources.
  (b) PURPOSES. -- The purposes of these amendments are to-
          (i) clarify the intent of Congress with regard to
certain provisions of Section 2001 of the Rescissions Act,
          (ii) protect the Secretaries' authority to implement
the Record of Decision for Amendments to Forest Service and
Bureau of Land Management Planning Documents Within the
Range of the Northern Spotted Owl, and
          (iii) provide the Secretaries concerned with additional
authority to replace, modify, suspend or terminate certain
timber contracts.
  (c)  DEFINITION.
o
-As used in this section, "Rescissions Act"
means the Emergency Supplemental Appropriations for Additional
Disaster Assistance, for Anti
o
-terrorism initiatives, for
Assistance in the Recovery from the Tragedy that occurred at
Oklahoma City, and Rescissions Act, 1995 (Pub. Law No. 104
o
-19) .
 (d)    OPTION 9 TIMBER SALES -- Section 2001 is amended-
                (I) by striking subsection (d);
                        (2) by redesignating subsections (e) through (I)
as (d) through (k), respectively;
                (3) in subs~ction (d) (as so redesignated), by
striking" timber sales conducted under subsection
(d) , " ;
                (4) in subsection (e) (as so redesignated),-
                        (A) in paragraph (I), by striking" and a


timber sale to be conducted    under subsection
 (d) , ";
                        (B)    in paragraph (2) , by striking lIor a
timber sale to be conducted    under subsection
 (d) , ";
                        ( C)   in paragraph (3) , by striking "or any

decision to prepare, advertise, offer, award, or
operate a timber sale pursuant to subsection
(d) , ";
                 (5) in subsection (h) (as so redesignated), by
striking "and any timber sale under subsection (d)";
                 (6) in subsection (i) (as so redesignated),-
                         (A) in the first sentence, by striking
"subsections (b) and (d)" and inserting
"subsection (b)";
                         (B) in the second sentence, by striking "and
timber sale contracts offered under subsection
(d) " .
 (e) AWARD AND RELEASE OF TIMBER SALE CONTRACTS SUBJECT TO
SECTION 318 OF PUBLIC LAW 101
o
-121 -- Subsection 2001(j) (as
redesignated by subsection (d) of this Section) is amended-
                 (1)  by striking paragraphs (1) through (3) and
inserting the following new paragraphs:
                 (1) REPLACEMENT, MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION OR
TERMINATION OF TIMBER SALE CONTRACTS.
                 (A)  Notwithstanding the National Forest
Management Act of 1976 (16 U.S.C. 472a et seq.), the
Federal Land Management Policy Act (43 U.S.C. 1701 et
seq.), the Oregon & California Lands Act (43 U.S.C.
1181a et seq.) or other law applicable to the award,
release, completion, replacement, modification
suspension or termination of timber sale contracts, the
Secretary concerned may replace, modify, suspend or
terminate any timber sale contract, currently
suspended, that was offered or awarded in fiscal year
1990 under the authority of, and in compliance with,
section 318(b) or that was released pursuant to this
subsection where the Secretary concerned, in his
discretion, finds that such replacement, modification,
suspension or termination is authorized pursuant to
originally advertised terms of the contract or that
release or completion of the contract may have an
adverse effect on the environment or natural resources.
Any replacement, modification, suspension or
termination shall be effective immediately upon
issuance of the Secretary's finding.
                      (B)  The Secretary concerned may expend, without
further appropriation action, from sums otherwise
available in the Treasury, up to $50 million in
compensation to contract holders for changes made
pursuant to the authority provided in subparagraph (A)
of this paragraph.
                 (2)  CONTRACT DISPUTES.- All claims by a
contractor against the government relating to a
contract replaced, modified, suspended or terminated

pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall be subject to the
    ARMS                                                               Page 3 of3


    Contract Disputes Act.
     (f) EFFECT ON PLANS, POLICIES AND ACTIVITIES -- Section 2001 is
    further amended by striking subsection (k) (as redesignated by
    subsection (d) of this Section).


