RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg ( KONIGSBERG_C         (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-MAR-1996 21:20:08.04

SUBJECT: ITEM VETO

TO: Charles S. Konigsberg                     KONIGSBERG C } (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 21:34:11.51

TO: Robert G. Damus                           DAMUS R } (OMB)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 08:24:16.06

TO: Charles E. Kieffer                        KIEFFER C         (OMB)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 10:31:21.83

TO: Lisa Kountoupes                           KOUNTOUPES L } (OMB)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 12:26:44.67

TO: Joseph Minarik                            MINARIK J         (OMB)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 08:23:56.36

TO: Barry B. Anderson                         ANDERSON B         (OMB)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 09:02:39.78

TO: James J. Jukes                            JUKES J}        (OMB)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 09:29:10.61

TO: Jacob J. Lew                              LEW J   } (OMB)
READ:11-MAR-1996 18:09:09.55

TO: James C. Murr                             MURR J } (OMB)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 09:03:09.75

TO: Harry E. Moran                            MORAN H)        (OMB)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 08:25:32.97

TO: Betty I. Bradshaw                         BRADSHAW B         (OMB)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 10:42:27.93

TO: Elena' Kagan                              KAGAN E } (WHO)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 08:55:37.89

TO: Paul J. weinstein, Jr                     WEINSTEIN P } (OPD)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 10:08:07.24

TO: FAX (9-622-9260,Clarissa Potter(Tre       TLXA1MAIL_\F:9-622-9260\C:Clarissa Potter
READ: NOT READ

TO: FAX (9-514-0563,Mike Small/DOJ-OLC)       TLXA1MAIL_\F:9-514-0563\C:Mike Small/DOJ-
READ:NOT READ

TO: Barbara C. Chow                           CHOW B } (WHO)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 08:51:44.02

TO: Martha Foley                              FOLEY M         (WHO)
READ: 7-MAR-1996 14:58:17.50

TEXT:


PRINTER FONT 10 - POINT- COURIER
TOP ODD
DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT-
D
-DRAFT--
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
FOLLOWING IS A REVISED ANALYSIS OF THE LATEST ITEM VETO DRAFT; I
HAVE INCORPORATED COMMENTS RECEIVED ON WEDNESDAY;  LET ME KNOW
ASAP IF YOU HAVE ANY ADDITIONAL COMMENTS.  THANKS.

Summary of comments on House Item Veto Draft
(dated March 4, 1996 -- 1:18pm)

The following provisions could render th~ item veto ineffective:
1. The lockbox language -- requiring automatic reductions in
spending caps -- would impair the ability of the President and
Congress to pay for supplemental appropriations;   the automatic
cap reductions would not permit the President and the Congress to
eliminate wasteful spending early in the year and use the savings
to pay for necessary additional spending later in the year.
2. Requiring the President to transmit cancellations of wasteful
spending on the same day as enactment of spending bills is
unrealistic -- especially given the extensive findings and
determinations which are required to accompany all cancellations.
A period of time -- 10 to 20 days -- following enactment is
necessary for .the authority to be exercised effectively.
3. The definition of targeted tax benefit is too narrow to be
truly effective in eliminating special interest tax provisions;
it also fails to delegate any authority to the President to
identify special interest provisions.
4. The "nonseverability" provision needlessly makes the authority
to cancel discretionary spending dependent on the
constitutionality of authority to cancel direct spending and tax
provisions.
5. Making the Act effective only upon enactment of a balanced
budget agreement, needlessly postpones the availability of
authority which is needed to eliminate wasteful spending. The
authority should be made available now and should be applied to
unobligated balances from already enacted FY96 bills.
D
TOP EVEN
DRAFT-


o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT--
Preliminary comments on House Item Veto Draft
(dated March 4, 1996    1:18pm) :

PROVISIONS WHICH COULD RENDER ITEM VETO INEFFECTIVE:
1. Lockbox: The lockbox language, set forth in [brackets] as
new section 1024, would require the President to: reduce the
statutory discretionary spending caps to reflect rescissions of
discretionary budget authority; and to eliminate from the PAYGO
scorecard any positive balance that would otherwise have accrued
from applying the item veto to new direct spending or ta~
benefits.
         This is problematic, especially on the discretionary side,
because the automatic lowering of spending caps, would make it
difficult for the Congress to pay for necessary supplementals
later in the year (or to pay for emergency supps which, although
not required to be offset, has been the recent pattern) .
         Suggested improvement in the lockbox mechanism:  Provide
that the rescinded or canceled amounts be placed in an "emergency
reserve" to be available to offset emergency supplementals and
other emergency legislation. Although such "emergency
legislation" does not legally require offsets, the availability
of these emergency reserves might facilitate supplementals and
other emerg.ency legislation when needed.

2. Time for transmittal of cancellation message:   Earlier
versions of item veto had given the President 10 days following
enactment of spending/revenue bills to identify items for
cancellation; the Administration had recommended 20 days as a
more realistic time period. This offer, however, requires that
special messages be transmitted "on the same calendar day as
enactment of the law to which the cancellation applies."
        Especially in the case of discretionary appropriations, this
is unrealistic and unworkable. Appropriations legislation often
has to be signed immediately upon presentment to the President in
order to continue vital government functions;  this would leave
no time at all to identify wasteful spending in legislative and
report language, and to prepare the very detailed findings
required for cancellation messages.  For discretionary
appropriations, the language should provide 20 days following
enactment of a bill to prepare cancellation messages (however, it


might be workable to transmit cancellation messages on targeted
tax benefits, on or near the date of enactment, since they would
already be clearly identified in the law}.
       . If less than 20 days is provided, consideration should be
given to: (I) paring down the extensive findings required to
accompany cancellation messages; and/or (2) permitting most of
the findings to be transmitted at a later time than the actual
cancellations. If only a few days are provided to review bills,
the qualifier "to the maximum extent practicable" should precede
the list of required determinations and findings.

5. Definition of Targeted Tax Benefit: The draft language would
define targeted tax benefit as "any revenue
o
-losing provision
which provides a federal income tax deduction, credit, exclusion
or preference to 100 or fewer beneficiaries" with several
exceptions; the definition also includes transition rules that
provide special treatment to 10 or fewer taxpayers, with
exceptions. Congress would identify in the statutory language,
provisions falling within this definition -- based upon
determinations made by the JCT.
        The Treasury Department notes that it will be difficult, if
not impossible for anyone to determine the number of persons
affected by any particular tax provision.  This test requires too
much precision and is too easy to avoid or manipulate in the
drafting process and by taxpayers.  It creates an incentive for
tax benefit provisions to be drafted too broadly.    In addition,
it provides no time limit within which this "100 or fewer"
standard must be met.
        The provisions also fails to delegate any authority to the
President to identify special interest provisions ..
        A definition of targeted tax benefit closer to the original
Senate definition is preferable -- i.e., causing a revenue loss
and "having the practical effect of providing more favorable tax
treatment to a particular taxpayer or limited group of taxpayers
when compared with other similarly situated taxpayers."

4. Nonseverability: The draft contains in [brackets] a
nonseverabi1ity provision which would invalidate the entire item
veto mechanism if any part of the mechanism -- cancellation of
targeted tax benefits, for example -- were to be found
unconstitutional. The statute should be severable, so that
for example -- cancellation of discretionary budget authority
could continue, even if cancellation of direct spending or tax
benefits is successfully challenged.

3. Effective Dates and Sunset:  This Act would become effective
upon enactment of a balanced budget (by 2002), and would sunset
in FY 2002. Authority to eliminate wasteful spending and special
interest tax provisions should be provided immediately -- without
delay -- and should be permanent.  In addition, in order to be
most effective, the cancellation authority should be made
applicable to unobligated balances from already enacted FY 1996
appropriations.
o
ADDITIONAL ISSUES:
o Disapproval bill: is defined as a bill which disapproves every
cancellation associated with a particular spending or revenue
bill.  Is the intention that disapproval bills must reject every


cancellation?

o Identifying congressional districts: The draft would require
that each cancellation message identify "the specific State and
congressional district, if any, affected by the cancellation; and
the total number and dollar value of all cancellations imposed
during the current session of Congress on the State and
congressional district .... " This requirement is unduly
burdensome and unnecessary: unduly burdensome for OMB which will
already face the difficult task of carefully vetting each
provision of spending and revenue bills immediately upon
presentment; and unnecessary because the objective of the
cancellation authority is to eliminate wasteful spending wherever
it may occur, without regard to geographic distribution.

o Definition of "item of new direct spending": The phrase
"relative to the most recent levels calculated pursuant to
section 251 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control
act of 1985" incorrectly references section 251;  should be 257.
Also, the reference to increasing any "Federal financial
obligation" has no definitive budget meaning.

o Definition of "cancel": This draft is preferable to earlier
drafts because the term "cancel" is substituted for the
constitutionally problematic term "veto." However, the
definition of "cancel" -- particularly with respect to new direct
spending and targeted tax benefits -- is too vague. We recommend
the following:
         The term "cancel" means--
    (A) with respect to "new direct spending," withholding
the authority to obligate the United States pertaining
thereto, and suspension of legal entitlement to claim any
benefits or payments deriving therefrom; and
    (B) with respect to "targeted tax benefits," the
suspension of legal entitlement to claim any Federal tax
deduction, credit, exclusion, preference or other tax
benefit deriving therefrom.

o Disapproval bills: are required to be titled "A bill
disapproval the recommendations submitted by the President on
               "    Use of the term "recommendations" is
inaccurate;  the special messages are more than mere
recommendations. The term "cancellations" would be more
appropriate.
D
Previous Administration comments which have been incorporated:
(for EOP use only)
o Uses the word "cancel" with respect to direct spending and
targeted tax benefits, instead of "veto" which we objected to on
constitutional grounds.
o Inserts "new" before "direct spending" in order to clarify.
o JCT's determination of what is a targeted tax benefit would be
written into law, thereby apparently solving the potential Chadha
problem (earlier version had limited the President's authority
based solely on determinations made by the JCT).
o Latest draft has dropped the Senate provision prohibiting the
inclusion of non
D
-emergency items in an emergency bill.
o Deletes the 3


o
-judge court judicial review mechanism but retains
the requirement for expedited consideration.
o
Time
o
-line under latest House item veto language:
(for EOP use only)
(Session Days)
DAY 1:                           Date of enactment of spending or revenue
                 bill; President to transmit special messages
                 on the same calendar day (single special
                 message for each Act); cancellation is
                 effective unless disapproved, as outlined
                 below
DAY 5:                   Disapproval bills, if any must be introduced
                                 in House and Senate
7 days following
introduction:            committees must report disapproval bills
   (day 12)

DAY 30:                 Congressional consideration of the
                               disapproval bill and any conference report
                                thereon must be completed (conferences may be
                                required because it's in order in the House
                                and Senate to strike specific disapprovals,
                                and it's in order in the Senate to add
                                additional disapprovals) .

Track 1:                                                Track 2:
Spending/revenue provisions             In the case of a veto,
are cancelled unless, w/in              5 session days are provided
10 calendar days (excluding             for consideration of the
Sundays) after the expiration           veto message;  the spending/
of the congressional review             revenue provisions are
period (above), a disapproval           cancelled unless within 10
bill is enacted into law                        calendar days the disapproval
                                                        bill     has become law (due
                                                        override)
o
Information which must accompany cancellations:
(for EOP use only)
Message shall specify:
1. Dollar amount of BA, or identify the direct spending or tax
benefit.
2. Determination whether the cancellation will reduce the budget
deficit.
3. Determination that the cancellation will not impair essential
Government functions.
4. Determination that the cancellation will not harm the national
interest.
5. Reasons for the cancellation.
6. To the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal,
economic, and budgetary effect.
7. All facts circumstances and considerations relating to or
bearing upon the cancellation.
S. To the maximum extent practicable, the estimated effect of
the cancellation upon the objects, purposes and programs for
which the canceled authority was provided.
9. The adjustments that will be made to the discretionary


spending caps or the PAYGO scorecard and an evaluation of
   the effects on sequestration.
10. The specific project or governmental function cancelled.
11. The specific State and congressional district affected and
    the total impact of cancellations during the current session
    on the State and congressional district.


