RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg ( KONIGSBERG_C        (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-MAR-1996 18:32:17.25

SUBJECT: URGENT

TO: Charles S. Konigsberg                       KONIGSBERG C )       (OMB)
READ:14-MAR-1996 18:34:38.80

TO: Robert G. Damus                             DAMUS R ) (OMB)
READ:15-MAR-1996 08:28:01.77

TO: Charles E. Kieffer                          KIEFFER C      (OMB)
READ:14-MAR-1996 20:36:11.72

TO: Joseph Minarik                              MINARIK J      (OMB)
READ:14-MAR-1996 19:45:29.31

TO: Barry B. Anderson                           ANDERSON B )    (OMB)
READ:15-MAR-1996 08:35:36.76

TO: James J. Jukes                              JUKES J)     (OMB)
READ:14-MAR-1996 18:44:17.90

TO: Harry E. Moran                              MORAN H )    (OMB)
READ:15-MAR-1996 08:33:20.21

TO: Betty I. Bradshaw                           BRADSHAW B )    (OMB)
READ:14-MAR-1996 18:32:54.70

TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E ) (WHO)
READ:14-MAR-1996 18:38:56.96

TO: Paul J. Weinstein, Jr                       WEINSTEIN P      (OPD)
READ:14-MAR-1996 18:43:31.61

TO: Arthur W. Stigile                           STIGILE A      (OMB)
READ:15-MAR-1996 09:07:49.71

TO: Steven D. Aitken                            AITKEN S      (OMB)
READ:15-MAR-1996 09:24:33.17

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 10 - POINT- COURIER
TOP ODD
DRAFT-
0
-DRAFT-
0
-DRAFT-
0
-DRAFT-
0
-DRAFT-
0
-DRAFT-
0
-DRAFT-


o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
THE ITEM VETO NEGOTIATIONS MAY BE COMING TO A CLOSE VERY QUICKLY.
PLEASE LET ME KNOW BY COB TODAY IF YOU HAVE ANY CONCERNS ABOUT
THE FOLLOWING ADMINISTRATION COMMENTS. THANKS.


PENDING LINE
o
-ITEM VETO ISSUES

1. Scope of item veto authority; "in whole or in part":  The
question of whether to apply the authority "in whole or in part"
to discretionary spending is apparently still an open issue.  It
is essential to the effectiveness of the item veto, that the
authority be available to cancel discretionary items "in whole or
in part". Authority to cancel only entire appropriation amounts,
would seriously limit the President's ability to eliminate
wasteful spending.
        With regard to direct spending and tax benefits, while most
instances of new direct spending and tax benefits would be
susceptible only to cancellation "in whole," there are some
instances where authority to cancel "in part" would make sense.
We would therefore recommend that the authority be available to
cancel direct spending or targeted tax benefits "in whole or in
part" .

2. Extensive reporting requirements:   Following is a list of the
extensive findings and determinations which would be required to
accompany cancellations. Because of the extent of these
requirements, in order for the item veto authority to operate
realistically, we recommend that the following requirements be
applied "to the maximum extent practicable."
   Dollar amount of BA, or identify the direct spending or tax
benefit.
   Determination whether the cancellation will reduce the budget
deficit.
   Determination that the cancellation will not impair essential
Government functions.
   Determination that the cancellation will not harm the national
interest.
   Reasons for the cancellation.
   To the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal,
economic, and budgetary effect.
   All facts circumstances and considerations relating to or
bearing upon the cancellation.
   To the maximum extent practicable, the estimated effect of
the cancellation upon the objects, purposes and programs for
which the canceled authority was provided.
   The adjustments that will be made to the discretionary
spending caps or the PAYGO scorecard and an evaluation of
   the effects on sequestration.
   The specific project or governmental function cancelled.
   The specific State and congressional district affected and
   the total impact of cancellations during the current session


    on the State and congressional district.]

TOP EVEN
DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT-
o
-DRAFT
o
3. Timing of Transmittal -- This is the issue of how much time
the President would have following the signing of a bill to
identify items to be canceled.   The House
o
-passed bill had given
the President a 10
o
-day window for transmittal of cancellations;
however, the latest drafts indicate consideration of either no
days -- i.e. it would require that we transmit cancellations on
the same day as enactment -- or 5 days.
        No days -- i.e. requiring transmittal of cancellations on
the same day a bill is signed -- would seriously impair the
President's ability to use the authority, especially given the
extensive reporting requirements to accompany cancellations.
Five days is more feasible than none.   However. the House
o
-passed
language     i.e. 10 days -- would be much better. Also, the
latest draft, excludes Sundays from the 5 days;   it would be
helpful to also exclude Saturdays, so the transmittal deadline
will fallon a weekday.
         There had been some concern about permitting targeted tax
benefits and new direct spending to go into effect on the date of
enactment -- only to be cancelled 5 days later. However, this is
not a problem; in cases, where the time lag would be a concern,
the President would have the authority to transmit the
cancellation immediately upon signing the bill (since the
proposed language is "within five calendar days") .

4. Lockbox -- The lockbox language, set forth as new section
1024, would require the President to: reduce the statutory
discretionary spending caps -- for the current year and the
applicable out years -- by the amount of discretionary
cancellations; and to eliminate from the PAYGO scorecard any
positive balance that would otherwise have accrued from applying
the item veto to new direct spending or tax benefits.


        Discretionary spending caps have been carefully negotiated
between Presidents and Congresses. Any decision to change the
total levels of discretionary spending should be made in a
deliberate manner -- by both the Congress and the President.
Therefore, if a lockbox is to be included, it should provide that
the caps are automatically reduced only if the Congress has
included a provision in the pertinent appropriations bill stating
that "the Congress has determined it is appropriate for the
President to reduce the discretionary spending caps to reflect
any cancellations of budget authority included in the Act which
may be made pursuant to the Line Item Veto Act of 1996."
        In addition, the Congress and the President should not tie
their hands for future budgets by requiring the automatic
reduction of spending caps in the out years.
o
5. Definition of Cancellation:   The latest Senate draft defines
cancellation -- with respect to targeted tax benefits and new
direct spending -- as preventing the direct spending or tax
provision "from taking legal force or effect." This raises
potential constitutional concerns. The definition is more likely
to survive constitutional scrutiny if the ~efinition is changed
to preventing the direct spending or tax provision "from having
current legal force or effect."

6. Definition of Targeted Tax Benefits:    The latest draft limits
the scope of the President's authority to cancel special interest
tax provisions, by defining targeted tax benefit as a benefit
going to 100 or fewer beneficiaries.    In addition to narrowing
the scope of the cancellation authority, this provision is
subject to abuse and open to substantial litigation because it
fails to define over what period of time the 100 or fewer
beneficiaries should be counted.    For example, a potential
beneficiary of a canceled tax provision might go to court to
argue that the provision would have benefited over a 100
beneficiaries if the next 15 years are considered. To fix this
problem, language should be inserted into the definition as
follows:    "to 100 or fewer beneficiaries during the first fis·cal
year in which the deduction, credit, exclusion or preference is
in effect".
         In addition, the question of who determines whether a
provision is a targeted tax benefit appears to remain an open
question.    In order to be consistent with the spending side of
the budget, the President should have the authority to determine
what qualifies as a targeted tax benefit.
         Additional technical changes to the tax language (changes in
bold) :
"For purposes of subparagraph (A) --
         (i) all entities which are related within the meaning of
sections 267(a) or 707(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
shall be treated as 1 entity a single beneficiary;
         (ii) all qualified plans of an employer shall be treated as
1 plan a single beneficiary;
         (iii) all holders of tax
o
-exempt bonds which are part of the
same issue shall be counted as 1 a single beneficiary, and
         (iv) shareholders of a corporation, partners in a
partnership, and beneficiaries of a trust or estate, shall not be
treated as beneficiaries of the corporation, partnership, trust,
or estate is treated as a beneficiary.
..
             Also, in the provision stating "in the case of entities, the
     size or type of the entities involved ... ," the word "type" should

     be replaced with "classification."
     o
     7. Nonseverability:   Recent drafts have included a
     non
     o
     -severability provision, the effect of which would be that if
     the courts strike down the tax benefit and direct spending
     provisions (the most vulnerable parts of this bill), the ability
     to cancel discretionary spending would also fall.  This provision
     is counterproductive to the goal of this legislation; if the
     direct spending and tax benefit sections of this mechanism fail
     to withstand constitutional challenge, the authority over
     discretionary spending should be permitted to continue.

     8. Effective dates/sunset:  In the latest drafts, this Act would
     become effective upon enactment of a balanced budget (by 2002),
     and would sunset in FY 2002. Authority to eliminate wasteful
     spending and special interest tax provisions should be provided
     immediately -- without delay.  In addition, as was the case in
     the House
     o
     -passed bill, the cancellation authority should be made
     applicable to unobligated balances from already enacted (FY 1996)
     appropriations.


