RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Barry J. Toiv ( TOIV_B ) (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-MAR-1996 16:12:28.29

SUBJECT: PIs check changed talking point - OK?

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:25-MAR-1996 16:31:05.59

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
TALKING POINTS FOR PRODUCT LIABILITY EVENT
MARCH 26, 1996

?       Thank you for coming to the White House today. We're in a
tough fight against some very bad legislation, and you all
are on the front lines of that fight.
?       The bill we're fighting is H.R. 956, the so
o
-called Common
Sense Product Liability Legal Reform Act of 1996.
?????????? will discuss with you the legislative status of
this bill. What I'd like to talk to you about is why the
President opposes it, why he will veto it, and why we have
to fight to sustain that veto.
?       On whose behalf are we fighting?
?       We're fighting on behalf of consumers.
?       We're fighting on behalf of the victims of shootings and the
victims of drunk drivers.
?       We're fighting on behalf of the victims of potential utility
accidents.
?       We're fighting on behalf of the victims of products that use
biomaterials when the producers have been negligent, like
the Dow Corning breast implant case.
?       And we're fighting on behalf of the rights of States, which
have traditionally retained authority over liability issues
but would lose it under this legislation.
?       H.R. 956 would encourage wrongful conduct, and it would
prevent injured persons from recovering the full measure of
their damages. That's wrong.
?       It's why we object to the elimination of joint
o
-and
o
-several
liability for non
o
-economic damages. We believe this would
prevent many victims from obtaining the damages to which
they are entitled.
?       It's why we object to the capping of punitive damages. We
believe that would increase the incentive of manufacturers
to knowingly produce and sell defective products.
?       And with regard to states' rights, here we have perhaps the
greatest irony of all coming out of this Congress. All they
talk about is giving power back to the States.  I hear Bob
Dole thinks it's so important to talk about States' rights


 that he pulls out a copy of the Tenth Amendment to the
 Constitution at every campaign speech.
 ?       Well, here's what they really think of States' rights.
 Under their product liability bill, States can go beyond
 this new Federal law -- as long as they are taking steps to
 make the law even more pro
 o
 -business. But if they try to
 pass State laws that are more pro
 o
 -consumer, forget it. This
 bill says, no way.
 ?       So State's rights are ok if you want to screw consumers.
 But if you want to protect them, don't even think about it.
 ?'      That's unfair and it's hypocritical, and I'm sure you agree
 with me on that.
 ?       Let me be clear.  The President is not opposed to sensible,
 limited product liability reform.   But this legislation
 doesn't come close.
 ?       Now, I don't have to tell you how hard the Republicans and
 major business organizations have been working this
 legislation. They're depicting the President's stand as a
 giveaway to lawyers.
 ?       Well, you're the people who can stand up and tell the
 American people what this is really about.   It's not about
 lawyers; it's about the rights of consumers.   I urge you to
 stand up and be counted on this legislation.
 ?       For those of you whose organizations have been working
 against this legislation, keep up the good work.   For those
 that have not, please get involved.   Speak out. Get your
 constituencies to speak out. Alexis Herman is here to talk
 about how you can help.
 ?       The President is taking a tough stand here, and he's taking
 a lot of partisan criticism for it.   I think he deserves
 your support.  I know he appreciates it.
 ?       Thank you.


