RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Weinberg ( WEINBERG_J )    (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-MAR-1996 09:14:17.03

SUBJECT: Here's the draft enrolled bill memo on HR 956

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) (WHO)
READ:29-MAR-1996 09:48:51.34

TO: Ellen S. Seidman                          SEIDMAN E   (OPD)
READ:29-MAR-1996 13:25:15.96

TEXT:

PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
DRAFT - For Executive Office of the President Use Only




MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
SUBJECT:         Enrolled Bill H.R. 956 - Common Sense Product
Liability Legal Reform Act of 1996
              Sponsors - Reps. Hyde (R) IL and Hoke (R) OH


Last Day for Action


Purpose
        Establishes Federal standards governing product liability
lawsuits and preempts certain State laws governing such
lawsuits.
Agency Recommendations

        Office of Management and Budget Disapproval (Veto
                                  message attached)
        Department of Commerce
        Department of Health and
           Human Services
        Department of the Treasury
        Small Business Administration
        Department of Labor             No comment (Informally)
        Department of Justice           No response
Discussion

        Your March 16th letter to the congressional leadership
stated that you would veto H.R. 956. The provisions of
H.R. 956 to which your letter objected are described below;
other provisions are described in the Attachment.
        The conference report on H.R. 956 was agreed to in the
Senate by a vote of 59
o
-40 and in the House by
        Joint
o
-and


o
-Several Liability.   H.R. 956 would abolish
?joint
o
-and
o
-several? liability for non
o
-economic damages (e.g.,
pain

and suffering) in product liability cases.   Each defendant
would only be liable for its percentage of liability as
determined at trial. In cases where a defendant goes out of
business or is unable to pay its part of a judgment, the other
defendants would not be responsible.
        Your letter stated that this provision means that ?an
innocent victim would suffer when one wrongdoer goes bankrupt
and cannot pay his portion of the judgment.?
        Cap on Punitive Damages. Punitive damages would generally
be limited to the greater of:   (1) $250,000; or (2) two times
the award for compensatory damages (economic loss and non-
economic loss). However, in an action against an individual
whose net worth does not exceed $500,000 or a business with
fewer than 25 full time employees, punitive damages would be
limited to the lesser of these two amounts. A court could
award additional punitive damages if it determines that the
award is insufficient to ?punish . . . egregious conduct? or to
?deter such conduct in the future?
        Your letter stated that the cap on punitive damages would
increase an irresponsible company?s incentive to knowingly
manufacture and sell defective products.
        Preemption of State Law. H.R. 956 preempts State laws
that are inconsistent with the bill?s standards for product
liability lawsuits. Your letter characterized the manner in
which H.R. 956 preempts State law as a ?one
o
-way street of
federalism, in which Congress defers to state law when doing so
helps manufacturers and sellers, but not when doing so aids
consumers.? H.R. 956 would allow a State to have:
         ?      A shorter -- but not a longer -- time limit for filing
product liability actions than the bill?s limit of 15
years after delivery of the product.
         ?       Lower -- but not higher -- ceilings for punitive
damages than those established by the bill (described
in the Attachment) .
Proponents? Arguments in Favor of H.R. 956
         Proponents of H.R. 956 argue that the enrolled bill would
improve the competitiveness of American businesses by:
         ?       Preventing firms with a small share of responsibility
for a claim from having to pay a large share of the
damages.

        ?       Precluding excessive awards of damages.
        ?       Removing burdens associated with the need to comply
with 50 different State laws governing product
liability.
Conclusion and Recommendations
        We join                 in recommending that you veto


H.R. 956.
        Attached for your consideration is a veto message that was
prepared by the Office of the White House Counsel.  It has been
reviewed and approved by ______________


                                   Alice M. Rivlin
                               Director
Enclosures
o
Attachment

Other Provisions of H.R. 956

        Statute of Repose. A product liability action involving a
durable good could not be filed more than 15 years after the
delivery of the product to the first purchaser or lessee.
However, State law could shorten the period.  The Senate
o
-passed
version of H.R. 956 provided a 20
o
-year period.
        Statute of Limitations. A product liability action could
not be filed more than 2 years after the claimant discovered or
should have discovered:  (1) the harm that is the subject of
the action; and (2) the cause of the harm.
        A provision in the Senate
o
-passed version that stopped the
statute of limitations from running in the event of a stay or
injunction against an action was dropped.   (Such a provision
protects claimants when a potential defendant files for
liquidation or reorganization, because the bankruptcy court
will usually issue a stay pending completion of its
proceedings. )
        Legal Standard for Punitive Damages. A higher legal
standard for punitive damages in product liability cases than
the current ?preponderance of the evidence? standard [used by
[some] [many] [most] States] would be established. A plaintiff
would have to establish by ?clear and convincing? evidence that
the defendant?s conduct demonstrated a ?conscious flagrant
indifference to the rights and safety? of those who might be
harmed.
        Liability of Retailers. Retailers, including those who
rent or lease products, generally would be liable only for
damages caused by their own actions -- not for selling or
renting a defective product.

         Misuse of Alteration of the Product. Damages would have
to be reduced by the percentage of responsibility of the
claimant?s harm attributable to misuse or alteration of the
product.
         Use of Product When Intoxicated. H.R. 956 would relieve a
defendant from liability if:   (1) the claimant was intoxicated
or under the influence of alcohol or a drug that was not
prescribed for the claimant or was not being used as prescribed
when the accident or other event occurred; and (2) the
claimant, as a result, was was more than 50 percent
        '.,

              responsible.
                      Alternative Dispute Resolution Procedures. A claimant or
              a defendant in a product liability action could, within a
              RESET 2
              specified time limit, offer to proceed under certain voluntary,
              nonbinding alternative dispute resolution procedures.
                      Workers? Compensation Subrogation. An insurer would be
              given the right to recover from a manufacturer or product
              seller the workers? compensation benefits paid to a claimant
              that are subject to a product liability action.

                      Biomaterials Suppliers. Suppliers of component parts or
              raw materials for use in the manufacture of a medical device
              that is implanted in the body would generally be excluded from
              liability for harm to a claimant caused by an implant. The
              Administration supported these provisions of H.R. 956.


