RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Stephen R. Neuwirth ( NEUWIRTH_S )    (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-APR-1996 15:06:30.99

SUBJECT: You had previously asked about this; I assume you know ...

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ: 2-APR-1996 15:35:20.33

TEXT:
Date: 04/02/96 Time: 08:40
AFDA Begins Review of Abortion Drug RU-486
    WASHINGTON (AP)    A nonprofit research group has finished
testing the French abortion drug RU-486 on 2,100 American women and
asked the Food and Drug Administration to allow it for sale.
    The FDA confirmed Monday that it had received the population
Council's application for RU-486 last month.
    Although the FDA won't say how long it will take to decide the
drug's fate, FDA Commissioner David Kessler told Congress last year
the review would take about six months. But it could be a little
longer    the agency typically spends a year on drugs that don't
address life-threatening diseases.
    The FDA is expected to approve the drug, based partly on records
of its use on 150,000 women in Europe, where it had about a 97
percent success rate.
    U.S. testing also would have to show the drug worked. The
Population Council would not release those results Monday, because
it is awaiting publication of the data in a medical journal.
    Anti-abortion groups urged the FDA to reject RU-486.
     "The FDA should not be approving a drug whose sole intention is
to kill,"   said Gracie Hsu of the Family Research Council.
    Almost all of the nation's 1.3 million abortions are surgical,
although doctors last year began publicizing the fact that a drug
already on the market to treat cancer    methotrexate   also can be
used to induce abortion.
    But RU-486, known chemically as mifepristone, would be the first
drug specifically approved by the FDA for nonsurgical abortion.
    Pressure from abortion opponents prompted French manufacturer
Roussel Uclaf to refuse for years to bring RU-486 to this country.
Last year, the Clinton administration brokered a deal giving the
population Council the U.S. patent rights to the drug, so it could
seek FDA approval.
    RU-486 blocks development of progesterone, a natural steroid
hormone that is essential for maintaining pregnancy. A doctor
administers the pill and two days later gives the woman a
prostaglandin, a hormone that causes contractions to expel the
embryo.
    The process can be painful. Like surgical abortions, there can
be side effects, including heavy bleeding and nausea, and it can be
used only through the seventh week of pregnancy.
    Because of the risks, federal health officials have said RU-486
won't be available over the counter and should be administered only
by specially trained doctors.
    The methotrexate that some doctors already use for nonsurgical
abortions also requires a return trip for a prostaglandin, but it
takes about a week instead of two days.
    Preparing for the FDA's possible approval of RU-486, the
Population Council has given exclusive legal rights to a new


company in Washington, Advances in Health Technology, to coordinate
the drug's manufacture and distribution.
    The council refused to name the actual manufacturer because of
security concerns, and federal regulations allow the FDA to keep
the identity secret.
APNP-04-02-96 0844EST


