RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Elisabeth Blaug ( BLAUG_E )   (CEQ)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1996 19:57:20.12

SUBJECT: seminoles v. Florida

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ: 9-APR-1996 09:08:03.03

TEXT:
Elena:   I left you a voice mail regarding a note the President
sent over to Katie regarding an April 4 op-ed piece in the NY
Times, written by John Cronin and Robert Kennedy Jr. (I faxed a
copy to you). The piece lambasts a recent Supreme Court decision,
which ruled generally that Congress cannot pass laws under the
Commerce Clause which provide for citizens to bring states into
Federal courts. The Op-Ed piece focuses on the environmental
repercussions of this decision. As you will see, the President
wants to know about this case. The following is a draft response.
I look forward to your comments/thoughts.
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
I received your note asking for clarification of an April 4, 1996
New York Times 'Op-Ed piece on a recent Supreme Court decision.
Your concern that this. decision limits an individual's right to
sue a state for failing to comply with an environmental statute is
well founded.   The practical significance of the decision may be
even broader, although it will have to be played out in future
cases.
On March 27, 1996, the Supreme Court issued a ruling which
factually involved a proposed Indian casino, but centers around
the 11th Amendment, which provides that a state may not be sued in
federal court against its will. In ruling that the Seminole
Indian tribe could not sue the State of Florida in federal court
for failing to negotiate for a casino in good faith, the Court
reasoned that Congressional laws regulating interstate commerce
are not enforceable against states in Federal courts.   Since a
vast amount of federal regulation, including environmental
regulation, is enacted pursuant to Congress' broad authority to
regulate interstate commerce, this ruling could have meaning well
beyond environmental regulation. This decision specifically
overturned the Court's 1989 Superfund decision, which held that a
federal court could order a state to pay cleanup costs.
This decision does not necessarily mean all is lost for the
private plaintiff. The federal government can still sue a state
in federal court, and many believe that the Seminole decision does
not preclude a citizen from bringing a state official, on behalf
of a state, into federal court. Again, it will take many more
cases in the coming months and years to digest the full impact of
the decision.

