 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

 CREATOR: Dinah Bear ( BEAR_D ) (CEQ)

 CREATION DATE/TIME:18-APR-1996 13:43:54.80

 SUBJECT: Background for 4:30 meeting

 TO: Jennifer M. O'Connor                      OCONNOR J     (WHO)
 READ:18-APR-1996 14:33:59.52

 TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E     (WHO)
 READ:18-APR-1996 14:37:35.29

 TEXT:
 PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
 TO:               Jennifer O'Connor
 CC:               Elena Kagan
 FROM:    Dinah Bear
 DATE:    April 18, 1996
 RE:               Timber issues for 4:30 meeting today
 Last Friday, Katie chaired a meeting to discuss the issue of how
 the Forest Service
 should go about identifying the sales under Section 2001(k) (l)These are all of the s
 found to contain threatened or endangered birds that
 are "known to be nesting". As you know, the case that
 raises the interpretation of the "known to be nesting"
 standard is on appeal, but if we prevail, we are
 required by the rider to offer replacement timber. We
 have already taken the position in court that
 replacement timber for those sales will require
 compliance with the environmental laws.
  of the timber rider for which we would offer substitute timber
 and where the Forest Service would get that substitute timber.
 The Forest Service had already identified about half a dozen
 sales that it believed would have particularly harmful
 consequences for the environment, including endangered species.
 They indicated that they would be completing that analysis
 shortly.
 On the issues of substitute timber.    the policy direction was to
 take timber out of this year's planned supply for the President's
 Forest Plan. These would be sales for which the Forest Service
 had already complied with the environmental laws, and that
 obviously met Plan standards and guidelines. That timber would
 no longer count as "Plan" timber.
 Once the list of sales for which we should offer substitute
 timber had been developed and we had the list of available timber
 sales we could offer instead, the thought was that Secretaries
 Glickman and Babbitt should go to the Pacific Northwest and make
 a very public presentation regarding their offer to mitigate - to
 the full extent of our administrative authorities - the adverse
 impacts of the worst of these sales by offering plan timber that
 did not pose environmental risks.
 Since that meeting, numerous issues have been raised by the
 Forest Service in regards to the availability of Plan timber.
 Katie asked that they make a presentation at this afternoon's
 meeting that would essentially be suitable for a press conference
 - essentially, a trial run.    It is not clear at this point
 whether the briefing will include all of the needed information,
 or whether we are about to run into another set of problems.


     Much of the USDA/Forest Service staff is still on the hill at a
     hearing on the Tongass National Forest.
     As you may already know, we also are not yet in possession of a
     satisfactory brief on the issue of cancelling the contract.
     Elena and I met with Justice earlier this week on that issue, and
     expect to see the next draft tomorrow.


