RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Seth E. Masket ( MASKET_S )   (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-APR-1996 11:54:25.95

SUBJECT: Thanks for looking at this

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:23-APR-1996 14:50:34.61

TEXT:
Specifically, I'd appreciate it if you'd look over paragraphs 2 &
3, (the ones beginning with "The Act also ... " and "As I have
stated ... ") This text has already been approved by Greg Simon,
Tom Kalil in NEC, and David Lytel in OSTP. Thanks for your help.
-Seth

Dear _ _ __
     Thank you for your message regarding the Telecommunications
Act of 1996.
     Vice President Gore and I worked hard with Congress on this
legislation, and I was proud to sign it into law this past
February. The Act is the result of thoughtful, bipartisan
deliberation, and I am confident that it will bolster consumer
choice while helping to create a more open marketplace for
competition and innovation. Additionally, this act will help us
connect schools and libraries to the Information Superhighway,
preparing American education for the challenges of the next
century.
     The Act also takes several steps to protect children from
inappropriate programming and content. The V-chip will help
parents exercise greater control over what their children watch
on television.  The Act takes a different approach toward
Internet communications, and because this approach raises serious
constitutional issues, the Act contains a process for expedited
judicial review, which is already underway.
     As I have stated, I strongly object to the provision in the
Act concerning the transmittal of abortion-related speech and
information. Although current law prohibits transmittal of this
information by certain means, the Department of Justice has
advised me of its longstanding policy that this and related
provisions in current law are unconstitutional and will not be
enforced because they violate the First Amendment. The
Department will continue to decline to enforce that provision of
current law as it is amended by this legislation.
     As the first major revision of our telecommunications laws
in more than 60 years, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 will
provide a sound basis for America's continued preeminence in
communication and information technology.   It will provide all
Americans with better telecommunications services at lower
prices -- preserving the diversity of voices and viewpoints in
the mass media that are so important to the health of our
democracy.
     I appreciate your taking the time to write.
Sincerely,
Bill Clinton


