RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1. MAIL)

CREATOR: Ann M. Cattalini ( CATTALINI_A)         (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1.-MAY-1.996 20:26:21.54

SUBJECT: BRIEFING MEMO

TO: Elena Kagan                                    KAGAN E    (WHO)
READ: l-MAY-1.996 20:34:20.07

TO: Jennifer D. Dudley                             DUDLEY J    (WHO)
READ: 1.-MAY-1996 20:26:33.49

CC: Peter Jacoby                                   JACOBY P    (WHO)
READ: 3-MAY-1.996 1.4:34:58.22

TEXT:


                                   May 1., 1.996

                  VETO CEREMONY FOR THE PRODUCTS LIABILITY AND
                            LEGAL REFORM ACT OF 1.995

                            DATE:       Thursday, May 2, 1.996
                            LOCATION:   Oval Office
                            TIME:       2:1.0pm to 2:25pm
                            FROM:       John Hilley
                                        Peter Jacoby

I.      PURPOSE
        This veto ceremony will provide an opportunity for you to
        reiterate your opposition to H.R. 956, the Common Sense
        Product Liability Legal Reform Act of 1.995.
II.     BACKGROUND
        On March 1.3th, 1.996, a House-Senate conference committee
        completed its work on H.R. 956, the "Common Sense Product
        Liability Legal Reform Act of 1.996." On March 21.st the
        Senate passed the conference committee bill by a vote of 59-
        40. On March 29th the House approved the conference report
        by a vote of 259-1.58. On April 30th, Majority Leader Dole
        and Speaker Gingrich convened a press conference to finalize
        Congressional action on the bill and send it to the
        President's desk.
        The conference report would abolish joint and several
        liability for non-economic damages in product liability
        cases. The measure also limits punitive damages in product
        liability cases to two times compensatory damages or
        $250,000, whichever is greater, with lower limits for small
        businesses. Although it allows judges to exceed these caps,
        the Statement of Managers makes clear that this is only to
        be done in the most unusual cases. Finally, the bill limits
        the time to file a suit to 1.5 years after the delivery of a
        product.
        You have supported products liability reform at the federal
        level but only if that reform: 1.) respects the important
        role of the states in our federal system, and 2) fairly
        balances the interests of consumers with those of
        manufacturers and sellers. You have promised to veto H.R.


    956 because it fails to meet these two tests.
    H.R. 956 represents an unwarranted intrusion on state
    authority, in the interest of shielding manufacturers and
    sellers of harmful products. While some federal action in
    this area is appropriate because no single State can
    alleviate nationwide problems in our tort system, the States
    should have, as they always have had, primary responsibility
    for tort law. The States traditionally have handled this
    responsibility well, serving as laboratories for new ideas
    and making needed reforms.   This bill will interfere with
    that process in products cases; moreover, it does so in a
    way that peculiarly disadvantages consumers. As a rule,
    this bill displaces state law only when that law is more
    favorable to consumers; it allows state law to remain in
    effect when that law is more helpful to manufacturers and
    sellers.
    Apart from the general structure of the bill, specific
    provisions of H.R. 956 unfairly disadvantage consumers and
    their families.
         The measure eliminates joint liability for noneconomic
         damages such as pain and suffering which will prevent
         many persons from receiving full compensation for
         injury. When one wrongdoer goes bankrupt (as companies
         that manufacture or sell harmful products often do) or
         is otherwise unable to pay its portion of the judgment,
         the other wrongdoers, and not the innocent victim,
         should have to should that part of the judgment.
         Additionally, because it applies to noneconomic, but
         not to economic damages, it most deeply cuts into the
         damage awards of people without large amounts of lost
         income.
         The measure places arbitrary ceilings on the amount of
         punitive damages that may be awarded in a product
         liability suit which will endanger the safety of the
         consuming public. The purpose of punitive damages is
         to punish and deter egregious conduct, such as the
         deliberate manufacture and sale of defective products.
         Capping punitive damages increases the incentive to
         engage in such misconduct.
    These defects alone would justify a veto. However, during
    the conference, conferees took several steps back from the
    version passed in the Senate and toward the one approved by
    the House.   The most notable changes include:
         The Conference Report expands the scope of the bill,
         inappropriately applying the limits on punitive and
         noneconomic damages to negligent entrustment actions
         lawsuits, for example, against a gun dealer who
         knowingly sells a gun to a convicted felon, who then
         uses it to shoot someone, or against a bar owner who
         knowingly serves a drink to an obviously inebriated
         customer, who then drives drunk and causes death or
         injury.
         Additionally, the Conference Report reduces the statute
         of repose from twenty years to a maximum of fifteen
         years (and less if states so provide), and applies the
         statute to a much wider range of goods, including
         handguns.   This Change, which prevents a person from
         bringing suit against a manufacturer of an older
         product even if the product has just recently caused
         injury, also will preclude many meritorious lawsuits.


      Finally, H.R. 956 is the product of a bruising legislative
      battle which has seen the intensity of political rhetoric
      rise to new levels on both sides of the issue. Generally,
      with certain notable exceptions, Democrats on both sides of
      the Capitol have worked hard to defeat this legislation in
      the face of powerful business interests.

III. PARTICIPANTS
     List of participants to be provided by Marilyn Yager, Office
     of public Liaison.
IV. PRESS PLAN
     Open press.

V.    SEQUENCE OF EVENTS
      You will meet briefly with the families of those affected by
      product liability litigation.
      Following this meeting, you will proceed to the Oval Office
      and make a formal veto statement, flanked by these victims.
      Following the statement, you will sign the letter of
      transmittal to the Congress formally vetoing this
      legislation.

VI.   REMARKS
      To be provided by Speechwriting.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 055 - FOLDER -006


[05/02/1999-05/15/1996]
