RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Todd Stern ( STERN_T )    (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-MAY-1996 20:17:44.92

SUBJECT: partial birth

TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ: 6-MAY-1996 08:47:11.48

TEXT:
Here's the letter tailored to respond to Marilyn's chosen
religious coalition. We should talk for a minute on Monday to see
if we agree that they're a good recipient for the letter.  (They
wrote in a letter supporting the veto in fairly broad pro-choice
language. todd
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 3-MAY-1996 20:16:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Todd Stern

TEXT:


PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
May 6, 1996

Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice
1025 Vermont Ave., N.W. Suite 1130
Washington, D.C. 20005
Dear
Thank you for your letter of April 29 concerning H.R. 1833,
legislation banning a certain abortion procedure, commonly
referred to in the press as partial birth abortion. As you know,
in late March, Congress passed that bill and on April 10, I
vetoed it because of its failure, in certain rare and compelling
cases, to prevent serious threats to women's health.
My position on this bill has been widely misrepresented and
misunderstood. Some, including those more interested in creating
a political issue than in putting real, meaningful limits on the
use of this procedure, have deliberately distorted my views. But
I know that a great many people of good faith -- and of all
faiths -- are sincerely perplexed about the veto. That is why I
want to set forth as clearly as I can the genuine basis for my
position.
Let me begin with a word of background.  I am against late
o
-term
abortions and have long opposed them, except, as the Supreme
Court requires, where necessary to protect the life or health of
the mother. As Governor of Arkansas, I signed into law a bill
that barred third trimester abortions, with an appropriate
exception for life or health, and I would sign a bill to do the
same thing at the federal level if it were presented to me.
The particular procedure aimed at in H.R. 1833 -- generally
referred to by doctors as dilation and evacuation -- poses a most
difficult and disturbing issue, one which I studied and prayed


about for many months.  Indeed, when I first heard a description
of this procedure, I anticipated that I would support the bill.
But after I studied the matter and learned more about it, I came
to believe that this rarely used procedure is justifiable as a
last resort when doctors judge it necessary to save a woman's
life or to avert serious consequences to her health.
Last month, I was joined in the White House by five women who
desperately wanted to have their babies and were devastated to
learn that their babies had fatal conditions and would not live .

. These women wanted anything other than an abortion, but were
  advised by their doctors that this procedure was their best
  chance to avert the risk of death or grave harm which, in some
  cases, would have included an inability to bear children. These
  women gave moving, powerful testimony.   For them, this was not
  about choice. This was not about choosing against having a
  child. Their babies were certain to perish before, during or
  shortly after birth. The only question was how much grave damage
  they were going to suffer. Here is what one of them had to say:
  "Our little boy had ... hydrocephaly. All the doctors told us
  there was no hope. We asked about in utero surgery, about
  shunts to remove the fluid, but there was absolutely nothing
  we could do.   I cannot express the pain we still feel.  This
  was our precious little baby, and he was being taken from us
  before we even had him. This was not our choice, for not
  only was our son going to die, but the complications of the
  pregnancy put my health in danger, as well.   If I carried to
  term, he might die in utero, and the resulting toxins could
  cause a hemorrhage and possibly a hysterectomy. The
  hydrocephaly also meant that a natural labor risked
  rupturing my cervix and my uterus."
  Some have raised the question whether this procedure is ever most
  appropriate as a matter of medical practice. The best answer to
  this question comes from the medical community, which broadly
  supports the continued availability of this procedure in cases
  where a woman's serious health interests are at stake.   In those
  rare cases, I believe the woman's doctors should have the ability
  to determine, in the best exercise of their medical judgment,
  that the procedure is indeed necessary.
  The problem with H.R. 1833 is that it provides an exception to
  the ban on this procedure only when a doctor can be certain that
  a woman's life is at risk, but not when the doctor is sure that
  she faces real, grave risks to her health.
  Let me be clear.   I do not contend that this procedure, today, is
  always used in circumstances that meet my standard -- namely,
  that the procedure must be necessary to prevent death or serious
  adverse health consequences. The procedure may well be used in
  situations where a woman's serious health interests are not at
  issue. But I do not support such uses, I do not defend them, and
  I would sign appropriate legislation banning them.
  At the same time, I cannot and will not countenance a ban on this
  procedure in those cases where it represents the best hope for a
  woman to avoid serious risks to her health.   I recognize that
  there are those who believe it appropriate to force a woman to
  endure real, serious risks to her health     including, sometimes,

the loss of her ability to bear children     in order to deliver a
baby who is already dead or about to die.   But I am not among
them.
I also understarid that many who support this bill believe that
:.


any health exception is untenable.   In a letter sent to me on
April 16 by our leading Catholic Cardinals, they contend that a
"health" exception for the use of this procedure could be used to
cover most anything -- for example, youth, emotional stress,
financial hardship or inconvenience.

PRINTER FONT 12_POINT_COURIER_OBLIQUE
That is not the kind of exception I support.   I support an
exception that takes effect only where a woman faces real,
serious adverse health consequences. Those who oppose this
procedure may wish to cite cases where fraudulent health reasons
are relied upon as an excuse -- excuses I could never condone.
But people of good faith must recognize that there are also cases
where the health risks facing a woman are deadly serious and
real.  It is in those cases that I believe an exception to the
general ban on the procedure must be allowed.
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
Further, I flatly reject the view of those who suggest that it is
impossible to draft a bill imposing real, stringent limits on the
use of this procedure -- a bill making absolutely clear that the
procedure may be used only in cases where a woman risks death or
serious damage to her health, and in no other case.   I know that
it is not beyond the ingenuity of Congress, working together with
this Administration, to fashion such a bill.
Indeed, that is why I implored Congress, by letter dated February
28, to add a limited exemption for the small number of compelling
cases where use of the procedure is necessary to avoid serious
health consequences. Congress ignored my proposal and did so, I
am afraid, because there are too many there who prefer creating a
political issue to solving a human problem.   But I reiterate my
offer now: if Congress will work with me to produce a bill that
meets the concerns outlined in this letter, I will sign it the
moment it reaches my desk.
As I said at the outset of this letter, I know that many people
will continue to disagree with me about this issue. But they
should all know the truth about where I stand: I do not support
the use of this procedure on demand.  I do not support the use of
this procedure on the strength of mild or fraudulent health
complaints. But I do believe that we cannot abandon women, like
the women I spoke with, whose doctors advise them that they need
the procedure to avoid serious injury. That, in my judgment,
would be the true inhumanity.
I continue to hope that a solution can be reached on this painful

issue. I hope as well that the deep dialogue between my
Administration and people of faith can continue with regard to
the broad array of issues on which we have worked and are working
together.
Sincerely,
================== END ATTACHMENT 1 ==================


