RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (ALL-IN-l MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeff P. Dailey ( DAILEY_J )   (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1996 12:02:06.69

SUBJECT: product liability

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ: 7-MAY-1996 12:12:41.68

TEXT:
Elena--
Please let me know if this is okay. Like I said in my voice mail to you, our
office made some minor cosmetic changes to Bruce's draft.
thanks, Jeff

Thank you very much for your letter regarding the Product
Liability Legal Reform Act of 1996. I appreciate having your
perspective on this issue.
While it is clear that our legal system needs reform, I vetoed
the product liability bill because it failed to adequately
protect the interests of consumers, in addition to the
interests of manufacturers and sellers. This bill would deprive
American families of their ability to recover fully from injuries
caused by defective products and unfairly disadvantage consumers.
In general, I objected to the bill's "one-way" preemption, which
would impose federal standards when state law is more favorable
to consumers, but not when state law is more favorable to
manufacturers or sellers. I also had concerns about specific
provisions of the legislation would impede the ability of
injured persons to gain fair and adequate recovery.   In
particular, I opposed completely eliminating joint liability
for non-economic damages, placing arbitrary caps on punitive
damages, and restricting an injured persons right to sue after 15
years without regard to the useful life of the product.
Additionally, I could not accept the provisions which would have
inappropriately applied the limits on punitive and non-economic
damages to lawsuits, such as when a person is injured after a gun
dealer knowingly sells a gun to a convicted felon or a bar owner
knowingly serves a drink to an obviously inebriated customer.
My Administration supports the enactment of limited,
but balanced product liability reform.   If Congress had passed
such legislation, I would have gladly signed it. As we continue
working to develop meaningful reforms to the American legal
system, I appreciate knowing your views.
                            ###


