RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeff P. Dailey ( DAILEY_J)   (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1996 14:37:45.89

SUBJECT: product letter

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ: 7-MAY-1996 15:49:03.97

TEXT:
Elena--
Please let me know if the re-wording at the bottem of the third paragraph will
suffice. Otherwise, Bruce's letter remains intact.
Also, have you looked at the Patricof letter that I mentioned earlier.  If so,
do you think this response would be appropriate? Thanks for your help.

Thank you for your letter regarding the Product Liability Legal
Reform Act of 1996.   I appreciate having your perspective on
this issue.
While I believe our legal system needs reform, I vetoed the
product liability bill because I concluded it failed to
adequately protect the interests of consumers, in addition to the
interests of manufacturers and sellers.
In general, I objected to the bill's "one-way" preemption, which
would impose federal standards when state law is more favorable
to consumers, but not when state law is more favorable to
manufacturers or sellers.   I also had concerns about specific
provisions of the legislation would impede the ability of
injured persons to gain fair and adequate recovery.   In
particular, I opposed completely eliminating joint liability
for non-economic damages, placing arbitrary caps on punitive
damages, and restricting an injured persons right to sue after 15
years without regard to the useful life of the product.
Additionally, I could not accept the provisions which would have
applied the limits on punitive and non-economic damages to
lawsuits, such as when a person is injured after a gun dealer
knowingly sells a gun to a convicted felon or a bar owner
knowingly serves a drink to an obviously inebriated customer.
Congress could have passed limited, but balanced product liability
reform, which I would have gladly signed. As I continue working
with Congress to achieve this end, I appreciate knowing your thoughts.
                               ###


