 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL         (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

 CREATOR: Kathy McKiernan ( MCKIERNAN_K)         (WHO)

 CREATION DATE/TIME:14-JUN-1996 15:11:42.92

 SUBJECT: FYI    -~    McCurry's briefing and answers on flag burning

 TO: Elena Kagan                                     KAGAN E   (WHO)
 READ:14-JUN-1996 15:34:07.32

 TEXT:
 Thanks again for your help.
 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:14-JUN-1996 14:23:00.00

 ATT CREATOR: Margaret M. Suntum

 ATT SUBJECT: 1996-6-14 McCurry Briefing

 ATT TO: Remote Addressee                                mwolfe@is1.js.mil@INET

 ATT TO: Mary Ellen Glynn

 ATT TO: Marlene A. MacDonald                            MACDONALD M

 ATT TO: Julie E. Mason

 ATT TO: Kathy McKiernan                                 MCKIERNAN K

 ATT TO: APRIL        K. MELLODY

 ATT TO: A. Victoria Rivas-Vazquez

 ATT TO: Darby Stott

 ATT TO: Margaret M. Suntum

 ATT TO: Virginia M. Terzano                             TERZANO V

 ATT TO: C. Patricia Cogdell                             COGDELL C

 ATT TO: Julia R. Green

 ATT TO: Lorraine McHugh                                 MCHUGH L

 ATT TO: Rica F. Rodman                                  RODMAN R

 ATT TO: Laura D. Schwartz                               SCHWARTZ L

 ATT TO: Joshua Silverman                                SILVERMAN J

 ATT TO: Allison Wilkie

 ATT TO: Remote Addressee                                backup@wilson.ai.mit.edu@INET

 ATT TO: Remote Addressee                                wh-outbox-distr@clinton.ai.mit.edu@IN

 ATT TO: Pauline M. Abernathy                            ABERNATHY P


ATT TO: Lori E. Abrams         ABRAMS L )

ATT TO: Lori L. Anderson       ANDERSON L

ATT TO: Brenda Anders          ANDERS B

ATT TO: Donald A. Baer         BAER D )

ATT TO: Karen L. Barbuschak    BARBUSCHAK K )

ATT TO: David S. Beaubaire     BEAUBAIRE D

ATT TO: Daniel E. Bernal       BERNAL D )

ATT TO: Antony J. Blinken      BLINKEN A

ATT TO: Gabrielle M. Bushman   BUSHMAN G

ATT TO: Phillip M. Caplan      CAPLAN P )

ATT TO: Laura Capps            CAPPS L )

ATT TO: Lisa M. Caputo         CAPUTO L

ATT TO: Joseph W. Cerrell      CERREL J

ATT TO: Steven A. Cohen        COHEN SA

ATT TO: Amanda Crumley         CRUMLEY A )

ATT TO: Carolyn Curiel         CURIEL C )

ATT TO: Marilyn DiGiacobbe     DIGIACOBBE M

ATT TO: Chris Dorval           DORVAL C )

ATT TO: James T. Edmonds       EDMONDS J

ATT TO: Anne M. Edwards        EDWARDS A

ATT TO: Rahm Emanuel           EMANUEL R

ATT TO: James L. Fetig         FETIG J )

ATT TO: Karen E. Finney        FINNEY K

ATT TO: Ben Freeland           FREELAND_B

ATT TO: Jeremy M. Gaines       GAINES_J

ATT TO: Michael A. Gill        GILL_M )

ATT TO: Jason S. Goldberg      GOLDBERG JS

ATT TO: Christopher M. Gruin   GRUIN C )

ATT TO: LAWRENCE J. HAAS       HAAS_L )

ATT TO: Alexis M. Herman       HERMAN A


ATT TO: William C. Hornish     HORNISH W

ATT TO: Russell W. Horwitz     HORWITZ R

ATT TO: LeeAnn Inadomi         INADOMI L

ATT TO: Annette E. Johnson     JOHNSON AE

ATT TO: Brian J. Johnson       JOHNSON BJ

ATT TO: David T. Johnson       JOHNSON DT

ATT TO: Wayne C. Johnson       JOHNSON WC

ATT TO: Angus S. King          KING A

ATT TO: Joshua A. King         KING J

ATT TO: Catherine T. Kitchen   KITCHEN C

ATT TO: James Kohlenberger     KOHLEN J    )

ATT TO: Heidi Kukis            KUKIS H

ATT TO: Karin Kullman          KULLMAN K

ATT TO: G. N. Lattimore        LATTIMORE G

ATT TO: Peggy A. Lewis         LEWIS P )

ATT TO: Patricia F. Lewis      LEWIS PF )

ATT TO: Evelyn S. Lieberman    LIEBERMAN E

ATT TO: Cynthia J. Lizik       LIZIK C

ATT TO: Gordon Li              LI_G )

ATT TO: Michael D. Malone      MALONE M )

ATT TO: Melissa Marshall       MARSHALL M

ATT TO: Doris O. Matsui        MATSUI D )

ATT TO: Anne E. McGuire        MCGUIRE A

ATT TO: Cheryl D. Mills        MILLS C

ATT TO: Julia Moffett          MOFFETT J

ATT TO: Elizabeth A. Montoya   MONTOYA E

ATT TO: Melissa M. Murray      MURRAY MM

ATT TO: Jonathan Orszag        ORSZAG J

ATT TO: Jonathan Orszag        ORSZAG J

ATT TO: Jonathan M. Prince     PRINCE J


ATT TO: Franklin S. Reeder    REEDER F )

ATT TO: Renee C. Riley        RILEY R )

ATT TO: Christa T. Robinson   ROBINSON C

ATT TO: Roger V. Salazar      SALAZAR R )

ATT TO: Stuart Schear         SCHEAR S )

ATT TO: Jill A. Schuker       SCHUKER J

ATT TO: Jennifer Senan        SENAN J )

ATT TO: Douglas S. Sheorn     SHEORN D )

ATT TO: Susan P. Shepard      SHEPARD S

ATT TO: David Shipley         SHIPLEY D

ATT TO: Douglas B. Sosnik     SOSNIK D )

ATT TO: Todd Stern            STERN T )

ATT TO: Mike Sullivan         SULLIVAN M

ATT TO: Shana E. Tesler       TESLER S

ATT TO: Terri 1. Tingen       TINGEN T

ATT TO: Barry J. Toiv         TOIV B    )


ATT TO: Jodie R. Torkelson    TORKELSON J

ATT TO: Lorraine A. Voles     VOLES L

ATT TO: Michael Waldman       WALDMAN M

ATT TO: Angelina Walker       WALKER L      )


ATT TO: Teresa Wildman        WILDMAN T

ATT TO: Stephen Willson       WILLSON S

ATT TO: Natalie S. Wozniak    WOZNIAK N

ATT TO: Remote Addressee      usiaOl@access.digex.com@INET

ATT TO: Remote Addressee      1=US@2=WESTERN UNION@3=@5=ATT.COM@*EL

ATT TO: Remote Addressee      62955104@eln.attmail.com@INET )

ATT TO: Remote Addressee      73030.21@compuserve.com@INET

ATT TO: Manager Infomgt       INFOMGT )

ATT TO: Remote Addressee      newsdesk@usnewswire.com@INET

ATT TO: Remote Addressee      usnwire@access.digex.com@INET )


TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 10- POINT- COURIER
BOTTOM ODD
MORE                            #235
o
-06/14


PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary

For Immediate Release                                      June 14, 1996

PRESS BRIEFING
BY MIKE MCCURRY

The Briefing Room


12:26 P.M. EDT

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, well, well, happy Friday. And shall
we start our briefing? What have you got? Actually, I don't have
anything formal to begin with today, so we just go with questions.

        Q       Former Senator Dole is saying today that his
support of the flag burning amendment and the President's lack
thereof is another distinction between the two candidates.

        MR. MCCURRY:  It's a laughable statement.  There's no
distinction at all between the President and Senator Dole and their
love and respect for the American flag.  Moreover, President Clinton
has a record that demonstrates that quite clearly. He's worked as a
governor in his state to protect the flag.  He supported legislation
that would have outlawed all intentional desecration of the flag.   He
initiated a statewide flag respect program designed to encourage
better understanding and appreciation of the flag. And on Flag Day
that's exactly the right attitude to have about the flag.

        I can't figure out -- I think because it's Flag Day,
once again Senator Dole is searching for some news.

        Q         How about the amendment?    Does he support the
amendment?

         Q        What about the amendment?

        MR. MCCURRY: On the amendment, the President's views on
that are known and have been known for a long time. He believes the
First Amendment is, in some respects, what the America flag is about,
in that the First Amendment expresses the very character of this
nation that the flag symbolizes, and the tampering with that and not
recognizing the right to freedom of expression -- beginning down that
road in which you begin to curtail freedom of expression is not
warranted.

         Q        Then there is a distinction on that question, isn't
it?



        MR. MCCURRY: Well, Senator Dole's speech,
unfortunately, was much more bordering on issues related to the
President's patriotism.

       Q        What exactly did he say that impugned the
President's patriotism?


BOTTOM EVEN
MORE                           #235
0
-06/14
         MR. MCCURRY: He said something to the effect that it
was - - that one difference between us is I love the flag and he
doesn't, or something like that.    Do you have the exact quote?
Something like that.

o
TOP EVEN
- \p -

BOTTOM EVEN
MORE                          #235
o
-06/14
        Q       Mike, are you putting out something this afternoon
in connection with the files?

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, we expect the FBI at some point this
afternoon to release publicly and to the Congress and we will get a
copy as well of a report of their review of these issues.
        For some time now, the White House legal counsel has
been looking at what procedures ought to govern the request of files
from the FBI and has been working changes in those procedures that
will really protect the rights of those individuals whose background
files would necessarily be reviewed in connection with security
passes or with clearance into the White House. And I believe that we
will be able to provide you a copy of some of his instructions to the
rest of the White House staff sometime this afternoon.
        Q       Will they be written only?
        MR. MCCURRY: That's what would be provided, yes, a copy
of the memorandum that he has been working on that he has prepared
for Mr. Panetta that really outlines these new procedures.
        Q       Can we get him to come in here and explain it to us
on camera?
        MR. MCCURRY:  I think it's pretty self
o
-explanatory, once
you see it.  It's a detailed explanation of what procedures ought to
exist, who should have access to the files, and under what procedures
should files properly be requested.  And it will develop a lot of
more accountability in the future to be very clear who has direct
responsibility for requesting the files and it will put in the hands
of the Chief of Staff and the White House legal counsel
responsibility for those who are using those files.
        Q       Mike, one question that still overhangs this whole
thing is why was the Office of Personnel Security trying to update
the files about people who would have continued access to the
Executive Complex when many White House staffers had not completed


the process of obtaining security clearances?
        MR. MCCURRY: Well, my understanding is, at that time,
in December of 1993 when those requests were made they were -- also
they, in addition to getting the necessary security clearances and
background checks in place for those who were newly arrived to the
White House staff, they were also reconstructing those files that had
been sent into archives by the Bush administration when it left
office. So they were, in a sense, updating the files of those who
were holdovers in addition to completing the work on the others.

        Q       Do we know why -- or do you know why they didn't
retrieve the files from the archives? They are, after all, the White
House archives.

          MR. MCCURRY:  It's not, to my understanding, not clear
 that they were in archives.

          Q       Well, you just said they'd been archived.

        MR. MCCURRY: They had been archived; I'm not clear
whether they were archived here or at the Bureau.  But I suspect
that's a question that the FBI may have addressed.

        Q        Wait a minute. The suggestion from Mr. Fabiani's
office was that they were archived by the Bush administration with
the Bush papers.  Is that the case?

          MR. MCCURRY:   He's got an authoritative record on it.   TOP ODD
 - \p -

BOTTOM ODD
MORE                             #235
D
-06/14
 I'd rely on what he's told you.

          Q       Well, I mean, are they here, or not?

         Q       How many governors have been invited to meet with
 the President on church burnings, and how many have accepted?

        MR. MCCURRY: We still are in consultation with the
southern governors. We reached out to the members of the Southern
Governors Association -- a total number of 14 states -- but we also
made clear to the national leadership of the National Governors
Association that the President would welcome any- governor who had an
interest in this issue and who wanted to participate in the
discussion.

        But we directly contacted those 14 governors in those
states that have been affected by these incidents, both Republicans
and Democrats, to extend them an invitation. We have not yet set the
date, in part because we're working with those offices to determine
what date is likely to get the best attendance.

        Q       Mike, it's my understanding there have not been
burnings in 14 states.

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, we contacted all the members of the
Southern Governors Association -- is that correct?



           MS. GLYNN:     There's an effort to be inclusive.

        Q       There's a report today that this probe is being
broadened to include a number of white churches.  There have been a
number of burnings, but is that now part of the -- included in the
scope as well?

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, they have, it's my understanding
from the testimony that's been given by the Justice Department, they
have been also similarly investigating those events where there's
properly a federal role suggested. Now, the investigation at the
black churches is done pursuant to civil rights concerns because it's
done by the Civil Rights Division. But when warranted, if there's
federal involvement suggested in burning of white churches, the
federal government has taken appropriate action.  Certainly, the
President condemns and has condemned all acts of burnings of
religious places of worship.

        Q       But that,' s not specifically part of this - - the
probe is not being expanded to cover these other

        MR. MCCURRY:  I had not heard that, but I think you
should check both at Treasury and Justice to see if they've indicated
something to that effect.  I hadn't heard that myself.

        Q       Given the history of political abuse of FBI files
in previous White Houses, why has it taken three and a half years for
the White House now to come up with new, stricter guidelines to make
sure these kinds of alleged abuses don't occur again?

        MR. MCCURRY: Because the process used to request these
files came to the attention of the President, as he indicated to you
yesterday, and other senior White House officials just last week.

        Q       Mike, last week or perhaps the week before you
characterized William Clinger's subpoena as a search for every scrap
of paper and sort of winsomely said, even toilet paper they wanted.
Do you now think that maybe you overstepped and that this is a
legitimate thing that he was looking at?


           MR. MCCURRY:    No, I did not overstep.

           Q       You don't think this is a legitimate area of
inquiry?

        MR. MCCURRY: And if I recall, I made that comment prior
to this matter surfacing.

           Q       That's right.

        Q       But that's what I mean.        What happened later, did
it make you think --

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, that comment was clearly directed at
the endless stream of requests they've made and their unwillingness
cooperate with White House legal counsel to resolve the documents we
were willing to provide, but they apparently wanted instead to force
some type of confrontation.


        Q       Is it still the White House position that senior
officials here can't even ask Craig Livingstone about these questions
such as the one raised in that op
o
-ed yesterday in the Wall Street
Journal, because to do so would somehow compromise the other
investigation?
        MR. MCCURRY:  It's the White House view that we should
do nothing to impede the inquiry that will be underway and is
underway, by the independent counsel. The best thing we can do is to
assist the independent counsel in getting timely and accurate
information so they can complete the inquiry they have underway.
        Q       Essentially, it's a self
o
-imposed gag rule that you

        MR. MCCURRY:  It's not a gag rule, John.   We are dealing
directly with an independent counsel that is looking into these
matters and will certainly request information of the White House and
request people to be available, and we're cooperating with that
effort.
        Q       That goes back to the question asked of the
President the other day.  If you guys are letting the independent
counsel do his job, therefore, you're not talking to Livingstone or
doing anything that might look like you're competing, how can you
guys stand up there and say it's just a bureaucratic snafu? If you
don't have all the facts and haven't been able to get all the facts?
        MR. MCCURRY:   Because there is no evidence to suggest
that it is otherwise, and there is an affidavit --
        Q       Well, you can't rule out the possibility --
        MR. MCCURRY:     that has not been public that explains
what happened. And it's pretty clear from that affidavit what
happened.
        Q       Mike, that's true as far as that affidavit goes,
but that affidavit would not appear to cover, for example, the
inquiring by the White House of Barney Brasseux's file, and as far as
I can tell White House officials have offered no explanation of how
that fired Travel Office employee's file was acquired.   Can you do so
now?
        MR. MCCURRY: That is incorrect, and you will see that
issue is most likely add~essed -- we suspect it will be addressed in
the FBI report later today, because of an exchange of letters that
the White House legal counsel has had with the FBI.


           Q       Can you --
           MR. MCCURRY:  I'll do it after the FBI releases its
report       or actually the best point of contact for that would be
Fabiani.
        Q       Is it still your position that this all stems from
a Carter administration executive order calling for every hard
passholder there must be at least an FBI file summary on hand in the
White House to match that hard passholder?
        MR. MCCURRY:  I can't -- I did not personally know that
this goes back to the Carter administration, but I suspect that if
there is any historical context here, if it's addressed it will be
addressed by the FBI. That's an assumption on my part, but I don't
know for a fact that that will be in there.

           Q      Has the President seen the FBI recommendations?



        MR. MCCURRY: We have not seen it. My understanding is
that we will receive it at the same time that it's made public.

        Q       Is Mr. Livingstone still carrying out his duties as
the head of Office of Personnel Security?

         MR. MCCURRY:   Yes.

         Q       Do you expect that to be true by the end of the
day?

        MR. MCCURRY:  I know of nothing that would make it
otherwise at this point.

         Q       Does he have the President's full confidence?

        MR. MCCURRY:    I know of nothing that would render lack
of confidence.

        Q       Mike, what is the cumulative effect of the
Whitewater convictions and the FBI files on the campaign and on the
White House generally?

        MR. MCCURRY: The cumulative effect is most of the
matters represent a nuisance that are dealt with, but mostly a
political nuisance -- issues raised by the political opponents in an
attempt to do damage to him. And we have to deal with it.   It's a
fact of life and we recognize that and just keep moving forward.

        Q        New subject?

        MR. MCCURRY:    New subject.

        Q       Could you expand on what Jesse Brown meant when he
testified up on Capitol Hill that he was, "I'm not planning to live
with the President's budget, the out
o
-year projections and the
seven
o
-year plan." And, apparently, the head of NASA said the same
thing. How can the seven
o
-year budget plan be serious if agencies
aren't making " the preparations for those cuts that are contemplated?

        MR. MCCURRY:  Well, you should check with Dr. Rivlin's
staff, but she has addressed that very directly.  They clearly have
to live within the instructions that are developed by the Office of
Management and Budget, and those instructions have been clear.

        Those comments, if I understand it correctly, say that
we don't presume that the President's budget or the Republican budget
will necessarily reach final passage. But the effort to streamline
government, to cut costs, to make the changes that reflect the
President's policies as reflected in the President's budget
submissions certainly is something the White House expect Cabinet
agencies to pursue.


        Q       Well, they testified that they're not making
preparations. That was the question -- are you preparing for these
possible cuts, and the answer was, no.

        MR. MCCURRY: There's a specific response t~that that I
know is available from Dr. Rivlin. You can call Larry Hoss, I think
he's probably got that for you.

        Q       Why is it a good idea to economically penalize
foreign companies that invest in Iran?

        MR. MCCURRY: Because Iran needs to be isolated by the
international community for its reprehensible support of
international terrorism. One of this administration's principal
goals in the conduct of its foreign policy is to curb incidents of
international terrorism, and one way to do that is to bring economic
pressure on Iran and to isolate that rogue nation.  We don't believe
that those who pursue a critical dialogue with Iran have demonstrated
any evidence that that dialogue has moderated Iran's behavior.

        Q       Is that another way of saying the Europeans haven't
done enough to stop terrorism?

        MR. MCCURRY: We believe the Europeans have made very
clear that they're working as hard on this problem as we have.     They
have participated in all the discussions by the G
o
-7, by other
nations. They were certainly heavily represented at the Sharm
el
o
-Sheikh conference. We enjoy broad cooperation with most of our
European allies -- in fact, I would say with all of our European
allies -- when it comes to combatting international terrorism.

        On the specific question of whether or not economic
pressure on Iran might usefully moderate its behavior, there is a
disagreement, and it's an honest disagreement.

        Q       Is imposing secondary sanctions now an accepted
principle of the administration? We see it with Cuba, and now we see
it with Iran. Will we see it again with other countries?

        MR. MCCURRY: There's not a broad principle at stake
here. These are two cases in which we are bringing economic pressure
to bear on two reprehensible regimes -- Iran, which is a sponsor of
international terrorism; Cuba, which violates the political, civil
and human rights of its citizens.

        Q       Do you foresee any other countries that would be
also isolated in this fashion?

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, there are various places around the
world in which we have used economic measures to bring pressure to
bear, but these are two specific cases involving specific forms of
pressure.

        Q       Is the President going to speak in his radio
address tomorrow about the relaxation of the ban on liquor
advertising?



        MR. MCCURRY:   If he does, I'm sure it would be very
newsworthy.

        Q       Then, Mike, on what grounds do you ask television
stations to continue to refuse liquor ads when beer and wine
manufacturers are allowed to advertise?

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, the White House view is that the
voluntary ban that has been in place on hard liquor advertising has
been a useful one, has helped the public health of the American
people. As to whether the President will have some specific
suggestions, let's wait and see.

        Q       What's your evidence to back that up?

        MR. MCCURRY: That is a consensus view of those who have
looked at what the health effects are of alcohol abuse.

        Q       But I'm asking what your evidence is to back up
that the voluntary ban on advertising has resulted in --

        MR. MCCURRY: As I say, my understanding is that's a
consensus within those who work closely on alcohol health
o
-related
issues, that that ban has had a positive effect on public health.

        Q       Is this an issue about which the President might
pick up the phone and call his good friends in the Bronfman family,
who run the Seagram's Corporation, which is running these ads in
Texas?

        MR. MCCURRY:   I'll have to check.   I don't have an
answer to that.

        Q       Isn't that a First Amendment issue also?

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, there have been some discussions
about the constitutionality of these things.  That's why -- the curbs
on this issue arose in the case of tobacco advertising, because of
some of the suggestions that have been made on that.  It has not been
deemed unconstitutional to prohibit certain types of advertising as
they relate to health
o
-related effects and advertising directed at
certain populations -- specifically, young people.  That was an
important distinction made in some of the court's review recently of
this issue.

        Q       I believe Bronfman was at a fundraiser with the
President just in the last few days at about the time when these ads
started running. Did he mention to him the --
        MR. MCCURRY: I'd have to check. I don't know.
        Q       Yesterday it was revealed that a trader at the
Sumitomu Corporation of Japan lost about $1.8 billion in illegal
trades and that he may be prosecuted under criminal charges in the
U.S. Does the White House have any comment on that subject?
        MR. MCCURRY: Well, we're certainly aware of the
development, aware of the ramifications, but I haven't seen anything


 developed here that represents a formal response to that.
         Q        I'd like to make sure that I understand your answer
 to his questions a couple of minutes ago on the files and some other
 things. Are you including or referring to the problems with these
 background files as a political nuisance?
         MR. MCCURRY: No, although I do believe it's accurate to
 say that the President's political opponents rushed to make what now
 turns out to be erroneous charges against him with scant information.
 Now, you'll see later when the Dale -- the first suggestion by
 Chairman Clinger, among others, at the release of one document that
 went to the committee is that this represented a particular vendetta
 against Billy Dale. Well, it turns out that was just wrong.
         Q        Do you know that it's wrong?
         MR. MCCURRY: And it's usual that they shot before they
 looked. Well, the facts would seem -- certainly seem to suggest that
 that's an erroneous interpretation.
         Q        Why do they suggest that?
         Q        It's been reported that Livingstone and Marceca
 worked together on two prior campaigns, even though this guy Marceca
 was an Army CID official.    Is the White House satisfied that this was
 not an unauthorized intelligence gathering operation by two of them
 in getting these records?
         MR. MCCURRY: As the President indicated to you
 yesterday, he is not aware of, and we are not aware of, any evidence
 to suggest that.
         Q        Is the President getting updates on the
 consultations going on in Beijing on intellectual property rights?
And is it his final decision to make as to whether to impose
 sanctions on China on Monday for IPR?
         MR. MCCURRY: Well, as Ambassador Barshefsky made clear
 in leaving for Beijing, that decision has been made and, yes, the
 President did make it. The sanctions will take effect on the date
 scheduled, lacking any improvement in our ability to enforce the
 international -- or intellectual property rights agreement that we
 have reached. The President will, if necessary, get some updates,
 but our anticipation at this point is that there will be lengthy
 talks throughout the weekend.
         Q        Mike, what is the President's reaction to end of
 the Freemen standoff?
         MR. MCCURRY: He actually delivered one publicly last
 night and it was very effective.
         Q        Just back on China for a second. Have you seen
.anything to suggest that there is any significant change in China's
position that there would be anything --
         MR. MCCURRY: Well, there have been -- as you know,
 there have been some enforcement actions by the People's Republic in
Guangdong that have been aimed at apparently some of our concerns
 about pirating of intellectual property. One of the things that
Ambassador Barshefsky will be able to do is to understand the nature
 and scope of that enforcement activity.
         Q        But you've seen that before, have you not?
         MR. MCCURRY: Have before and whether or not that is
 sufficient in the eyes of our trade negotiators will be a subject
 that they will look at carefully this weekend.
         Q        Just to follow up on Gene's question one more time.
As far as you know, the detailing of Marceca to this project update
 to the white House was purely accidental, coincidental?
         MR. MCCURRY: Well, I don't believe it's accidental or
coincidental. We detail people, you get people from various agencies
who work on detail here.    I'm not aware, myself, of the full


circumstances of his detailing or how the request was made for his
help on that process.


        Q       Can you confirm that about Livingstone and Marceca
worked together on the earlier campaign and on the inauguration?

          MR. MCCURRY:  I don't know that to be true as a fact
myself.    I don't have any reason to suspect that's not true.

        Q       If nobody has talked to -- nobody at the White
House has talked to these two individuals, how can you say that
there's no evidence to support that they may have been freelancing on
this thing?

        MR. MCCURRY: There's nothing that's been made available
to the White House that
                        suggests that that's a correct interpretation.

        Q       Well, there is this article from Gary Aldridge in
the Wall Street Journal in which he makes some serious allegations.

        MR. MCCURRY: He makes -- using innuendo, raises
questions to which he doesn't appear to have any factual information
to make a case.

        Q       That's the same exact thing you folks are -- you're
saying there is nothing there, but you don't have any evidence to
show there is nothing there. You haven't been able to investigate.

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, we have not been able to get
specific answers to specific questions that you want to have
answered, but since the independent counsel is going to want to have
those questions answered, we can answer that. We can establish the
general understanding of the situation what the circumstances were by
which files were requested, and I ,believe it's accurate to say that
the affidavit that Mr. Marceca made available does provide you a
general understanding of what the situation is.

        Q       Mike, not to belabor this point, but the only
evidence that it was an innocent thing is the two people who stand to
-- if there was a violation of law to have committed it, say they
didn't break the law.  You don't have anything other than that. Are
you sure that this wasn't a bad operation?

        MR. MCCURRY: There is absolutely no evidence that they
did anything with those files that would constitute improper use.   In
fact, there are factual logs that indicate that those files remained
where they were supposed to be in the vault throughout that period,
right? So that would -- you're trying to suggest, is there any
evidence -- if you're aware of any evidence that suggests there was
any improper use, you should come forward and present that to the
independent counsel.

        Q       -- that it would be very easy to go in and look at
those records -- the suggestion has been made that it would be very
easy to go and look at the records without signing them out -- to
walk into the room, to have a look, maybe even to copy them. We have
no assurances, and the White House is in the position of saying we
can't investigate this because it would look like we were trying to


cover up.

        MR. MCCURRY: We are in the position of saying it is
being investigated by the independent counsel, who has more than
proven his ability to run credible, exhaustive investigations, and
that we will cooperate with that investigation. That's exactly what
we should do.

        Now, you all have a responsibility, too, which is that
you have to decide as you report what is the factual basis upon which
people make allegations. And got to make -- each of you have got
your own independent journalistic standards that you use. But people
have made a lot of wild charges. And the President's political
opponents in particular make a lot of wild charges.

        Q       This one should be outside the purview of the
independent counsel. Did the First Lady have a role in getting Craig
Livingstone hired? You could simply ask her that.

        MR. MCCURRY:   I don't know the answer.   I'll see if
that's a get table answer.

        Q       Mike, as head of the Personnel Security Office.
does Craig Livingstone have access to those files without signing the
logs?

        MR. MCCURRY:  I do not know the answer to that.  I can
see -- that's among the kinds of questions that eventually you would
want to have an answer to.

        Q       Mike, it's understandable the White House might not
want to be conducting an inquiry which would make it the locus of
more information and stories about this. but the independent counsel
is looking into the possibility of criminal behavior; the FBI is
looking into what it did and mayor may not find out all of what went
on here and who looked at the files once they were over here. How
will the White House ever know if these files were properly handled
and the information that was in them was properly handled short of an
indictment?

        MR. MCCURRY: Well. because you can -- at the point that
the Independent Counsel concludes whatever inquiry is under way and
produced whatever report or summary analysis of the matters that
they've looked at, we will either have suggestions that there are
procedures that need to be examined, or an ability at that point to
really look more closely at what our own procedures are here.

        And, in fact, indeed. later today you're going to see
demonstrated very vividly that when something comes to our attention
that suggests that we need to tighten up procedures, we can move very
swiftly to put those procedures in place.

        Q       And you're suggesting here that that has been done?
Would you outline what you have done there? Could you explain that
to us?

        MR. MCCURRY:  I'm saying that we've got some substantial
reason to believe. based on what has been reported since last week,
that we need to tighten up procedures for handling requests for
background information.  Now, you'll see later today that we've been


able to do that and do that effectively and it didn't require an
indictment of somebody in order for that to happen.

        Q       But, Mike, isn't it manifestly clear that there are
a lot of things about what the White House did in this that would
almost necessarily slip between the cracks of the inquiries that are
going on that a President, trying to find out what did happen here,
would want to know?

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, that's an accusation you're making
about Mr. Starr. You should ask Mr. Starr whether he's going to let
things fall between the cracks.

         Q       Mr. Starr's investigation is of criminal matters
only.

        MR. MCCURRY:   Oh?


        Q      Clearly so. There could be a hotbed of unethical
behavior that wouldn't be actuable by him --

        MR. MCCURRY:   In order to --

        Q        -- how would you know?

        MR. MCCURRY:  If I understand the way most investigators
do investigations, you have to establish the facts in order to reach
conclusions.  So, presumably, they're going to establish certain
facts that would let them that kind of decision. And that factual
record would then be of enormous use to us if we needed to make
procedural changes.

        Q        Not if it was induced in front of a grand jury, it
wouldn't.

        Q       You're telling us to wait for the report of the
independent counsel?

        MR. MCCURRY:  I'm saying that there is a independent
counsel investigation now that's going to be underway. That is a
very serious matter.  You know it's a serious matter. And you know
if we say we're going to cooperate with that, we have a
responsibility to produce information and people who can satisfy the
concerns they're going to raise. And I think it's hard to make a
case that that's not a proper way to go forward here.

         Q       Mike, all these questions seems to point to, if
once the independent counsel's investigation is done and the Clinger
committee investigation is done, these questions all seem to point to
a question for you is:   If those investigations produce information
that leads to other questions that remain, in the eyes of the White
House, unanswered about procedures here or internal administrative
matters, would the White House take additional steps of its own
either to make inquiries, revise procedures, change things, fire
people, .demote people, dismiss people, reward people, whatever
based on administrative concerns, not criminal ones, not legal ones?

        MR. MCCURRY: What I just said is, establishing the
facts allow you then to really have some understanding of whether you


need to go in and make those types of administrative management
reviews to change procedures. But it is a far more serious matter,
and everybody here knows it, if there are allegations -- and there
allegations -- of potential illegal conduct that those things then
need to pursued, and they are being pursued by an independent
counsel. And you establish facts and record and understand what the
situation is. And if it turns out, as we strongly suspect, that
there is no evidence at all of illegality, then you look at the
questions underlying the management practices and are there things
that need to be done to improve personnel or resources or management
practices.

        Q       Well, there was a demonstrative lack of
sensitivity, too, about contacts with the FBI that the White House,
itself, acknowledged in the report on the Travel Office. And six
months or so after this, there seems again to have been a lack of
sensitivity about contacts that even if, short of criminality, just
from the standpoint of embarrassing the President, would seem to be
something that people would be held accountable for.

        MR. MCCURRY: Gene, I think you need to wait and see
what the FBI report says about that. Now, all know that the
procedure

         Q       You seem to know.   Doyou?


         MR. MCCURRY: We don't have the report, but that's a
question that the Director's already indicated that they would look
-- I mean the general parameters of something that they're going to
look at.

        Now the form that -- you're saying it shows a lack of
sensitivity to take a fax form, send it over to the FBI and
requisition an access -- or an FBI background file.  To my knowledge,
the exact same form used by Bernie Nussbaum that became public in
connection with the Billy Dale case is the exact same form used with
"C. Boyden Gray" typed right up at the top.  So it's apparently a
practice that was used -- or the form, in any event used to
requisition those background files is one that predates this
administration.

        Q       I don't think he was saying it was an insensitive
form, Mike. I think what he's suggesting is that when wholesale
requests are made for files of people who haven't been in the -- not
even in the previous administration, but were in the one before that
who are relatively famous people, for example, Jim Brady -- that
there was some lack of sensitivity to who these people are, whether
any of this procedure made any sense --

        MR. MCCURRY:   Oh, yes.

          Q     -- and that that would be something that the White
House would want to make sure it knew everything about in order to
c·orrect.

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, and correct it, indeed, we will.
Call it inexcusable; indeed, we have. And express our regret for it;
we have in the words of the President himself.


        Q       Are you saying that the President's absolutely now
prohibited from inquiring of staffers what happened?

        MR. MCCURRY:  No, I'm saying again, for I think the
third or fourth time, there is an independent counsel investigation
underway. We are not going to do anything that might impede that
investigation.

        Q        Would that impede just to find out what the hell
went wrong?

        MR. MCCURRY:  Finding that out is exactly what the
independent counsel is going to do. To find that out, we would
certainly have to at least duplicate or cross paths with the
independent counsel. And I don't think there's anyone here that
doubts that the independent counsel is going to be able to properly
investigate these matters. Any takers for that?

        Q       While waiting for the independent counsel, wouldn't
it make sense to take some step, for example, by moving Mr.
Livingstone to another slot? I mean, he's the man who was in charge
of the office where all these questions are being raised. Why keep
him in place while you're waiting to know how big a mess it was?

        MR. MCCURRY:  Well, because that would presume that
there was something egregiously wrong about his conduct, and I'm not
aware, at this point, that there was.

        Q       Why would that presume that? It happens all the
time when questions are raised about the conduct of people in
official positions that they are relieved of those responsibilities
while an inquiry goes forward.

        MR. MCCURRY: Well, that is a presumption that there
needs to be a personnel change there, and I'm not aware that the
White House has made that presumption.

        Q       If you're the President, doesn't your gut tell you
that it would be a good thing to give Craig Livingstone a jingle and
find out what's going on here?

         MR. MCCURRY:  I think that that's been asked and
answered now several times -- that the independent counsel is
presumably going to have him as one of the people that they want to
talk to.   I don't know that for a fact, but that would be a
presumption I'd make.
         Q       Speaker Gingrich had some extremely caustic things
to say this morning, saying that the FBI files are evidence of a
dangerous presidency, that the President misleads the public daily on
Medicare cuts and so forth.   Two questions:  What's the White House
response, and do you see this as sort of a return to the old Gingrich
now that Senator Dole has left the legislature?

        MR. MCCURRY: He's -- the Speaker         is part of a
coordinated strategy of personal attack that represents the only
thing that the Republicans are now, apparently, offering to the
American people in the course of this campaign.  It's relentless.
It's day after day.  It is their brand of politics because they lack
of substantive appeal that they can make to the American people.


        And as to some of the specifics -- the other day I heard
Senator Dole and I hear Speaker Gingrich regularly say that the
President is responsible for the biggest tax increase in history.
They know that's not true, and they know there is not a single
economist or single leading economic publication that would verify
that claim, and they say that over and over again. And if you call
them on it, call them up and say, is that true. See what they say.
        Q       Well, Mike, you're talking about brands of
political tactics and who has got the moral high ground here. Since
your briefings are only carried on delay on C
o
-Span and not live,
would you object if Republican staffers came and held a cell phone up
-- in your briefing, so that it could be transmitted in real time?
         MR. MCCURRY:  I assume they probably do.   You know. We
were up in Pennsylvania not long ago, and a Republican Congressman
came in, wandered into our little filing center and walked around.   I
mean, that's -- I assume that happens.
         Q       Does the President support this Republican
legislation that would require the President's signature on any FBI
file request?
         MR. MCCURRY: Why don't you wait and see Mr. Quinn's
memo later this afternoon?
         Q       Does it address that specifically?
         MR. MCCURRY: Well, the procedures that will be in place
for requesting background files are very proper, very
straightforward, and have got a high degree of supervision on it.
But I suggest it might be a little bit much to have the President
sign these forms, but there needs to be an accountability process in
place, and you'll see from Mr. Quinn's memo that there is one that is
very effectively designed.
         Q       Are there White House people up on the Hill today
talking about the Kennedy
o
 -Kassebaum bill and a possible compromise?
         MR. MCCURRY: I don't know if they're on the Hill, but
 there is an ongoing dialogue with the Hill on Kennedy
o
-Kassebaum bill.
And we remain very hopeful that we will see final passage of that
legislation very soon.   It would be something good for Trent Lott in
his first days as Majority Leader to be down here for a signing
ceremony.
        Q        Mike, do officials here in the White House already
know what the FBI report is going to say, either generally or
specifically?
        MR. MCCURRY: No. We have not been --
        Q        Jack Quinn doesn't know?
        MR. MCCURRY: We have not been given a copy of it,
and --
        Q        Don't know what's in it?
        MR. MCCURRY: Doesn't have a -- we only --        what
we know it will address we know largely from the comments that
Director Freeh has made publicly.

          Q      Mike, you've been, if I may, very careful not to
 say whether you've been given any indication the FBI has pointed a
 finger at some specific person in the White House. As a matter of
 fact, from what you've said, it would seem that you've at least been
 assured that they are not pointing a finger at anyone and accusing


      them of wrongdoing.

              MR. MCCURRY: We have not been assured, and I don't know
      whether they do or not.

              Q       Mike, are there any plans in the way of reaction to
      the Russian election on Sunday?

              MR. MCCURRY: Not on Sunday. Our best understanding is
      that the election results will take some time to assemble before the
      Central Election Commission verifies them and announces them
      publicly. So we suspect it will be sometime early next week before
      we have a reaction. Now, we might have some -- some administration
      officials are going to be out talking on various programs over the
      weekend, and they might be able to comment about our understanding of
      the process or something. But beyond that, we don't expect any
      formal result until we get some type of formal declaration from the
      Central Election Commission.

              Q       As long as you're dealing with logistics here,
      logistical questions, have you all locked up the itinerary now for
      the trip to Lyon?

              MR. MCCURRY: We are very close to -- the President's
      got a scheduling meeting related to his trip to Europe on Monday.  I
      think at that point I'll be able to do it, but everything I've heard
      here at the White House indicates that there's nothing beyond the
      planned stops that you're already aware of -- going to Lyon and then
      onward to Paris at the end of the trip. And we don't anticipate
      adding to that, but the President will have a final review of his
      schedule Monday.

             Q       Does the First Family know where it will be
     vacationing this summer?

             MR. MCCURRY: No, we have not -- I asked the President
     that question the other day, and he was going to visit with the other
     members of the First Family on the subject.
     o
     TOP EVEN
      - \p -

      BOTTOM ALL

             Q       Is that likely to occur, if you know, during the
     Republican convention, or do you know if he's going to be in down
     time then?

             MR. MCCURRY:  I don't know, Brit.  I think a lot of --
     some people have suggested that's a good time; other people have
     suggested no, that he might want to be out and be active during that
     period. So I don't know the answer at this point.
             Q       This may be a little early, but the President is
     going to Camp David this weekend. Do you know if he is also going
     over July 4th, the long weekend?
             MR. MCCURRY:  I do not know.
             Q       Mike, the targeted capital gains break for housing
     that is mentioned in the Wall Street Journal today and elsewhere
     has the President signed off on it or has a formal proposal come to
     him to approve that?


         MR. MCCURRY: There are people interested in that idea,
 but I don't know that that's got any formal sign
 o
 -off, and from my
 understanding it's a long ways away from it. But it's an idea that
 has been looked at, but again, no idea comes forward with the
 President's stamp of approval unless it's highly targeted, unless it
 will help grow the economy, unless it's fully paid for.
         Q       Along that line, are you considering increasing the
 exemption for capital gains -- $25,000?
         MR. MCCURRY: That's a new one to me.   I hadn't heard
 that one, but it would be the same answer: Nothing comes forward
 unless it helps grow the economy, unless it's consistent with the
 President's view that tax relief ought to be highly targeted so it
 goes to the middle income, that it fits into the contours of a
 balanced budget plan by being fully paid for.
         Q       Do the week ahead?
         MR. MCCURRY: The week ahead, we've got -- can we just
 put it out? We'll put it out shortly.
         Okay.
         THE PRESS: Thank you.
 END                          1:04 P.M. EDT

 #235
 o
 -06/14
 ==================   END ATTACHMENT   1   ==================




                                                    o


