 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

 CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( WALDMAN M    (WHO)

 CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUN-1996 17:57:22.72

 SUBJECT: preliminary circulation - comments to TERRY EDMONDS asap

 TO: Marilyn Yager                             YAGER M      (WHO)
 READ:20-JUN-1996 10:43:42.70

 TO: Jennifer L. Klein                         KLEIN J      (OPD)
 READ:17-JUN-1996 19:00:07.15

 TO: Betsy Myers                               MYERS B      (WHO)
 READ:17-JUN-1996 18:01:24.11

 TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E      (WHO)
 READ:17-JUN-1996 18:55:09.27

 TO: Michelle Crisci                           CRISCI M      (WHO)
 READ:17-JUN-1996 18:18:32.65

 TO: Rahm Emanuel                              EMANUEL R      (WHO)
 READ: NOT READ

 TO: Victoria L. Radd                          RADD V      (WHO)
 READ:17-JUN-1996 17:59:32.44

 TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED B      (WHO)
 READ:18-JUN-1996 09:33:46.13

 TEXT:
 PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN
                -     -
 PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
 AMERICAN NURSES ASSOCIATION
 WASHINGTON, DC
 JUNE 18, 1996

          [Acknowledgments: Ginna Trotter Betts for introduction
 she is leaving after four years as national president of ANA.
 She was a leading voice for health care reform.]

         I am honored to join you in this 100th anniversary
 celebration. Today, I ask all Americans to join me in saluting
 you for a century of service, leadership and advocacy for quality
 health care. It is generally recognized that, for all its
 shortcomings, America has the finest health care system in the
 world -- the best doctors, the best hospitals, the best
 technology. But none of this would matter without you, America's
 nurses -- the heart and soul of our nation's health care system.'
         I know the hard work and sacrifice that goes into being a
 good nurse. As most of you know, for more than 30 years, my
 mother worked as a nurse anesthetist.  I want to thank you again
 for honoring her memory in 1994 with a special award in her name.
 I have vivid memories of her getting up in the middle of the
 night to be at work by 7 a.m. She was serious about the life and
 death nature of her work. She was the consummate professional.
 But she understood that healing is about more than medicine and
 technology. It is also about caring. So she always added a dose


 of compassion -- a kind word, a gentle touch, a smile -- to put
 her patients at ease and to reassure them that everything would
 be alright.    That is what good nursing is all about. That is
 what all of you do everyday.
         What I learned from my mother and what America is learning
 from you are the basic values that make us strong. We know that
 the mission of this country must be to offer every American an
 opportunity and demand that every American take responsibility --
 that is the basic bargain of our democracy. And that is how we
 will create an America that is rooted in strong communities and
 strong families.
         Today, I want to talk with you about how we can work
 together to build strong families and to guarantee that every
 child in this country has not only quality health care but also
 the support from responsible parents -- mothers and fathers
 that they need to grow and make the most of their lives.
          For the past three
 o
 -and
 o
 -a
 o
 -half years, we have worked hard to
 give people opportunity, by giving them the tools they need to
 build strong families.

         Working with you, we fought for the Family and Medical Leave
 Act to say that if you take a little time off to take care of a
 sick child you will not lose your job.  I signed the Family Leave
 Law -- and it was one of my proudest moments. And we did it over
 the filibuster led by Senator Dole.
         Working with you, we fought to preserve Medicaid. For three
 decades, we have guaranteed that poor children, pregnant women,
 people with disabilities and older Americans will not be denied
 health care simply because they can't afford it. That is the
 right thing to do. The Republicans in Congress are actually
 insisting that we repeal this guarantee. I have said that this
 would amount to child neglect for a whole generation. That is
 why I vetoed this plan last year when the Republican Congress
 sent it to me. And let me assure you, if they send it to me
 again, I will veto it again.

         Working with you, we have fought to balance the budget in a
 way that protects Medicare and honors our duty to our parents.
 The Republican proposal for Medicare would undermine the hiring
 and training of nurses, and would close down hospital wings in
 cities and rural communities across America. We must reform
 Medicare; my plan will secure the Trust Fund for a decade. But
 we do not need to devastate Medicare to balance the budget.
         And we are working with you to expand access to health care
 for 43 million Americans by fighting for the Kassebaum
 o
 -Kennedy
 bill. No worker in this country should have to worry that he or
 she will lose their health care if they lose their job or change
 jobs. And no one should be denied care simply because they have
 a pre
 o
 -existing condition. When you go to a patient's bedside you
 ask, "Where does it hurt? How can I help?" You don't ask: "Is


 this a preexisting condition?" I challenge Congress to send me
 this legislation now.
         We are doing all this to give our people opportunity. But we
 must demand responsibility in turn.  You and I know that, where
 children are concerned, the most important building block of
 strong families is not government.  It is not nurses and doctors.
 It is parents -- mothers and fathers who love their children and
 take active responsibility for their care.
         Parental responsibility has been the driving principle
 behind our efforts to end welfare as we know it.  I want reform
 because our present system perpetuates a cycle of dependency and
 irresponsible behavior. Nobody wants welfare reform more than
 the people who are trapped in the current system.  I am working
 for a welfare system that promotes work, strengthens families,
 and encourages independence. That is why I have proposed time
 limits, work requirements, and child care and health care to help

 people move from welfare to work.  That is real welfare reform.
         I have worked with Congress to make these important changes.
 But so far, the Congress has sent me bills that have been tough
 on kids and soft on work.  I have not let these plans become law.
 But while Congress has not done its job, we are acting.
         We have worked to cut red tape for 40 states to approve 63
 welfare reform experiments at the local level. Just today, we
 approved a waiver for a welfare reform effort in New Hampshire,
 which combines strong work requirements with incentives to move
 people from welfare to work. For 3 out of 4 welfare recipients,
 the rules have changed.                         .
         I am proud that today, 1.3 million fewer people are on
 welfare than when I took office. The food stamp rolls are down,
 the poverty rate is down, teen pregnancy rates are down, while
 work and training among welfare recipients are up and child
 support collections have reached a record high.
         But we must do more to insist on parental responsibility.
 Our welfare reform proposals are about giving people opportunity
 and demanding responsibility in return. And I reject the idea
 that only the mother has to act responsibly.   Every child has
 both a mother and a father. And for too long, we have let men
 off the hook. We must insist that they do their part to support
 the children they helped bring into this world.
         How many times have you seen a frightened young girl give
 birth to a baby alone in the hospital, with the father of the
 child no where to be found? How many times has the hospital and
 the government been left to pay the costs, not only for the
 delivery but for the continuing care of that ·child? That is
 wrong.  It takes two people to bring a child into this world, and
 it takes two people to raise that child.

         That is why we have made it our mission to make sure that
 parents take responsibility by supporting their children. Last
 year, I signed an executive order that cracked down on federal
 employees who owe child support. And 3 years ago I signed into
 law requiring states to establish hospital
 o
 -based programs to
 determine the father of a newborn child. Based on our first
 reports, more than 200,000 fathers have been identified through
 these voluntary hospital paternity identification programs last
 year. That's 200,000 children whose fathers can't just up and
 walk away without a trace. And child support collections and


 paternity establishment are both up 40% since 1992.
         But we have to do more. That is why today, I took executive
 action to strengthen child support enforcement and promote
 parental responsibility.


         First, we are putting in place a new national program to
 help states track parents who owe child support across state
 lines. Today, too many men have figured out that the way to
 weasel out of paying child support is to move from job to job and
 state to state. This must stop. Currently, twenty
 o
 -five states
 require that when a person is hired for a job, a check is made to
 see if he owes child support. Under this new program, we will
 check that information against our national database to catch
 deadbeats who have crossed state lines.
         Second,  today I directed the Department of Health and Human
 Services to require all mothers who apply for welfare to provide
 the name of the father and other identifying information at the
 time they apply for assistance, before they can get welfare
 benefits. Exceptions will be made to protect women from domestic
 violence. And whenever a mother applies for welfare, the
 government must begin to take legal paternity action against the
 father, so that he will do his part to help support his children.
         Our system ought to say to mothers:  help us identify and
 locate the father, or you cannot get welfare. And it should say
 to fathers -- we are not going to let you walk away from your
 children and stick the taxpayers with the tab. The government did
 not bring that child into the world -- you did.

         If we do all these things -- if we offer opportunity by
 providing health care and family leave .       if we demand
 responsibility of fathers and mothers who bring children into
 this world -- then we can restore our social fabric and protect
 the American family.   If we have strong families, then the job of
 every doctor and every nurse is easier.   If parents take
 responsibility for pre
 o
 -natal care, if mothers and fathers make
 sure that their newborns get pediatric care and immunizations,
 then our children will be healthier and our nation will be
 stronger.
         You are on the front lines, every day, caring for our
 children and our parents. Our nation owes it to you to give you
 all the help you need and deserve.  For all that you do, for all
 the professionalism and compassion you pour into every hour of
 every day, we thank you.

         Thank you and God bless you all.


