     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

     CREATOR: Elyse H. Fitter ( FITTER_E )   (OMB)

     CREATION DATE/TIME:19-JUN-1996 09:29:06.00

     SUBJECT: Environmental Crime Initiative -·please comment by 9:30 6/30

     TO: Karren E. Skelton                           SKELTO K ) Autoforward to: Remote Address
     READ: NOT READ

     TO: Elgie Holstein                              HOLSTEIN E        (OPD)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 13:22:40.29

     TO: Robert G. Damus                             DAMUS R      (OMB)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 09:36:14.91

     TO: Diane Regas                                 REGAS D      (OPD)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 09:50:34.12

     TO: Robert S. Fairweather                       FAIRWEATHE R         (OMB)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 09:53:06.74

     TO: Ron Cogswell                                COGSWELL R )      (OMB)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 09:40:13.65

     TO: Carol R. Dennis                             DENNIS C )    (OMB)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 09:35:04.54

     TO: David J. Haun                               HAUN D    (OMB)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 09:30:30.43

     TO: Kenneth L. Schwartz                         SCHWARTZ K      (OMB)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 09:57:31.13

     TO: Bradley M. Campbell                         CAMPBELL BM )      (CEQ)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 12:53:38.16

     TO: T J Glauthier                               GLAUTHIER T )      (OMB)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 22:06:08.58

     TO: Alecia Ward                                 WARD A)   (OMB)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 09:56:30.70

     TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E      (WHO)
     READ:19-JUN-1996 09:32:01.42

     TEXT:
     PRINTER FONT 10 - POINT- COURIER
     TOP ALL
     D R AFT
     PRINTER FONT 14_POINT_ROMAN_ITALIC
     FIGHTING ENVIRONMENTAL CRIME:
     THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION AGENDA



     PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
     Criminal prosecution under our environmental laws is reserved for
     the most serious threats to public health and the environment,


and depends heavily on close partnership between the federal
government and state and local environmental, public health, and
law enforcement agencies. Unfortunately, due to gaps in the
current environmental laws, and the severely limited resources of
state and local law enforcement agencies, environmental crimes
still may go undetected or inadequately punished.
The Clinton Administration is committed to strengthening the hand
of law enforcement when it comes to environmental crime, and has
a three
o
-point plan for making sure those who commit environmental
crimes are brought to justice.
?       1. We will strengthen our national partnership with State
and Local Law Enforcement. The Clinton Administration is
committed to meeting the needs of state and local law
enforcement personnel working to detect or prosecute
environmental crimes.
?       2.  We will protect communities' right
o
-to
o
-know and make sure
prosecutors can do their job.  The Clinton Administration
has and will oppose bills and budgets that tie the hands of
federal prosecutors, immunize environmental violations from
prosecution, take the environmental cop off the beat, or
jeopardize the public's right to know about violations that
may affect their health and environment.
?       3. We will seek to strengthen current law against
environmental crime. The Clinton Administration is
challenging Congress to work with us to close gaps in
current laws against environmental crimes, so that the most
egregious violations will be prosecuted and properly
punished. Administrator Carol Browner and Attorney General
Janet Reno stand ready to work with the Congress to enact
legislation that meets these goals
o
TOP ALL
D R AFT
PRINTER FONT 14 - POINT- ROMAN- ITALIC
FIGHTING ENVIRONMENTAL CRIME:
THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION AGENDA


A Three
o
-Point Plan
PRINTER FONT 14 - POINT- ROMAN

PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN ITALIC
1. The Administration will strengthen its national partnership
with State and Local Law Enforcement.
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN
               -     -
The Clinton Administration is committed to meeting the needs of
state and.local law enforcement personnel working to detect or
prosecute environmental crimes. As part of this effort:
?       The Clinton Administration is committed to enhancing its
partnership with state and local prosecutors by identifying
new resources to support and train state and local law
enforcement officials.


 ?       EPA Administrator Carol Browner is accelerating the hiring
 of new federal criminal investigators, to assist both
 federal and state environmental law enforcers.
 ?       Attorney General Reno is strengthening the role of
 environmental law enforcement coordinating committees, which
 bring together state and local prosecutors to more
 effectively combat environmental crime.

 PRINTER FONT 12_POINT_ROMAN_ITALIC
 2. The Administration will protect communities' right
 o
 -to
 o
 -know,
 and make sure prosecutors can do their job.

 PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
 The Clinton Administration has steadfastly opposed efforts by the
 Dole
 o
 -Gingrich leadership in Congress to pass bills that would tie
 the hands of federal prosecutors, immunize environmental
 violations from prosecution, take the environmental cop off the
 beat, or jeopardize the public's right to know about violations
 that may affect their health and environment. For example:
 ?       H.R. 3307, the "Regulatory Fair Warning Act," is now moving
 through a House Judiciary subcommittee.  This bill would let
 environmental criminals be the judge of whether their
 conduct violates the law, seriously weaken standards for
 compliance, and devastate enforcement of laws protecting
 human health and the environment.
 ?       "Audit Immunity" bills now pending in the Senate and House
 (S. 582 and H.R. 1047) would provide a blanket immunity to
 environmental criminals who disclose their violations.
 As the Massachusetts Attorney General stated, the provisions
 in these bills are "akin to Congress passing a law allowing

 anyone who confesses a crime to escape prosecution, so long
 as they apologize and promise to make amends." By contrast,
 the balanced audit policy EPA developed under the Clinton
 Administration has been endorsed by both prosecutors and
 industry.

 ?       The Dole
 o
 -Gingrich budget proposals this year would have cut
 EPA enforcement by 25 percent, and included legislative
 riders that would have directly cut off EPA's ability to
 make information available to communities under the
 right
 o
 -to
 o
 -know laws. Because President Clinton and
 Congressional Democrats stood firm in the budget debate,
 these cuts were avoided and Administrator Browner prevailed
 in expanding communities' right to know -- nearly doubling
 the number of chemicals that industries must report.
   ?     Senator Dole sponsored a regulatory "reform" bill that would
 have weakened enforcement and standards under every single



      meat safety, clean water, toxic waste, or other
      environmental law on the books (S. 343).  (See "Business
      Leaves the Lobby and Sits at Congress' Table," New York
      Times, March 31, 1995). After the bill was defeated three
      times on the floor of the Senate, Senator Dole attached a
      version of the bill to the "must pass" debt
      o
      -ceiling bill,
      forcing President Clinton to veto the entire bill.
      PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN- ITALIC
      3. The Administration is challenging Congress to strengthen
      current law against environmental crime.
      PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
      The Clinton Administration is challengirig Congress to join in an
      effort to close the gaps in current laws against environmental
      crimes, so that the most egregious violations will be fully
      prosecuted and properly punished. Administrator Carol Browner
      and Attorney General Janet Reno stand ready to work with the
      Congress to enact legislation that meets the following goals:
      ?       There should be greater deterrence of the most serious
      environmental crimes.
              Penalties should be enhanced where environmental crimes
      endanger the safety of police and other law enforcement
      personnel.
              Attempted environmental crimes must be outlawed, so
      that prosecutors can undertake "sting" operations and
      capture criminals before environmental damage is done.
              Current statutes of limitations must be modified so
      that diligent prosecutors can reach those who conceal
      their environmental crimes.,
      ?       Current laws should be clarified to make sure that the

      polluter pays the full costs of environmental crimes --
      including the costs of restoring the environment for
      communities victimized by environmental crime, and the costs
      to state and local officials who support joint prosecutions
      of federal crimes. These penalties should be added to the
      fine convicted criminals have to pay.

      ?       New authorization should be provided for training and
      support of state and local law enforcement officials.


