RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Alice E. Shuffield ( SHUFFIELD_A)     (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-JUN-1996 20:33:46.27

SUBJECT: SAP on the Senate Campaign Finance Reform Act

TO: Martha Foley                              FOLEY M )    (WHO)
READ:25-JUN-1996 12:27:17.02

TO: John C. Angell                            ANGELL J    ) (WHO)
READ:25-JUN-1996 10:17:32.64

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E )    (WHO)
READ:25-JUN-1996 09:48:53.59

TO: James Weber                               WEBER J      (WHO)
READ:25-JUN-1996 10:59:26.77

TO: Michael Waldman                           WALDMAN M ) (WHO)
READ: NOT READ

CC: Charles S. Konigsberg                     KONIGSBERG C )       (OMB)
READ:24-JUN-1996 20:34:04.03

CC: James J. Jukes                            JUKESJ       (OMB)
READ:24-JUN-1996 20:34:44.82

CC: Jill M. Blickstein                        BLICKSTEIN J    )    (OMB)
READ:NOT READ

CC: Christopher F. Walker                     WALKER C      (WHO)
READ:24-JUN-1996 21:38:22.12

CC: Lisa Kountoupes                           KOUNTOUPES L )       (OMB)
READ:25-JUN-1996 18:56:01.87

TEXT:
A draft SAP on the S. 1219, Senate Campaign Finance Reform Act follows.  We hope
to get it to the Hill as soon as possible tomorrow morning.
As mentioned in the first paragraph, we plan to send the President's 6/24 letter
to the Senate Leadership up with the SAP. Also, if the Justice letter is ready,
we will refer to it in the SAP's last paragraph (see below).
I'll wait to hear from you in the morning (5
o
-4790).   Thanks!

Martha, John, Elena, and Michael -- I'll fax to you the President's letter in
case you do not already have a copy.

June 25, 1996              (Senate)
S. 1219 - Senate Campaign Finance Reform Act of 1996
(McCain (R) Arizona and 4 cosponsors)

The Administration strongly supports Senate passage of S. 1219,
as amended by the Senate on June 20th, for the reasons explained
in the attached letter from the President to the Majority Leader.
This bipartisan legislation includes many proposals that have
been endorsed by the President since 1992.  It will limit



    campaign spending, provide free and discounted broadcast time to
    candidates for Federal office, curb the influence of political
    action committees and lobbyists, and put an end to the ?soft
    money? system.   S. 1219 will open the political process and shift
    power from special interests to ordinary citizens.
    [This sentence is contingent on receiving the DOJ letter by
    Tuesday at lOam]   The Department of Justice will be suggesting
    how certain provisions of S. 1219 could be strengthened against
    potential constitutional challenge.
    * * * * *
    o
     (Do Not Distribute Outside Executive Office of the President)
    This Statement of Administration Policy (SAP) was developed by
    the Legislative Reference Division (Johnson) in coordination with
    the Departments of Justice (Silas) and the Treasury (Dorsey), the
    Federal Election Commission (Surina), the Office of Government
    Ethics (Ley), White House Counsel (Kagan), Domestic Policy
    Council (Weinstein), White House Political Affairs (Hancox),
    White House Legislative Affairs (Weber), VAPD (Long, McCormick),
    HRD (VanWie), BRCD (Fairhall), and BASD (Stigile).
    Commerce, FCC, HTF, and GC did not respond to our request for
    views on this SAP.
    Elena Kagan of the White House Counsel?s office has asked that
    she be checked with before this SAP is sent to the Senate, so
    that she can verify that Jack Quinn has personally approved it.
    The United States Postal Service (USPS) objects to the SAP and to
    the bill because of the requirement (described below) for postal
    subsidies to qualified candidates. USPS has previously testified
    in opposition to S. 1219 and has characterized the subsidy
    requirement as an ?unfunded mandate? on its customers that could
    cost ?well over $50 million per election.?
    Status of Senate Floor Action on S. 1219
    On June 20th, the Senate began consideration of S. 1219 and, by
    unanimous consent, adopted for consideration an amendment in the
    nature of a substitute (described below). A cloture vote on
    S. 1219 (as amended by the substitute) is scheduled for June 25th
    at 2:15 p.m.
    Administration Position to Date
    According to WH/LA (Weber), the President wrote to Senators
    McCain and Feingold on June 24th in support of S. 1219.
    The President referred favorably to S. 1219 in his February 17th
    radio address to the Nation. He stated that, as a candidate in
    1992, he supported spending limits, curbing the influence of PACs
    and lobbyists, and an end to the soft money system. He called on
    Congress to pass a bipartisan campaign finance reform bill.
    Constitutional Issues
    The Department of Justice expects to transmit to Congress a
    letter describing how S. 1219 could be strengthened against
    constitutional challenge.   LRD has not yet receiyed the letter
    for clearance.
    Background
    The Revenue Act of 1971 initiated public funding of presidential
    general elections. Funding was later extended to presidential
    primaries and nominating conventions by the Federal Election
    Campaign Act (FECA) of 1971. The FECA and subsequent amendments
    imposed limits on contributions, required uniform disclosure of
    campaign receipts and expenditures, and established the Federal
    Election Commission (FEC) as the central administrative and


enforcement agency.
S. 1219 addresses congressional campaign finance.  Its proponents
are concerned about the increasing costs of congressional
campaigns, the influence of special interest groups, and the
fundraising advantages of incumbents. The principal focus of S.
1219 is on Senate campaigns.  (In recent years, Senate campaign
finance bills have addressed Senate campaigns, House bills have
addressed House campaigns, and the two are joined in conference.)

o
Major Provisions of S. 1219 as Amended on June 20th
        voluntary Spending Limits
S. 1219 would establish voluntary Senate election spending
limits. Candidates who comply with the limits and meet other
requirements would be eligible for the broadcast and postal
benefits described below.
Election expenditures by a Senate candidate or the candidate?s
authorized committee could not exceed:
?       for general elections, an amount based on State voting
o
-age
population, ranging from $950,000 to $5,500,000;
?       for primary elections, the lesser of 67 percent of the
general election expenditure limit or $2,750,000;
?       for runoff elections, 20 percent of the general election
expenditure limit; and
?       for election expenditures from the candidate?s personal
funds (including certain loans), $250,000 or 10 percent of
the general election expenditure limit.
A candidate who complies with the spending limits and runs
against a candidate who does not comply is allowed to: (1)
increase his or her spending limits according to a formula in the
bill; and (2) receive contributions from individuals of up to
$2,000 per individual (instead of the $1,000 allowed under
current law).
The bill also provides for inflation adjustments to the spending
limits.
        Benefits
Free Broadcast Time. Under S. 1219, a candidate who has
qualified for the general election and adheres to the spending
limits above is entitled to receive 30 minutes of free broadcast
time from stations within or adjacent to his or her State. Where
there are more than two candidates, the bill provides for a total
of 60 minutes of free broadcast time to be allocated among the
candidates according to a formula.
Unless the candidate chooses otherwise, the time made available
for broadcasting must be between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any
weekday. The length of each individual broadcast must be between
30 seconds and 5 minutes. A candidate may not request more than
15 minutes of free·time from anyone broadcasting station.


Reduced Broadcast Rates.  Under S. 1219, eligible candidates are
entitled to receive reduced television broadcast rates during the
30
o
-day period prior to the primary election and the 60
o
-day period
prior to a general or special election.   The maximum rate would


be half of the station?s lowest charge for an equal amount of
time, for the same period on the same date.
Postal Subsidies. Eligible candidates are entitled to send two
pieces of mail to each voting age resident at the lowest third
class, non
o
-profit bulk rate.
        Political Action committees (PACs)
The bill prohibits candidates from accepting contributions from
PACs and limits contributors to individuals and political
committees.  Political committees are defined as: (1) the
principal campaign committee of a candidate; (2) any national,
state, or district committee of a political party; and (3) some
local committees of a political party. The bill provides that if
this provision is held unconstitutional; PAC contributions would
be limited to the maximum individual contribution, $1,000. In
addition, contributions from PACs to. a candidate could not exceed
20 percent of the candidate?s total election spending limit.    (In
1976, the Supreme Court ruled in Buckley vs. Valeo that certain
expenditure limits placed substantial restrictions on the First
Amendment rights of candidates, citizens, and associations.)
        ?Soft Money?
The term ?soft money? refers to money that may influence the
outcome of Federal elections, but that is raised and spent
outside the scope of Federal election laws.   (Examples include
corporate- or union
o
-sponsored voter registration drives that
identify a Federal candidate.)
Under S. 1219, each time individuals, unions, corporations, or
partnerships raise ?soft money? in excess of $10,000, they must
file statements including the purpose of the disbursement to
either the Secretary of the Senate or the Clerk of the House of
Representatives, and the Secretary of State of the relevant
State.
The bill generally prohibits national party committees from
seeking, accepting, or spending soft money.  In addition, during
Federal election years, funds spent by State and local committees
for any activity which could affect the outcome of a Federal
election are subject to FECA limitations and reporting
requirements.  In general, both national and State committees of
a political party must report all receipts and disbursements to

the FEC.

        ?Bundling?
The term ?bundling? refers to the collection by an intermediary
of individual checks for a candidate. Under S. 1219,
contributions to a candidate made by an intermediary would
generally be treated as a direct contribution from both the
original contributor and the intermediary for purposes of
contribution limits.   In addition, the intermediary must report
to the FEC the original source and the intended recipient of the
contribution.
o
           In
o
-State Contributions
To comply with the spending limits of S. 1219, a candidate or a
candidate?s authorized committee must receive not less than 60


    percent of the total dollar amount of contributions from
    individuals legally residing in the candidate?s State.   (For
    small States, the candidate could opt for a requirement that 60
    percent of the contributors be residents of their home State.)
    In specified circumstances, candidates would have to report to
    the FEC their in
    o
    -State contributions and the names and addresses
    of persons who contribute at least $50 in a year.
             Other Provisions
    Other provisions of S. 1219 would:
    ?        Require certain ?independent expenditures? (i.e., funds
    spent on direct communication with voters to advocate the
    election or defeat of a candidate without the cooperation or
    participation of a candidate) to be reported to the FEC.
    The bill would also increase the spending limits of
    candidates who had more than $10,000 in independent
    expenditures spent against them (or for their opponents) .
    ?        Restrict the use of campaign contributions to legitimate and
    verifiable campaign expenses and prohibit the use of these
    contributions for personal purposes.
    ?       Require paid campaign advertising in all types of media to
    include a verbal, written, and/or visual (photographic)
    identification of the candidate. In addition, broadcast or
    cablecast advertisements must include a verbal statement
    naming the person or group responsible for the
    advertisement.
    ?        Establish contribution limits for ?State party grassroots
    funds? that support party
    o
    -building activities that are not
    candidate
    o
    -specific.
    ?       Authorize the FEC to: (1) prescribe regulations for computer
    and facsimile reporting; and (2) conduct random
    post
    o
    -election audits to ensure voluntary compliance with the
    FECA.
    ?       Limit congressional use of the franking privilege during the
    year in which an incumbent is up for re
    o
    -election. The bill
    states the ?intent of Congress? that any savings realized
    from this limitation be designated to pay for the postal
    subsidies required by the bill.

    ?       Allow court decisions on the constitutionality of provisions
    of S. 1219 to be appealed directly to the Supreme Court.
    Pay
    o
    -As
    o
    -You
    o
    -Go Scoring
    According to BASD (Stigile), S. 1219 is subject to the
    pay
    o


-as
o
-you
o
-go requirements of the Omnibus Budget and
Reconciliation Act of 1990 because of provisions providing for
fines for FECA violations. An OMB pay
o
-as
o
-you
o
-go estimate has not
been completed but similar provisions are generally scored at
zero or a negligible amount. VAPD (McCormick) advises that the
postal subsidy provision· would score at zero because USPS could
recoup the subsidies by increasing postage rates. No CBO
estimate is available.
Legislative Reference Division
6/24/96 - 5:00 p.m.


