RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeff P. Dailey ( DAILEY_J)      (WHO)

CREATION   DATE/TIME:23-JUL~1996   11:01:30.16

SUBJECT: product liability form letter

TO: Elena Kagan                                  KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:23-JUL-1996 14:01:22.97

TEXT:
Elena--
The President has received a good deal of mail over the past couple of months
from the general public relating to product liability reform. About 75% of the
letters deal with the legislation that the President vetoed and 25% deal with
product liability reform in general. As you may know, for the most part my
office does not usually see letters from the general public; rather, we respond
to letters from elected officials and other vips.
The office that opens the President's letters catagorizes mail from the general
public as it comes in, but, for instance, the letters that have been written
regarding the product liability legislation are clumped together with the
general letters on this topic. Therefore, in responding to all of these
letters, we need to craft a single letter that deals with product liability as a
whole, but that also addresses the legislation that Potus vetoed.  I've written
a draft, and I'm wondering if you can give me some guidance on what would be
appropriate for Presidential response.
You've been very helpful over the past few months, and I really appreciate your
help.
Here's my draft:
Thank you very much for sharing your thoughts regarding product
liability. I appreciate having your perspective on this issue.
My Administration believes our civil justice system can and
should be improved.  In this effort, we must ensure that reform
is respectful of the state's important role in the federal
system, as well as fair to all parties.
Earlier this year, I vetoed the product liability bill because it
went against this belief. Not only did it inappropriately
intrude on state authority, it also seriously impaired the
ability of consumers to gain fair and adequate compensation for
their injuries.  In particular, I opposed completely eliminating
joint liability for non-economic damages, placing arbitrary caps
on punitive damages, and restricting a person's right to sue
after fifteen years without regard to the useful life of the
product in question.
I continue to believe that Congress can pass limited, but
balanced, product liability reform, without resorting to measures
which would harm the consumer. As I continue working with
Congress to achieve this end, I appreciate having your
perspective and encourage you to stay involved in the future.
                         ###
thanks,
Jeff


