RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (ALL-IN-l MAIL)

CREATOR: Keith J. Fontenot ( FONTENOT_K)       (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-AUG-1996 16:32:11.89

SUBJECT: Note on Wisconsin

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E          (WHO)
READ: 2-AUG-1996 16:48:16.23

TEXT:

==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 2-AUG-1996 15:51:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:B

ATT CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna

ATT SUBJECT: See lOth bullet on W-2; fyi from White House Bulletin

ATT TO: Keith J. Fontenot                              FONTENOT K

ATT TO: Lester D. Cash                                 CASH L

TEXT:
        IN THE WHITE HOUSE AND AROUND TOWN:
o       House passes minimum wage bill. Today, the House passed by a vote
        of 354-72 a bill that will raise the minimum wage from $4.25 per
        hour to $4.75 effective Oct. 1 and, on Sept. 1, 1997, to $5.15.   The
        legislation also includes $21.4 billion in tax breaks through 2006
        for businesses, homemakers, students and couples adopting children.
o       Clinton claims unemployment figures show strong economy. The
        unemployment rate rose today, but President Clinton saw good news in
        the addition of new jobs, saying today:   "It was reported this
        morning that our economy produced nearly 200,000 more new jobs in
        July, further good news for the American people that our economy is
        growing and creating good jobs. Thanks to the hard work of
        employees and businesses here in our country, we now have the
        economic equivalent of our Dream Team:   strong growth, millions of
        jobs; low inflation, low unemployment, and growing incomes. That's
        the lineup we want for America."
o       Clinton contrasts Democrats' "progressive, mainstream achievements"
        with GOP "extremism." President Clinton hosted an end-of-session
        gathering at the White House today for Democratic congressional
        leaders. Said Clinton:    "On this last day before Congress goes
        home, I wanted to invite the Democratic leadership down to the White
        House to thank them for their hard work and eventual successes on
        behalf of the working families of this country. The Congress is
        going to send me two measures that this caucus has worked hard on
        for a long time -- the minimum wage bill, which also has some
        important help for small businesses, incentives to invest more in
        the business and to make it easier to take out retirement plans;
        and, of course, the Kennedy-Kassebaum health bill, which will help
        millions of Americans have access to health care." The Democrats
        interrupted Clinton with applause when he paid tribute to Senator
        Ted Kennedy, calling him "absolutely superb in the debates in the
        Senate" on both the minimum wage and health care issues.   "These
        issues have been very key to our party, our caucus and to me and my


     Administration for a long time now. And I'm very, very happy about
     it. We're in a lot better shape than we were a year ago."    Clinton
     also cited "two major environmental legislative victories - - the
     Safe Drinking Water Act and one on pesticides, which I think are
     very, very important." Clinton continued: "And I'm very pleased
     that we've been able to move away from some of the extremism of the
     last two years into a position where we can get some things done for
     the American people.   So I think the American people have a lot to
     be proud of. I think the progressive, mainstream achievements of
     this caucus are things that they can go home and be proud of in
     August. I have to say that this has been, on balance, a very good
     week for the American people."
o    Clinton says he'll continue to fight for more anti-terror
     legislation. At this morning's meeting with congressional
     Democrats, President Clinton said he was "deeply disappointed that
     the antiterrorism package, which had been agreed to by our caucus
     and our leadership and the leadership of the Republican Party,
     apparently is not going to pass because the same folks who opposed
     the crime bill in '94 and the Brady Bill are not going to permit it
     to pass in the House. And I am disappointed about that. I'm
     disappointed that we can't pass anything on the taggants yet, the
     explosives, because that's a big problem in domestic terrorist
     incidents. But I think we have to keep working on it because this
     problem will not go away." Asked by a reporter if Congress's
     failure to pass an anti-terrorism bill would become a campaign
     issue, Clinton said: "Well, I believe that this ought to pass, and,
     you know, I have done my best not to make this a partisan issue,
     this terrorism issue. This is a national security issue just as
     much as devising a defense in the Cold War was a national security
     issue -- that we tried to develop a bipartisan position on dealing
     with terrorism, dealing with the proliferation of weapons, dealing
     with the consequences for freedom-loving people everywhere of all
     the racial and ethnic and religious and tribal and political hatred
     in the world today. These are the national security issues of the
     21st century. And so I can tell you that I think it is legitimate
     for those of us who believe more should be done to continue to press
     for more to be done. But I am going to do my best to try to fashion
     a bipartisan majority in America for this."
o    Clinton says he's happy for Lindsey. President Clinton was asked
     this morning to comment on yesterday's not-guilty verdict ir.l the
     trial of Arkansas bankers Herby Branscum and Robert Hill.   Clinton
     responded briefly:   "I'm very pleased, close to home here, that
     Bruce Lindsey was completely exonerated, as I felt certain he would
     be. And I'm happy for the people involved. And I have nothing to
     add to what has been coming out of the stories in Little Rock."
o    Clinton meets with apparel industry about working conditions.
     Today, following press reports of poor working conditions for some
     apparel industry workers, President Clinton met with the industry
     leaders to discuss the issue. Said Clinton after his meet ir.lg , "I've
     just had a very productive meeting with representatives of some of
     our nation's largest apparel and footwear companies, as well as
     representatives of labor, consumer, human rights and religious
     groups. They all accepted my invitation to meet here today to deal
     with an issue that is rightly on the minds of millions of American
     consumers. Just a year ago today, the discovery of more that 70
     people working in virtual slavery behind barbed wire in a garment
     factory in El Monte, California, awakened Americans to the fact that
     some of the clothes and shoes they buy are manufactured by people
     who work under deplorable conditions. The well-documented episode
     involving Kathie Lee Gifford also awakened many people to this


     problem. We all are outraged by these awful revelations, but as
     leaders, we have a responsibility to do something about them. When
     Kathie Lee learned that some of the garments with her name on them
     were being produced under terrible working conditions, she didn't
     bury her head in the sand.   Instead, she reacted quickly,
     decisively, and responsively. That's what all the rest of us must
     do as well."
     Added Clinton:   "Our nation has always stood for human dignity
     and the fundamental rights of working people. We believe everyone
     should work, but no one should have to put their lives or health in
     jeopardy to put food on the table for their families.   That's why
     I'm pleased to announce that the companies gathered here today have
     agreed to begin working together to put an end to this terrible
     problem. They have agreed to do two things. First, they will take
     additional steps to ensure that the products they make and sell are
     manufactured under decent and humane working conditions. Second,
     they will develop options to inform consumers that the products they
     buy are not produced under those exploitative conditions. They have
     agreed to report back to me within a maximum of six months about
     their progress."
o    GOP crows over its legislative accomplishments. Today,
     congressional Republicans held a joint press conference to trumpet
     their recent successes.   "We're all part of the most significant
     Congress in a generation," said Rep. John Boehner. Added Sen. Trent
     Lott:  "I have to tell you that the last two weeks has probably been
     my most exciting time in all of my years in Congress over the past
     23 years.  I have seen legislative teamwork, hard work, like I have
     never seen before, and it has produced results.        And when you
     look at what has happened over the past 18 months, there has been a
     burst of action and production in the Congress that we haven't seen
     in 30 years. We have produced, and we're going to continue to do
     that." According to Lott:    "We've seen Congress go from gridlock to
     Olympic gold." Added Lott:    "The only problem we've had is a lot of
     our good work has been subject to vacillation by the President and,
     in far too many instances, against the best interests of the
     American people," it was "vetoed" by Clinton.
o    US reaches agreements with Japan on computer chips and insurance.
     The US and Japan have reached agreement during their negotiations in
     Vancouver on American access to Japan's computer chip and insurance
     markets, Clinton Administration officials say this morning. Details
     of the deal were expected later today from Acting Trade
     Representative Charlene Barshefsky. Both sides are calling the
     agreement a victory. Barshefsky told reporters the deal "is
     responsive to the views of the Clinton Administration and to the
     views of the government of Japan." Japanese Trade Minister Shunpei
     Tsukahara said, "The contents are almost exactly the same as Japan's
     version of the plan."
o    Clinton to press Croatian president on elections.   President Clinton
     was to meet with Croatian President Franjo Tudjman today.   In an
     effort to move the peace p'rocess along, Clinton will reportedly
     press Tudjman to influence ethnic Croats in Mostar to accept the
     results of the June 30 elections that gave Muslims in that city a
     slight majority on the city council.
o    Delay in sending welfare bill to Clinton could put off Wisconsin
     decision. A decision on whether the Clinton Administration will
     continue its review of Wisconsin's experimental welfare plan could
     be delayed by a possible Republican plan to wait on sending new
     welfare legislation to President Clinton for his signature.
     Wisconsin is seeking waiver of Federal law in order to proceed
     with its plan known as W-2, and sources close to the issue are


     divided on whether Congress' new legislation -- which Clinton has
     said he will sign into law -- would make the W-2 application moot.
     According to presidential adviser Bruce Reed:   "When the bill
     becomes law, Wisconsin should be able to do the welfare reform plan
     that they submitted to us." However, a line in the new welfare
     reform bill's conference report apparently says the "conferees urge
     the Secretary [of Health and Human Resources] to approve the
     Wisconsin comprehensive welfare reform waiver request" in spite of
     the passage of new Federal law.
     Although the new bill has the backing of both chambers of
     Congress, Republicans have reportedly been considering a plan to
     hold the welfare bill temporarily and send it to Clinton for his
     signature as the Republican National Convention winds up. The HHS
     official said today:   "Typically, they would enroll the bill and we
     would have legislative language by next Tuesday or wednesday. If
      [Republicans] choose instead this delaying tactic of waiting in
     order to make the President sign the bill just before his
     convention, if they go down that road, it would take considerably
     longer and we would just have to wait for the language."
     Added the official:   "We haven't seen the actual legislative
     language yet, and there are several provisions in the bill and in
     the accompanying report having to do with waivers." Saying the new
     bill "gives flexibility to design your own programs, which is
     essentially block grants," the official said:   "What Wisconsin needs
     to do is look at the waivers they already have, because they have
     three. They need to figure out if they want to keep them and what
     the interaction is between those waivers and the Federal law. And
     then they have to figure out, on the waiver submission that's
     pending for W-2, whether they even need it anymore, or whether they
     just might want part of it." Added the official:    "Most states,
     including Wisconsin, will not even need waivers anymore, but we at
     HHS have not prejudged that."
     Meanwhile, Wisconsin Gov. Tommy Thompson is continuing his push
     for permission to start the W-2 program. Even before the House and
     Senate voted on the welfare conference report, Thompson issued a
     statement on the bill, saying it "is a positive step forward and it
     will allow us to pursue the work portion of W-2, but it does not go
     as far as W-2 in terms of providing health care to the working
     poor." Added Thompson:    "I hope that President Clinton will not use
     this legislation as an excuse to walk away from W-2 and our proposal
     to help the working poor by allowing them to participate in our
     health care system, thus insuring that their children will have
     adequate medical care."
o    Key issues still unresolved on securities, but conferees remain
     optimistic. Despite a report to the contrary, a congressional
     source reports this morning that no deal has yet been reached on the
     Securities and Exchange Commission fees issue -- the major stumbling
     block preventing a quick wrapup of the securities regulation reform
     conference. At issue is a House proposal that would phase the SEC
     into a straight appropriation, terminating the fee collections that
     currently pay for its operation. The House included the proposal to
     go to a straight appropriation because the SEC annually collects
     about $400 million in fees in excess of its operating needs, which
     it turns over to the Treasury for deficit reduction. The
     Administration has objected to the House proposal because, while the
     SEC would remain level funded under the House measure, the $400
     million contributed annually to deficit reduction by the SEC is not
     accounted for in the House bill. Consequently, the Administration
     and congressional Democrats are concerned that the Commerce-Justice-
     State appropriation would have to take an additional $400 million


     hit. The C-J-S appropriation bill proved to be one of the most
     hotly contested budget debates last year between the Administration
     and the Republican Congress.
     A report tOday suggesting a compromise has been reached between
     the House negotiators and OMB, wherein OMB will accept an offer made
     by House Commerce Committee Chairman Thomas Bliley to cut fees by $2
     billion over ten years, is "completely inaccurate," according to a
     congressional source. The source contended, "OMB is not ready to
     accept Bliley's compromise offer," adding that contrary to the
     report, "OMB officials did not meet with any Senate conferees at
     all. The [Senate] Appropriations Commerce subcommittee markup
     doesn't affect the talks in any way." Reportedly, the Senate has
     included in its FY 97 C-J-S markup the Bliley SEC fees compromise
     proposal. An OMB official also said there is no deal and that OMB
     continues to negotiate "in good faith" on the issue.
     The congressional source suggested that the Bliley compromise
     is meant to spread the budget pain out over several years,
     potentially meaning smaller C-J-S discretionary cuts in the next few
     years, which might be more politically palatable. However, the
     source said "while you can make the numbers do anything,"
     nevertheless, there remains a "significant philosophical gulf"
     between the Administration's position and House negotiators.   In
     addition, according to the source, it's not clear that smaller
     reductions in SEC fee collection would satisfy some House members
     who want to end the practice of collecting excess fees as quickly as
     possible. The source emphasized, however, that the mere existence
     of the compromise proposal is a "positive sign," noting the House
     negotiators are putting in "a lot of work into trying to resolve the
     fee issue" in an effort to conclude a successful conference.
     Nonetheless, according to the congressional source, other
     important issues which need to be resolved have yet to be discussed,
     kept in abeyance by the activity on the fees issue.   But the source
     emphasized that conferees remain optimistic about reaching an
     agreement and producing a conference report for congressional floor
     action in September.
o    VP speculation increases. With Bob Dole expected to announce his
     running mate selection soon, speculation is growing among GOP
     insiders as to who Dole will choose. The current conventional
     wisdom among political reporters and some Republicans is that former
     South Carolina Governor Carroll Campbell is at the top of the list.
     Former Education Secretary and Drug Czar Bill Bennett appears to be
     rising into the "serious candidate" status, although his name is
     mostly floated by Republicans outside the Dole camp. Among
     insiders, Senator John McCain is seen as a very real possibility,
     with a few actually believing Dole has already made the selection.
o    Lamm reportedly to name Zschau as running mate Monday. Several
     California papers are reporting this morning that Reform Party
     candidate Dick Lamm will name former San Jose Congressman Ed Zschau
     as his running-mate.  The San Francisco Chronicle and the San Jose
     Mercury News are citing unnamed sources close to the Lamm campaign
     in reporting that the announcement will be made at the Tech Museum
     of Innovation in San Jose on Monday. A Lamm campaign source told
     the Bulletin this morning:   "I can confirm the story's true, but I
     can't say anything else.   I can tell you that there's a major
     announcement Monday in San Jose, California."   Zschau is a former
     two-term congressman and the 1986 GOP Senate nominee in a close race
     against Democratic Senator Alan Cranston.   Zschau currently teaches
     at Harvard Business School.
     Meanwhile, Lamm is currently campaigning from Denver,
     conducting tv and radio interviews. He is scheduled to appear at
f.




      the Kansas Reform Party convention this weekend, and will reportedly
      travel to Florida in addition to California next week.
o     Clinton campaign accepts proposal for free-TV time, with conditions.
      Clinton-Gore '96 campaign manager Peter Knight, in a statement,
      outlined the conditions by which the campaign will participate with
      the proposal of the Free TV for Straight Talk Coalition for free air
      time. Knight stated:    "As the President stated in his radio address
      earlier this year, providing television time for the presidential
      candidates to directly address the American people on issues of
      importance to the country is an important and exciting opportunity.
      The Clinton/Gore campaign is fully committed to supporting these
      efforts." Knight then outlined criteria for the Clinton campaign's
      participation:   "First, there should be no adverse consequences
      whatsoever to the presidential and vice presidential debates that
      may be agreed upon. We are firmly committed to those debates and do
      not wish to do anything to obstruct them. The format and structure
      of the debates have become institutionalized after refinements that
      were made over numerous campaign cycles and provide an invaluable
      way to inform the citizens of the country about the candidates and
      their positions.
      "Next, we believe that the public interest would be best served
      if these broadcasts were conducted live, with no preconditions to
      the locations of the broadcasts. Our acceptance of the proposal is
      provisional on these conditions." Knight added that the Clinton
      campaign "has also accepted the formal offers set forth by NBC and
      CNN in their letters of late June . . . . The campaign is also in the
      process of reviewing numerous other offers of free candidate time
      that have come from other media organizations."
o     Former White House Travel Office employee to make flight
      arrangements for Dole campaign.   Gary Wright, who was among the
      seven fired White House Travel Office employees, has been hired by
      Republican Presidential Travel, a Republican air-charter outfit that
      leases Bob Dole his campaign plane. Wright will help make flight
      arrangements, and is expected to report to work after the Republican
      National Convention.
================== END ATTACHMENT 1 ==================


