RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne Johnson ( JOHNSON_L)   (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-AUG-1996 10:33:55.50

SUBJECT: TEAM ACT

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ:22-AUG-1996 10:45:01.88

CC:James A. Dorskind                           DORSKIND J      (WHO)
READ:22-AUG-1996 11:52:36.39

TEX:r:
Hi Elena,
Could you approve/edit the following TEAM Act language.  This response is going
to John Pepper, CEO of Proctor and Gamble (he opposes the President's veto) and
is for the President's signature.  It is language you have already cleared,
except for the second paragraph which has been rearranged somewhat. We would
like to have this ready for the President by tomorrow. Thanks for your help
with this!

 Thank you for your letter regarding my veto of the Teamwork for
 Employees and Managers Act.   I appreciate knowing your thoughts on
 this legislation, and I have shared your letter with my staff.
 I understand your concerns, but I am confident that we have done
 the right thing for both labor and management. This bill would
 have allowed employers to establish company unions where no
 union currently exists and permit company-dominated unions where
 employees are in the process of determining whether to be
 represented by a union.   In doing so, it would have abolished
 protections that ensure independent and democratic representation
 in the workplace.
 As you know, current law provides for a wide variety of cooperative
 workplace efforts.   It permits employers to work with employees in
 quality circles to improve quality, efficiency, and productivity.
 It also allows employers to delegate significant managerial
 responsibilities to employee work teams, sponsor brainstorming
 sessions, and solicit employee suggestions and criticisms. Today,
 30,000 workplaces across the country have employee involvement
 plans. According to one recent survey, 96 percent of large
 employers already have established such programs.
 Please be assured that my Administration supports workplace
 flexibility and high-performance workplace practices that promote
 cooperative labor-management relations.   I firmly believe that
 in order for America to remain globally competitive into the next
 century, employers and employees must work in partnership with each
 other to encourage innovation, improve productivity, and enhance
 efficiency and performance in the workplace.
 As we continue our efforts to encourage true workplace cooperation,
 I look forward to your continued involvement.


