     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

     CREATOR: Bradley M. Campbell ( CAMPBELL BM        (CEQ)

     CREATION DATE/TIME:21-AUG-1996 13:14:48.88

     SUBJECT: FYI: Enviro/POTUS Memo

     TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E ) (WHO)
     READ:2l-AUG-1996 13:15:45.79

     TO: David Fein                                  FEIN D ) (WHO)
     READ:22-AUG-1996 09:39:57.36

     TEXT:

     ==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:20-AUG-1996 22:39:00.00

     ATT BODY PART TYPE:B

     ATT CREATOR: Elgie Holstein

     ATT SUBJECT: Final environment section.

     ATT TO: Diane Regas                                 REGAS D )

     ATT TO: Wesley P. Warren                            WARREN W

     ATT TO: Bradley M. Campbell                         CAMPBELL BM

     ATT TO: Brian J. Johnson                            JOHNSON BJ

     ATT TO: Ron Cogswell                                COGSWELL R

     ATT TO: Robert S. Fairweather                       FAIRWEATHE R

     ATT TO: Mark J. Mazur                               MAZUR M )

     ATT TO: Paul R. Dimond                              DIMOND P )

     ATT TO: Paul J. Weinstein, Jr                       WEINSTEIN P

     TEXT:
     Ignore any earlier version you may have received from me.
     ================== END ATTACHMENT 1 ==================
     ==================== ATTACHMENT 2 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:20-AUG-1996 22:39:00.00

     ATT BODYPART TYPE:p

     ATT CREATOR: Elgie Holstein

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert OA$SHARB2540:ZWLGWGDTV.FGN to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF5750438A320000010A000100000000FBFF050032000B010000FFFFOE00000042000000060010
     00000050000000FFFF5AOOOOOOA6000000FFFFOB00000000010000436F75726965722031306370
                                                                        .      Hex-Dump Conversion
                              ENVIRONMENTAL INITIATIVES


OVERVIEW: Under the theme of protecting communities from toxic chemicals, these are
several initiatives building on the Administration's environmental record:

I.Increase Superfund cleanups at the nation's worst toxic waste sites, with the goal of cleaning up
        two-thirds of the sites on the current priority list. (cost: $1.5 - $2 billion)

2. A new set of proposals to cleanup and re-develop "Brownfields" to complement the
      Administration's previously announced tax incentive. (cost: ($400 million)

3.Safe drinking water for all Americans' communities through implementation of the recently
       enacted Safe Drinking Water Act reauthorization, and protection of drinking water sources.
       (cost: $800 million)

4.Expanding the community right-to-know program to collect and make available via computer
      local information about toxic threats in air and water. (cost: $355 million)

5.An environmental crimes legislative proposal that would increase penalties for the worst
      environmental offenders and strengthen the federal government's partnership with state and
      local law enforcement. (cost: zero)

TOTAL COST:

Total4-Year Cost for this agency-proposed agenda: $3.05 - 3.55 billion

The package summarized above is set out in greater detail in the following pages. To construct an
environmental package at lower cost, two alternative packages may be considered:

Alternative Package A: (cost: $2.9 billion)

 ·Low end of Superfund range would be selected. (revised cost: $1.5 billion)

 ·Brownfields same as above. (cost: $400 million)

 ·The scope of the right-to-know initiative would be limited to fewer communities. (revised cost:
       $250 million)

 ·The drinking water budget would be trimmed. (revised cost: $750 million)

 ·Environmental crimes, same as above. (cost: none)

Alternative Package B: (cost: $1.5 billion)

 ·Erase the Superfund Backlog: provide sufficient funding to permit EPA to clear out its current
                                                                           Hex-Dump ConVGision
        backlog of 70 Superfund sites which are ready to be cleaned up, but for which funds have
        been unavailable. (New sites would continue to be added, however.) We would also
        expand the Reagan executive order to give more environmental agencies (in addition to
        EPA) authority to order cleanups. This proposal would end the waiting for communities
      . with Superfund sites at which all preliminary assessments and design work has been
        compieted but actual cleanup has been stalled because of a lack of funds. (cost: $500
        million)

 ·Brownfields: Increase the EPA grant program to local governments for brownfields site
      assessment and cleanup as discussed in item II, but at a lower level. (cost: $245 million)

 ·Safer Drinking Water Implementation as described in item Ill, below, but at a lower level and
        without source water protection. (cost $400 million)

 ·Community Right-to-Know: As described below in item IV. (cost: $355 million)

 ·The Environmental Crimes legislative proposal described item V.

Note: Both CEQ and EPA believe that the resources in this altemative are too few, and too thinly
spread among proposals, to support a presidential initiative on toxics, specifically, that will be
either credible or well-received among major constituencies. There are other difficulties as well:
the proposal to "clear the Superfund backlog" highlights the fact that we have created a backlog by
inadequate budget requests; the drinking water request is likely to be derided by any constituency
informed about the magnitude of the need.

I.     ACCELERATED SUPERFUND CLEANUPS (cost: $1.5 - $2 billion)

OVERVIEW: There are currently 1,387 Superfund toxic waste sites. Some 362 cleanups have
been completed, and at current levels of funding, a total of 650 sites will be cleaned up by the year
2000. This proposal would increase the total number of cleanups by the year 2000 to some 900
sites, allowing us to say two-thirds of the current sites will be cleaned up and the pace of additional
cleanups doubled.

The proposal:

·Accelerate the Pace Of Cleanup. Set an ambitious new goal for Superfund: doubling the pace of
       cleanup so that two-thirds of the existing Superfund sites are cleaned up by the year 2000.

·Issue an executive order to provide agencies with new authority to make polluters clean up toxic
        waste sites they created. By executive order, give Interior, USDA,and NOAA new
        authority to make polluters clean up toxic pollution, which will boost site cleanups and
        clean water protection. (These agencies already must oversee cleanup at many sites that are
        not on EPA's priority list, but lack full authority. This would modify the Reagan executive
        order delegating Superfund authority.)
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
Potential Negatives

The fight with Congress over reauthorization has generally been very posItIve for the
Administration in terms of our position that the largest polluters must pay their fair share.
However, the congressional leadership has sought to suggest that we take our position just to be
friendly to the trial lawyers as they say we have sought to do in other areas.

We have based this initiative on our estimates of the time and money typically involved in cleaning
up a Superfund site. Despite our best efforts at sampling and other work to determine the extent of
contamination at a Superfund site, we do sometimes find levels or types of contamination that take
longer to remediate than originally anticipated. Such unanticipated circumstances -- or other
unexpected delays (severe weather, labor problems, etc.) -- could keep us from reaching the goal set
out in this initiative. We do believe that clean up will be completed or substantially completed on
the additional sites covered by the initiative by 2000.
As with other aspects of our "polluter pays" message, the executive order expanding Superfund
cleanup authority may generate criticism from those companies who are liable at particular sites.
These are primarily mining sites managed by Interior, USDA, and NOAA that mining companies
have contaminated and abandoned.


II.  CLEANUP AND REDEVELOPMENT OF BROWNFIELDS (cost: $400 million)
Numbers reflect combined impacts of a new EPA initiative and the President's proposed
Brownfields tax incentive.

OVERVIEW: This initiative would clean" up and redevelop up to 30,000 contaminated
brownfield sites in 300 communities. Brownfields sites are contaminated, abandoned, properties.
The contamination is not serious enough for EPA to list the site on its ranking of the worst sites
requiring cleanup, but serious enough that banks generally will not lend money for redevelopment
because of their fear of potential liability for the contamination. Thus the site stays idle and
remains a blight on our cities and communities. GAO estimates that there are some 450,000
brownfield sites in the Untied States. Of that number, EPA and Treasury estimate that some
130,00 would be eligible for the brownfields tax credit -- a fair estimate of the number of sites that
are good candidates for redevelopment. This program would, therefore, help clean up as much as
25% of the sites that are candidates for redevelopment. This proposal will result in improved
quality of life for 15 million Americans living within 5 miles of at least one brownfield site. It
would also create new jobs in cleanup and redevelopment work, increase the local tax base; spur
private-sector investment; and discourage urban sprawl by enhancing preservation of "greenfields."
 The proposal includes:

·Enactment of the Administration's Brownjields tax incentive, announced in the State of the
     Union and later introduced in the House and Senate, to accelerate brownfields cleanup ($2
     billion cost already budgeted).

·$340 million EPA brownjields grants program; grants to cities for site assessment (up to
      $200,000 each) and cleanup (up to $500,000 each).
                                                                            Hex-Dump Convc;si0n
·$40 million EPA state voluntary cleanup program support: provides technical support and
     needed expertise for states offering cleanup guidance to industry.

·$20 million EPA Worker Training Program to train citizens living in brownfield communities in
      cleanup technologies to create opportunity for employment at these sites.

Potential Negatives

This proposal would only provide a marginal increase in sites (13,000, not 30,000) cleaned up.
The proposal "double counts" the number of clean-ups that will result from the Administration's
announced $2 billion tax incentive (17,000 sites).


III. SAFER WATER FOR ALL AMERICAN COMMUNITIES. (Cost: $800 million over 4
years in addition to funding already included in our budget. EPA, NOAA, Interior, USDA.

OVERVIEW: This proposal reflects the recently signed Safe Drinking Water Act's expansion of
EPA's drinking water program. The proposal incorporates a series of steps to stop toxic pollution
from entering our drinking water sources and other streams imd rivers, while providing new
resources to state and local governments fighting toxic pollution. The proposal makes use of
existing authority to make polluters clean up toxies that threaten our lands and waters. Legislative
proposals for reauthorization of the Clean Water Act would advance these principles and strengthen
protection against toxic pollution, especially from polluted runoff.

·Making Polluters Clean Up More Toxic Threats to Lands and Waters. (no cost) Replace the
     Reagan Administration Executive Order that limits agency authority to compel polluters to
     clean up toxic waste sites that threaten our lands and waters with a new Executive Order that
     expands the authority of Interior, NOAA, and USDA to compel polluters to clean up.

·Protection for Drinking Water Sources. ($400 million) Congress has not yet provided full
      funding for the Safe Drinking Water bill, which you signed earlier this month and which
      contains proposals to strengthen the ability ofEPA and state and local governments to protect
      drinking water supplies. This proposal would challenge Congress to restore the money for
      communities to protect their drinking water, through the Safe Drinking Water Revolving
      Fund that you proposed and provide additional funding for communities to protect their
      drinking water sources.

·Protecting Communities from Toxic Mine Wastes. ($332 million) Dedicate a Hard Rock Mining
      Reclamation Fund (DOl) and an expanded cleanup program to stop toxic discharges from
      hundreds of mines and restore thousands of miles of rivers to productive use. USDA would
      also undertake related activities .

·Targeting Farm Bill Resources to Reducing Toxic Cleanup. (cost: none) The 1996 Farm Bill
      provided a number of opportunities for USDA to work in partnership with local governments
      and soil conservation districts on voluntary, community-oriented conservation projects. This
      initiative would direct USDA to focus those programs on reducing toxic and agricultural
                                                                               Hex-Dump Convcision
       pollution into our waterways, beginning with an effort to focus the Conservation Reserve
       Program on water quality goals. These efforts should result in water quality protection
       efforts covering more than 50 million acres oflands nationwide.

 -State and Local Protection of Rivers and Beaches. (cost: $64 million) In order to provide
       front-line protection of rivers and beaches this initiative would have you direct EPA and
       NOAA to create new partnerships with state and local governments to control polluted
       runoff, and to manage critical coastal zone areas.

Potential Negatives

The new resources for drinking water that may be viewed as an inadequate financial commitment,
when needs are estimated to be in the tens of billions of dollars. In addition; other elements
similarly may be regarded as inadequate to the magnitude of the need.


IV.    HONORING AMERICANS' RIGHT TO KNOW ABOUT TOXICS (Cost: $355 mil.)

OVERVIEW: Announce a broad initiative to enhance the Right-To-Know program. Under this
proposal, by the year 2000, EPA, the Department of the Interior, and NOAA will make more local
environmental information about the quality of the air and water -- which for ordinary citizens can
often be impossible to find -- available instantly for all American communities. This information
would be coupled with information about food and products that present major risks to families.
This new service would complement the information available from EPA's Toxics Release
Inventory, which has been highly effective in informing citizens about chemical data from major
manufacturing facilities in their neighborhoods.

-A Callfor Expanded Right-to-Know Legislation. (cost: none) Cabinet agencies will be directed
     to build on the success of our right-to-know laws to help families make informed choices
     about the products they use. The Administration will work with parents, scientists, the
     business community, and the Congress to provide better information to families, so that they
     will have the tools to protect themselves. This initiative will include common-sense and
     cost-effective ways to meet the following objectives:

--Assist parents in assessing and avoiding unique environmental health risks to children from
             products and chemicals;

--Provide information on the whole range of environmental health risk from toxics, including
            cancer, developmental, endocrine, and reproductive risks; and

--Encourage informed consumer choices by providing improved information.

-Making Right-to-Know Accessible to all Americans. (cost: $250 million) By the year 2000,
     every American should have access to timely information about toxic and other pollutants in
     their local air, land, and water through a comprehensive monitoring system with computer
     links to schools, libraries, community centers and home computers in all cities with
                                                                              lilJA-Dump ConvGisiiln
      populations over 100,000.

      --For the first time, set up a nationwide, federally funded, network to monitor key health
            indicators in the air and water. Monitoring would provide families with access to
            timely health-related data to make informed choices that directly affect their health,
            without requiring private parties to report more. For example, timely air quality
            information can mean the difference between hospitalization and a healthy day for an
            asthmatic child. Asthma is now the leading cause of hospitalization for young
            children in the United States.

      --Expanding Right-to-Know About Water Quality. (cost: $85 million) Federal agencies
            now monitor water quality in only half the nation's rivers, lakes, streams, and beaches.
            President Clinton is expanding the effort so that communities across America have
            information about what are the sources of pollution to their rivers, lakes and beaches.

      --Increasing Availability of Right-to-Know Information. (cost: $20 million) President
             Clinton is directing EPA to lead an effort to ensure that, by the year 2000, Americans
             have one-stop access to all of the environmental information available. Several
             government agencies, like NASA, the Interior Department, and the Commerce
             Department will bring together the information they already collect, so that citizens
             can get access through one place.

Potential Negatives

Right to Know is criticized as increasing the paperwork burden facing industry in a manner
unrelated to real environmental risks. These concerns, however, should not apply to an approach
that makes better use of existing reporting requirements and that focuses on vital common public
health resources, such as clean air and water.


V. GETTING TOUGH ON ENVIRONMENTAL CRIMES (Cost: none)

OVERVIEW: This proposal would increase penalties for the worse offenders, strengthen our
partnership with state and local law enforcement agencies, and plug loopholes in existing laws that
allow environmental crimes to go unpunished.

Illegal dumping of toxics and other environmental crimes are real crimes, and our families are the
victims. Prosecutors, police, and investigators need better tools to protect our communities from
the toxic threat posed by environmental criminals. To address these problems, we recommend the
Administration propose a new Environmental Crimes Bill, which will strengthen community
protection against environmental criminals. Illegal dumping of toxics and other pollutants is real
crime, and communities are the victims. Police, prosecutors, and investigators need better tools to
protect our communities from the toxic threat posed by environmental criminals. TIus bill will
ensure that the assets of environment criminals can be secured even before conviction, and are used
to restore the communities they victimize. The bill would impose stronger penalties for the worst
environmental crimes, and strengthen our partnerslup with state and local prosecutors. TIle bill will
                                                                   Au~ I,,: ._ f"I'~o'"'l~"t,jr·· CiI'~'vJ .. _,Jlvl
                                                                             : lex-uump Convc;siiln
include provisions to:

· New authority for prosecutors to secure the assets of environmental criminals, even before
      conviction, when those assets are needed to repair the environmental hann that has been
      done. Prosecutors should be able to secure the assets of environmental criminals when they
      threaten our communities. Criminal defendants are often able to shield their assets from
      prosecutors, and communities are often at risk that the damage done by the crime will remain
      unrestoredAuthorize prosecutors to get a prejudgment order making placing criminal
      defendants' assets widIin the control of the court, to make sure dlOse assets are available to
      clean up dIe environment Broader even dIan a lien, dIis provision will allow prosecutors,
      after a hearing, to secure any of dIe assets belonging to an environmental criminal and make
      sure dIe money is dlere to clean up dIe environment for victimized communities.

· Impose stronger penalties for the worst environmental crimes, and strengdlen our parmerslIip widl
      state and local prosecutors widl more tools and resources. Current law has no provision for
      environmental criminals whose otTenses result in deadl or injury to dIe public, including to
      police and odler law enforcement personnel. Tins proposal would enhance penalties for
      environmental crimes dlat result in deadl or serious bodily injury to law enforcement
      personnel or dIe public;

· Oudaw "attempts" to commit environmental crimes.       Tllere are no laws against attempted
      environmental crimes, winch hampers etTorts to capture crinrinals before environmental
      damage is done drrough "sting" operations and odler undercover work. Tins proposal will
      make it possible to conduct undercover operations and odlerwise to make an arrest before
      toxics are released into dIe environment

· Modify statutes oflimitation to allow additional time for prosecution {not to exceed a total of eight
      years from dIe date of dIe violation} where a criminal tries conceals an environmental crime.
      Current statutes of limitations have no exceptions for dIose who conceal dleir environmental
      crimes, widl dIe result dlat some of dIe most egregious environmental crimes cannot be
      prosecuted.

· Strengthen environmental law enforcement partnerships. Local law enforcement agencies often
      lack dIe resources to support enviromnental crimes prosecutions or to train dleir officers on
      detection and handling of environmental crimes. TlIis problem hampers joint federal-state
      prosecutions, and has been made more urgent by dIe goverrrrnent shutdown and odler etTorts
      to cut EPA's enforcement budget and take dIe environmental cop otT dIe beat Tins initiative
      would provide dIat state and local officials would be able to receive an aWard of dleir costs in
      joint prosecutions widl federal audlOrities of environmental crime, and dIe cost award would be
      added to dIe criminal fme dIe defendant would have to pay. Tile bill would seek $1,000,000
      in new money for training and support of state and local law enforcement officials.

· Assure restitution for victims of environmental crimes. Tile audlOrity of courts to require
      environmental criminals to provide "restitution" to communities victimized by environmental
      crime should be clear. Tile communities dlat are victims of environmental crime should dIe
      right to have dleir environment and natural resources restored. Tile proposal would clarifY


                                                                               AUIG'lIt:l~~ ::,1cJrdc MQnt:~t1)"!;li: C'/stem
          the law to ensure that the courts may order convicted criminals to pay ~c'~fiilltiahCfOil-;tIiihr '
          crimes, by making payments to remediate or restore tile quality of the environment to the full
          extent that it is damaged by an environmental crime.


    Potential Negatives

    May be concern in industrial community about aggressive enforcement.


