RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeremy D. Benami ( BENAMI_J    (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-AUG-1996 10:44:26.79

SUBJECT: other immigration steps

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ:22-AUG-1996 10:45:25.13

TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED B      (WHO)
READ:22-AUG-1996 12:14:28.87

TO: Diana M. Fortuna                          FORTUNA D      (OPD)
READ: NOT READ

CC: Carol H. Rasco                            RASCO C      (WHO)
READ:22-AUG-1996 11:59:50.63

TEXT:
In addition to the two items above, there are two more executive
actions the administration can take in the immediate term that
mitigate the impact of the welfare bill on immigrants:
   o the first is a proposed rule that the INS will be publishing
within the next week (?) which authorizes the INS to exempt people
with certain disabilities from the testing requirements for
naturalization.   This regulation will help ensure that legal
immigrants whose disability may make them unable to take or pass
these tests will not be denied the opportunity to become citizens.
This obviously will help to mitigate the impact of the ban on SSI
and other benefits for those legal immigrants with certain
disabilities. This action is anticipated and welcomed by the
immigration community.
   o the second is the Attorney General's memorandum designating
certain programs, services and assistance from which immigrants
cannot be barred.  The Attorney General's designation is
authorized by the welfare reform legislation and helps to ensure
that certain services necessary to protect the life and safety of
all residents of the United States will not be adversely affected
by the bill. Examples of the type of services that the AG will
exempt include soup kitchens, crisis counseling, and short-term
shelter. The AG's order demonstrates that the legislation does
provide the administration with authority to limit potential harm
caused by the provisions of this bill.
The Attorney General's memorandum could be signed today and the
President could announce that the INS rule is to be published
as part of an overall package to demonstration action on the
immigrant provisions of this legislation.

ELENA: the above paragraphs were written quickly, using the
proposed rule and the bill to describe the provisions. We will
bring the rule down to you asap.  it is being faxed to us now.


