RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (ALL-IN-l MAIL)

CREATOR: Todd Stern ( STERN_T)        (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:2l-AUG-1996 20:01:38.66

SUBJECT: talking points

TO: Elena Kagan                                    KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:2l-AUG-1996 20:30:24.82

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
TALKING POINTS ON H.R. 1833

?       The President vetoed H.R. 1833 -- which would have prohibited
a certain kind of abortion procedure -- for one reason:
because it failed to include an exemption permitting the use
of this procedure in those rare cases where a physician says
its use is necessary to protect a woman from serious injury to
her health. The President could not sign a bill that would
have abandoned women facing such serious health risks.
?       The procedure described in the bill troubles the President
deeply and he does not support its use on an elective basis.
But this bill went too far because it would have banned use of
the procedure even when it was the only or best hope of
averting a serious threat to a woman's health, including her
ability to have children in the future.
?       The bill provided an exception only when a doctor believes a
woman faces death -- not when the doctor is convinced that she
faces real, grave risks to her health.
?       Before vetoing this bill, the President heard from women who
desperately wanted babies, were devastated to learn that their
babies had fatal conditions, wanted anything other than an
abortion, but were advised by their doctors that this
procedure was their best hope of preventing death or grave
harm, including the loss of reproductive ability.
For these women and others, this was not about choice. These
babies were certain to perish before, during, or shortly after
birth. The only question was how much grave harm was going to
be done to the woman.
?       It was to protect women in these rare and tragic circumstances
that the President asked Congress to add an exemption allowing
use of the procedure when, in the doctor's medical judgment,
it is necessary to save a woman from serious adverse
consequences to her health.  The President told Congress he
would sign such a bill. Congress refused.

?       The President rejects the contention that his proposed
exemption would create a huge loophole.  Congress, working
with the Administration, could draft a bill making clear that
serious harm to health means just that -- and doesn't include
trivial complaints such as headaches or inconvenience.
?       As to the claim that this procedure is never medically
appropriate, the best answer comes from the medical community
itself, which broadly supports the use of the procedure where
a woman's serious health interests are at stake.


?       These are tough and tragic cases.          Criminalizing the use of


this procedure where a woman's doctor believes it is her best
chance to avoid serious injury is no answer. And politicizing
the debate serves no one. The President stands for a common
sense solution and is ready and willing to work with Congress
to achieve it.


