     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

     CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( REED_B)   (WHO)

     CREATION DATE/TIME:23-AUG-1996 19:54:19.93

     SUBJECT: CLINTON PROTECTS WELFARE BENEFITS FOR LEGAL ALIENS

     TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
     READ:24-AUG-1996 11:10:42.90

     TEXT:
     Date: 08/23/96 Time: 19:10
     CClinton Protects Welfare Benefits for Legal Aliens
          WASHINGTON (AP)   Keeping his promise to reduce the impact of
     the new welfare overhaul law on legal aliens, President Clinton
     acted Friday to make sure benefits are not cut off mistakenly and
     to speed the citizenship process.
          The White House also said legal aliens who lose welfare benefits
     will not be denied non-cash services needed to protect life and
     safety, such as access to soup kitchens, medical services and child
     protection.
          When he signed the welfare reform legislation into law on
     Thursday, Clinton said he did so despite his belief that a
     provision barring legal aliens from seeking welfare assistance was
     unfair and would cause unwarranted harm to many families through no
     fault of their own.
          --This is especially true of legal immigrant families, who have
     followed the rules, worked and paid taxes and who have suffered a
     calamity that has forced them to seek assistance, " said White
     House press secretary Mike McCurry.
          --The president has vowed to repair these provisIons of the
     bill, " McCurry said. --In the meantime, however, he is determined
     to ensure that they are implemented carefully, and that no
     individuals not actually covered by these provisions are improperly
     denied the benefits they and their children need. ' ,
          In a directive to Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman, Clinton
     ordered that states be given the maximum time allowed by law to
     ensure that legal immigrants eligible for food stamps continue to
     receive them.
          Glickman will grant waivers allowing any state to extend the
     certification periods for food stamp eligibility for legal
     immigrants receiving assistance.
          --The extension will give states time to develop the procedures
     needed to make accurate determinations of the many facts    such as
     immigration classification, veteran status or work history     that
     the new law makes relevant to eligibility, " McCurry said. --In
     this way, the directive will decrease inaccurate or inequitable
     decisions to cut off food stamps."
          McCurry said that under the terms of the new law, benefits to
     legal immigrants and their families will be cut off only when they
     attempt to recertify their eligibility to receive food stamps.
          --When a state extends the certification period, it will, in
     effect, push back the date on which a legal immigrant will be
     deprived of food stamps, " McCurry said.
         The White House said the waiver has limits and that
     certification periods may not be extended beyond one year for most
     aliens or beyond two years for those who are elderly or disabled.
     In any case, the government may not allow states to extend
     recertification beyond Aug. 22, 1997.
"




        In a second directive, the president told Attorney General Janet
    Reno to make every effort to reduce bureaucratic delay for legal
    immigrants applying for citizenship.
        '-In the past, hundreds of thousands of eligible people have had
    to wait unnecessarily to become citizens, " the president said in
    the directive, in which he told Reno to increase the number of
    people processing applications.
        "This administration is committed to eliminating the waiting
    lists," he said. "This administration's target is to process and
    swear in within six months of application all individuals eligible
    for citizenship."
        Clinton's directive also orders agency heads to develop
    public-private partnerships to provide English-language training to
    those applying for citizenship, to reach out to those wishing to
    become citizens and to provide special help to refugees and those
    seeking asylum.
    APNP-08-23-96 1919EDT


