RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Dawn Chirwa ( CHIRWA_D )   (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-AUG-1996 14:08:22.49

SUBJECT: RE: arson

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:25-AUG-1996 14:16:49.05

 TEXT:
 Sorry, I'm sort of rushed, so these are in no particular order. Also, this is
 not a comprehensive list of actions taken in response to church fires, just the
 primary ones. If you need more, let me know.
 --To draw attention to the problem of church burnings, the President visited the
 site of a church which had been rebuilt after a fire, spoke about the issue in a
 radio address and announced a National Month of Unity in July to encourage the
 country to reflect on the issue of racial and religious tolerance.
 --In June, the President called a meeting of Southern Governors to discuss ways
 the Federal government and the States could cooperate to combat church arsons.
'--The President announced the existence of a task force led by the Dep't of
 Justice and the Dep't of Treasury which has been coordinating federal, state and
 local investigations of church fires.  The President asked the task force to
 report back to him regularly on its progress.
 --The President instructed the ATF to inform churches of steps they can take to
 protect themselves from arsonists.
 --The President announced the establishment of a 24-hour toll-free number to
 report information about church fires:  1-888-AFT-FIRE.
 --This month, the President, along with Mr. and Mrs. Gore [and I believe the
 First Lady], personally helped to rebuild a church.
 --The President called on FEMA to assist states with arson detection and
 investigation training and technical assistance.
 --The President announced that HUD would make loan guarantees available to
 non-profit institutions, including churches, which are victims of arson.
 --The President signed a bill which would toughen the criminal penalties on
 those convicted of burning religious institutions, codify HUD's ability to make
 loan guarantees [see above] and provide additional appropriations for Treasury's
 work in combating church arsons.
 Hope this helps.
 --Dawn.


