RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna ( FORTUNA_D)    (OPD)

CREATION DP..TE/TIME: 3-SEP-1996 19:53:17.38

SUBJECT: Wisconsin waiver

TO: Jacob J . Lew                              LEW J ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                           APFEL K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E ) (WHO)
READ: 4-SEP-1996 08:39:17.39

TEXT:
Emily Broml>erg threw together an impromptu meeting today on the
Wisconsin '-7aiver, with Carol, Bruce Reed, and HHS (Monahan,
Rosewater, Sally Richardson of HCFA).    I thought I should let you
know what happened.
The impetus for the meeting was the fact that HHS had a plan to
send Wisconsin 3 letters: one from ACF saying that the
outstanding waivers were either moot because of the new law, were
under continuing review, or were questionable (the residency
issue) .
There were also draft letters from HCFA and food stamps. We
didn't see the food stamp letter, but the HCFA letter said we had
big policy problems with what they want to do, but we'd be happy
to continue to work with them on a plan to expand coverage. The
overall intent of the 3 letters was to say we are "done" with W-2,
except for a few minor items.
However, Bruce and Carol pushed strongly for resolving all
resolvable welfare issues before sending any letters, including
perhaps the conditional approval we had been arguing about on the
residency issue.    Bruce argued it would be much cleaner to fight
on Medicaid if we had done all we could on welfare.
HHS is going to look at what it would take to resolve this (there
are also some remaining child support issues that should be
resolvable). Elena, I assume they will call you on residency.
Then the plan was to reconvene perhaps by conference call this
Friday (not yet scheduled). And no letters will go out till this
is resolved.
Food stamps is still a mystery; I have to call them to get their
story.
No one thinks this is a big rush, but people would like to get it
out of the way -- although not before the big NGA meeting at the
beginning of next week.


