RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (ALL- IN -1. MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeff P. Dailey ( DAILEY_J )       (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:    4-SEP-1.996 1.4:34:1.6.36

SUBJECT: president i.al letter

TO: Elena Kagan                                     KAGAN E    (WHO)
READ: 4-SEP-1.996 1.8:1.7:23.1.4

TO: Dawn Chirwa                                     CHIRWA D    (WHO)
READ: 4-SEP-1.996 1.4:45:00.1.2

TO: Kumiki S. Gibson                                GIBSON K ) Auteferward te: Remete Address
READ:NOT READ

TEXT:
The fellewing is my draft .of a letter regarding the censtitutienality .of
cengressienal redistricting.    Cheryl Mil1.s said that .one .of yeu might be
knewledgable in thi.s area, se I'm wendering if yeu will please determine whether
my draft is .okay for presidential signature.
thanks.
Thank you fer your letter en behalf .of the Baptist Ministers
Asseciatien .of Heusten and Vicinity.    I appreciate knewing yeur
views regarding the legal challenges te redistricting plans drawn
after the 1.990 census.
The pretectien of veting rights ever the past thirty years and
the resulting increase in minerity representatien has been a
testament te our enduring demecracy. As yeu neted, the
cemmunities that were .once shut .out .of the precess have breught
new leadership te all levels .of .our gevernment, including the
halls of Cengress.   Yeur cengressienal district alene has
centributed distinguished leaders like Barbara Jerdan and Mickey
Leland, and is new well represented by Cengressweman Sheila
Jacksen Lee.
My Administration remains cemmitted ensuring every American the
oppertunity to cast an effective and meaningful ballet, free frem
racial discriminatien.   We have strengly defended racially fair
redistricting plans against c1.aims .of uncenstitutienality, and
wi1.l continue te do se in cencert with the Supreme Ceurt's new
legal standards.   In additien, the Justice Department is
participating in the Texas cengressienal case te ensure any
changes in the law wil1. still previde minerity veters equa1.
oppertunities te elect candidates .of their cheice.
The recent decisions .of the Supreme Ceurt have understandably
created a great deal .of anxiety ameng the censtituents .of these
districts and others.   Hewever, these rulings de net signify that
states can abanden their ebligatien te ensure fair representatien
or that the Justice Department will cede its responsibility te
enferce the Voting Rights Act with viger and tenacity.      Instead,
we must redeuble our efforts te guarantee an .open pelitical
precess fer all Americans and rededicate .ourselves te the ideals
.of equal access and participati.on that inspired the .original
passage .of the Veting Rights Act.
Thanks again for writing.
                                 ###


