               RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

               CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna ( FORTUNA_D)   (OPD)

               CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-SEP-1996 15:56:31.81

               SUBJECT: Draft memo on SSI kids cutoff date

               TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                          APFEL K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
               READ: NOT READ

               TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E    (WHO)
               READ: 5-SEP-1996 16:02:29.39

               TO: Keith J. Fontenot                         FONTENOT K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addre
               READ: NOT READ

               CC: Jeremy D. Benami                          BENAMI J    (WHO)
               READ: 6-SEP-1996 09:24:23.12

               TEXT:
               I know we are not yet agreed between us on the need for this
               memo, but I believe Carol wants it, at a minimum if we end up
               deciding on the earlier cut
               o
               -off.  So I thought I would send you
               the draft I am sending to Carol for her review, just so we are
               keeping in touch.
               I was hoping to use whatever SSA is drafting on this, but I
               haven't received it yet. Maybe it is just as well.
               Obviously I am interested in any comments. This will just barely
               fit on 1 page; so if you think I should add things (and the draft
               is a bit oversimplified), it will go over a page unless we cut.
               PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
               DRAFT -- doesn't (yet) layout a recommendation

               September -, 1996

               MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
               FROM:           Carol H. Rasco
               SUBJECT:                 When to Cease SSI Benefits for Disabled Children
               A decision must be made in the next few days about when to stop
               benefits for disabled children whose families are appealing SSA's
               decision to drop them from the rolls.
               Background: Under the welfare reform statute, 190,000 disabled
               children will lose eligibility for SSI benefits because their
               impairments are not severe enough to qualify under the new law.
               The families of these children will get notices this December
               that they will lose benefits unless they can prove that they meet
               the new, tougher standards.   SSA will then review all these
               cases, with the goal of making decisions within one year of
               enactment.
               These children have the right to appeal SSA's decision, and are
               guaranteed continued benefits during the appeals process until
               they have a "face to face interview." However, from a legal
               perspective that interview could take place either at the point
               when a state reviews the case, or at a later point when an SSA
               administrative law judge issues a ruling.   The first choice cuts
               kids off in late 1997 or early 1998; the second choice pushes it
               off to 1999.


Arguments Favoring Earlier Cut
o
-off:
o       We reluctantly supported the tougher eligibility standards,
and included savings in our budget based on kids being
dropped at the earlier point. This could create a
credibility problem with Congress if we go with the later
date.
o       If they lose on appeal, families would be liable for
substantial overpayments. However, SSA can waive this debt
on a case by case basis.  (Budget Implications?)
o S S A ' s workload will be far greater if the later date is
chosen. The large backlog in initial applications could get
worse. It will encourage more families to appeal.
Arguments Favoring Later Cut
o
-off:
o       Losing these benefits will be difficult for these families,
with many of them affected by other parts of welfare reform.
We should give them more time to adjust, and ensure
continued benefits for the 50% who will win their appeals.
Although this change arose out of reports that families were

abusing the system by having children feign mental
disabilities, such abuse was never shown to be widespread,
and many of the families losing benefits have compelling
stories.
o        Advocates will definitely sue if we choose the earlier date,
and could win.
cc: Jack Lew
         Jack Quinn


