     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

     CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna ( FORTUNA_D)   (OPD)

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-SEP-1996 09:28:00.93

     SUBJECT: Draft of Carol's NGA speech FYI; let me know if ...

     TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
     READ: 9-SEP-1996 09:52:25.84

     TEXT:
     you see anything wrong with it asap; she's delivering it at
     lunchtime.
     ==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 9-SEP-1996 09:17:00.00

     ATT BODY PART TYPE:H

     ATT CREATOR: Jill Pizzuto

     ATT SUBJECT: CHR / today's speech

     ATT TO: Diana M. Fortuna

     ATT TO: Jeremy D. Benami                         BENAMI J

     ATT TO: Emily Bromberg                           BROMBERG E

     TEXT:
     fyi:  speech is also saved on our i: drive.   This is the version
     WITH CHR corrections -- should be final draft unless you all make
     a few more changes in your 10:30 meeting.
     PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
     Draft
     NGA/NCSL/APWA CONFERENCE ON WELFARE REFORM
     Carol H. Rasco
     September 9, 1996

     Thank you,            I  thank NGA, NCSL, and APWA for inviting the
     Administration to be a part of this conference and for working
     with us as you prepared for this meeting.
     As I prepared to come here, I could not help but think back eight
     years ago to the signing of the Family Support Act .... then
     Governors Clinton and Castle represented the NGA in the Rose
     Garden as President Reagan signed that version of welfare
     reform .... as part of my reflection I also wondered how I could
     come here today and not convey the message of, "I'm a Fed and I'm
     here to help you" .... some of the most dreaded words to state
     officials -- I know, I've been in your seat.
     In those years in the statehouse, I also experienced major
     systems changes at this point in the state legislative calendar.
     But I don't think I ever faced a system change as far reaching as
     found in the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
     Reconciliation Act of 1996, and I can only imagine the anxiety
     you feel, with many of your states' budgets prepared, pre
     o
     -session
     hearings now being held and an early 1997 legislative session
     start date facing you.  You probably feel like many of us here in


Washington as we read and re
o
-read this law: Stop the World -- at
least for a few moments -- I need to get off!


But time, legislative schedules, deadlines set in law and, most
importantly, the lives of our
o
clients march on, and so must we.
Less than three weeks ago, President Clinton -- again in the Rose
Garden with, by the way, Congressman Castle and several of your
governors present -- signed legislation with strong bipartisan
support that makes the most dramatic changes in the country's
social welfare system in thirty years. Welfare as we knew it is
no more.
But, as President Clinton said on signing the bill, while the
legislation may have marked the end of "welfare as we know it",
it is really only the beginning of welfare reform.
We now have an historic opportunity to create a new program that
provides those who need it with a hand up and out of poverty.
But the challenging work now begins.
As many of you know from Governor Clinton's tenure in the NGA,
the President has a profound understanding of the state
perspective on welfare reform. And it is certainly fitting that
the law relies so heavily on the states. Clearly, states have
long been ahead of the curve on welfare reform. You have
demonstrated a record of innovation reflected in the nearly 80
state waiver programs approved to date. States have known for
some time that federal welfare laws were not working, and the
push for waivers was a manifestation of that. This legislation
recognizes that states are in the best position to accomplish the
goals we all want to reach.


Now you have the opportunity you have long sought. Each of us
has an awesome responsibility to fulfill in making this law work
to improve the lives of people now on welfare. We in the federal
government will be working with you, but we will playa very
different role than we have in the past. We will be prescribing
processes a lot less than we used to, and instead working with
you on outcomes and goals. You will have many other partners, as
well -- the business community, the non
o
-profit sector, the
religious community, state agencies who have not worked on this
issue previously, and welfare recipients themselves. And we must
all work to ensure that everyone does their part. But in so many
ways, it will be up to you.
Vision
What does truly successful welfare reform look like to the
President and his Administration?
The President has 3 primary goals for welfare reform:
(1)     to create a genuine transitional system of support for
families in need;
         (2)    to make work pay; and
(3)     to do everything we can to achieve those two goals
while protecting children during this difficult
transition period.


(1) The fundamental problem with the old welfare system was its
answer to the question, "What does a poor family need?" The
answer was a check.  Plain and simple. The less income you
brought into the household the larger your check.  The system
contained all the wrong incentives and was out of step with our
values and culture.
I think it is fair to say that a new consensus has emerged in
this country that the right answer to the question of what a
family in poverty needs is work. Work gives shape and meaning
and dignity to all of our lives.  It has to be the centerpiece of
our social compact. All those who can work, should. All those
who work full time should not have to raise their children in
poverty.
So the first goal of welfare reform is to transform welfare
offices and programs from check
D
-writing operations to work
preparation, placement, and support.  Welfare offices should be
places where people who need help temporarily -- because of
family crisis, unemployment, or for whatever reason -- can go to
get it. And the help they get will be help in preparing for,
finding, and holding a job.
D
(2) The second goal of welfare reform is to ensure that work
pays.  I'm sure I don't need to tell all of you that for many
years it simply made rational sense for a mother in many states
to choose to stay on welfare rather than to work.
The decision was based on simple economics: A mother leaving
welfare to go to work would often bring home less cash while
facing increased expenses for child care, transportation and work
clothes, and of course putting her family's health care and other
benefits at risk.
It was no wonder so many people chose welfare over work.   The
only real surprise is how many people chose to leave welfare for
work despite the economics.
Let me tell you a bit about what's been accomplished so far to
change these economics.
First, we've taken two critical steps to increase the incomes of
the working poor -- the expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit
and the increase in the minimum wage. When both of these changes
are fully phased in, a person working a full
D
-time minimum wage
job will have over $14,000 in annual income after taxes,
excluding other benefits.   That is a major improvement over four
years ago.
D
The second critical element is child care.  The new law increases
federal funding for child care over the next six years by $4
billion. The President is also proposing to expand Head Start to
over 1 million children in the next six years, and is leading a
national challenge to support efforts to keep schools open late,
so that parents have a safe, secure place for their children
while they are still at work.
A final piece of the puzzle is health care. The welfare bill
guarantees a year of Medicaid for those leaving welfare for work
and severs the link between Medicaid and welfare.  Several states
have developed plans to extend coverage to more working poor
families, and the Kassebaum
D


-Kennedy law will help families keep
their insurance if they have to switch jobs, which so often
happens at entry levels. Of course, there is more to be done to
expand health care coverage so that all working Americans and
their children have it, and the President is committed to moving
step by step toward that goal.
The bottom line is that welfare must never again pay better than
work.
(3)   Our third goal is to ensure that children are protected.
Families and their children will be better off in the long run
with a system that substitutes paychecks for welfare checks and
ensures that those who do take a job, any job, can raise their
kids out of poverty.

The bill also includes the child support enforcement measures the
President proposed two years ago. These sweeping changes could
increase child support collections by $24 billion over 10 years.
They will make it easier to establish paternity, track delinquent
parents across state lines, and streamline procedures for
withholding child support from wages. As a result, children will
get more of the support they need and deserve.
Problems with the Bill
The President signed this legislation because it presented a
historic opportunity to reform welfare. However, as you all
know, he did so with strong objections to certain provisions that
are not related to welfare reform.
He has vowed to correct the deep cuts in Food Stamps for working
families with high shelter costs. He is also committed to
changing provisions that are so unfair to legal immigrant
families who have followed the rules, worked hard, and paid
taxes, and who have suffered a calamity that has forced them to
seek assistance.  In addition to placing an undue hardship on
these individuals, this will shift costs to states, local
governments, and communities that serve large immigrant
populations. The President is committed to working with Congress
to fix these parts of the bill in the legislative process.
o
In implementing the bill, the Administration has already taken
actions to treat legal immigrants fairly.  We have offered states
a waiver of food stamp recertification requirements, so that many
states will have more time to develop the procedures needed to
make accurate determinations about eligibility. We are
continuing to reduce the bureaucratic delays in the citizenship
process, so that legal immigrants who are eligible to become
citizens can do so as quickly as possible.  The Attorney General
has issued a memorandum pursuant to the new law listing non
o
-cash
services that may not be denied to immigrants because they are
necessary for the protection of life and safety.
Finally, we are widely disseminating information on
naturalization.  I hope you will include the issue of
naturalization in your discussions with the ever
o
-widening circle
of stakeholders with whom you will be working -- public and
private.
Implementation Issues
Let me now touch briefly on some of the steps we will be taking
over the coming months to ensure that our goals for welfare


reform are fulfilled.
o
The central issue in a reformed welfare system that requires work
is, "Where are the jobs?" The President understands this, and
that's why he unveiled a new $3.4 billion job creation and
placement initiative -- called the Welfare to Work Jobs
Challenge. This fund will provide money to support job creation
and placement initiatives, targeted to the hardest
o
-to
o
-place
welfare recipients.     This three
o
-part initiative includes a
targeted welfare
o
-to
o
-work tax credit, tax incentives to increase
investment in distressed areas, and a major welfare
o
-to
o
-work jobs
initiative. We have provided information on this challenge for
your notebooks.
In addition to this proposal, we are eager to know from you if
there are steps we in the federal government can take to assist
you, as you work to create an atmosphere where state programs and
departments -- that might never have done so in the past -- come
to view jobs for welfare clients as part of their mission.
This will be a critical step in your planning. I was pleased to
see reported in my home state this weekend that the DHS Director
acknowledged to a legislative committee last week,
Sure, we will be initially receiving more money, but the
major outcome has to do with jobs, and it will be necessary
for us to look at the current jobs and economic development
programs in Arkansas that can be re
o
-focused to make certain
we can meet the work requirements.

o
How can -- or perhaps more appropriately -- CAN the federal
government assist in that effort in your state?
The President is committed to an active, but appropriate, role
for the Federal government in the implementation of this welfare
reform law -- our role will be modified to reflect more of a
partnership, and less of the traditional bureaucratic approach.
The White House is bringing together on a regular basis the
agencies with the major responsibility for implementing this
bill, including the Department of Health and Human Services, the
Department of Agriculture, the Social Security Administration,
and the Immigration and Naturalization Service, to ensure that
all of us are working together in a coordinated fashion across
agencies to implement this law smoothly and effectively.
It is with this group of four agencies and several White House
departments that your three organizations met as planning
proceeded for this conference. The White House has committed to


convening this group regularly for a reporting and sharing
session in order to better ensure that we act in partnership with
you, the states. We will meet next week for a debriefing process
from this conference.
o
A larger group of 11 federal agencies and departments is meeting
bi
o
-weekly at the White House to discuss the implications of the
law more broadly.  Included in this group are the Departments of
Labor, Commerce, Justice, Housing, and Education, the Small
Business Administration, and the EPA due to the brownfields
initiative and its relation to jobs creation.
We are all here these two days to learn from one another. All of
us have questions about how to interpret the statute and how
programs will work on the ground level. The Administration
officials who are here today and tomorrow will do their best to
discuss these questions with you and to listen. But it would be
misleading to suggest that we have all the answers at this point.
In fact, one benefit of this conference coming so soon after the
enactment of the law is that we can all take advantage of this
opportunity to learn from one another.
On the other hand, from the perspective of state officials, I
know that the law's effective dates must seem very near indeed.
There is so much to do:   developing work programs; changing the
culture of welfare offices; writing new state plans; implementing
a new child support enforcement system and a new child care block
grant; managing major changes to food stamps and other nutrition
programs; delinking Medicaid from welfare and other systems; and
getting a handle on performance bonuses and contingency funds.
o
Conclusion
Working together, I know we can bring all these strands together
and make this law a success. But the success of welfare reform
will depend on the work that goes on each and every day in each
and every state - - and, qui.te frankly, most importantly the work
that occurs every day in the communities, large and small across
this country.
I have already heard or read that this law has numerous analogies
to various processes in our lives. There are those who have said
we will move from chaos and confusion, to a state of change, on
to competence. There are even those who have said the law is
like the eye of the fiercest storm, and we must work to keep the
devastation and churning off
o
-shore, out of the lives of the
clients.
However, if you look at the list of programs where you will be
trying to bring about major change -- the new TANF block grant,
Food Stamps, WIC, Medicaid in all its variations, SSI, child
care, child support, education and training, employment ... and the
list goes on -- then perhaps the best image to keep before us
throughout the process of implementation is the life of the
current welfare recipient. She or he and the children involved
have been trying for years to make sense out of these programs,
and more often than not have been their own case managers, trying
desperately to create a life, a support system for making the
family whole.

We now have the framework through this law to build on the


  lessons we in government -- whatever the level -- have learned
  from one another AND from the clients. Over the last 18 months,
  I have traveled to 27 of your states and the District, visiting
  programs at various levels of government, private and public.
  Always, I have tried to learn something about how you are
  approaching welfare in your state or community. On each visit, I
  always heard how you are seeking to learn the best ways to
  coordinate, collaborate, and achieve results for the families
  trapped in this system -- and make changes that are long
  o
  -term and
  focused on jobs ... and how difficult the job is.
  I doubt anyone in this room has escaped countless hours in the
  last 5
  o
  -7 years in workshops, conferences, academies, etc.,
  exploring just how we get to these long
  o
  -lasting, systemic
  changes. We must apply those hours of lessons to our work in the
  days ahead as we seize this opportunity.
  In closing, I would like to share with you the three groups of
  persons that I believe we must keep before us at all times as we
  proceed. I challenge you to pause often in your work and picture
  beside you a real person from your state in each of these
  categories. I certainly pledge to keep in my sight some of the
  people I've met in your states. And then we must all listen as
  the person standing by us asks his or her questions.
  1. First, the front line worker.

  a.      Will you listen to me while I tell you about the tools
  I genuinely need to assist my clients who really want
  to be self
  o
  -sufficient?
  b.      will you take a half day, or a couple of hours, and sit
  with me while I do an intake or a home visit or fill
  out my required forms?

  c.      Do you really respect and value my work and worth, or
  am I simply a regulation enforcer who is there to meet
  your stated numerical goals and avoid penalties?
  2. Second, the welfare mother, or the welfare dad.
  a.      What kind of system are you creating for my family that
  I care about so much?
  b.      Can you help me figure out how I can get a REAL job?
  c.      Would you mind sitting down and talking to me about how
  I put my life back together?
  3. And finally, and in my mind, most importantly, the third
  group is the children. You have an eight year old standing by
  you in the months ahead ... an eight year old from a welfare
  family, an eight year old whose eyes still light up as she enters
  the classroom each morning:

  a.      Mister, what you doing to my life?
  b.      If I get sick, can my mama take me to a doctor?
  c.      Will my little brother be safe at day care?
  d.      Do I have a chance when I grow up?
  I firmly believe children whose chances were dimmer in the past
  DO now have a better chance and we all together hold that chance


 before us. The outcome will depend on the creativity and
 dedication of all of us in making the most of this opportunity.
 Let us work together so that all our nation's children can soar!
 Thank you very much.
 ================== END ATTACHMENT   1 ==================


