     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

     CREATOR: Stephen C. Warnath ( WARNATH_S )     (OPD)

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-SEP-1996 13:45:22.80

     SUBJECT: try try again

     TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                          APFEL K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
     READ: NOT READ

     TO: Keith J. Fontenot                         FONTENOT K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addre
     READ: NOT READ

     TO: Jack A. Smalligan                         SMALLIGAN J   ) Autoforward to: Remote Addr
     READ:NOT READ

     TO: Ingrid M. Schroeder                       SCHROEDER I     (OMB)
     READ:13-SEP-1996 14:12:28.50

     TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E   (WHO)
     READ:13-SEP-1996 15:58:42.70

     TEXT:
     PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
     Backdoor Cut to Legal Immigration (By Sponsor Income Requirement)
     H.R.2202 would restrict family reunification legal immigration by
     requiring sponsors to have income above 140% of poverty to
     sponsor a spouse or child, and 200% of poverty to sponsor other
     family members.
     Deports Legal Immigrants For Using Government Programs
     The legislation would subject immigrants to deportation and ban
     them from naturalizing if they have temporary need of government
     programs. These sanctions may be imposed for legal immigrants who
     use means
     o
     -tested benefits for an aggregate period of 12 months
     within their first 7 years. Deportation arguably could result
     from receiving child care or Head Start, and possibly medical
     assistance (depending on how "means
     o
     -tested" is interpreted) .
     Deeming
     The immigration bill extends deeming to programs such as
     emergency Medicaid and Head Start and creates a more narrow
     exemption for public health assistance.  HHS says that an
     immigrant child whose sponsor father has abandoned her would be
     excluded from Head Start because of her father's income.

     Broad Definition of Means
     o
     -tested Programs
     The welfare reform bill provides the Administration with some
     leeway in defining means
     o
     -tested programs that exclude
     noncitizens. The immigration bill appears to limit this
     discretion with a definition of means
     o
     -tested programs that is
.,.

      broader than in the welfare bill.
      Social Security Implementation
      SSA has observed that the immigration bill and welfare reform
      provisions that SSA is responsible for implementing differ enough
      to raise numerous legal issues and administrative problems
      concerning how they would interact.  For example, the welfare
      reform bill allows veterans and active duty personnel, and their
      spouses and dependents to be eligible for SSI; the immigration
      bill would make them ineligible.
      Bottom
      o
      -Line Welfare Point
      This bill is viewed by some as including provisions that add
      insult to injury after the welfare reform bill and would be
      viewed by some as a repudiation of the President's pledge to try
      to "fix" welfare reform provisions concerning noncitizens.


