RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeremy D. Benami ( BENAMI_J     (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-SEP-1996 14:46:29.40

SUBJECT: welfare decisions

TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                           APFEL K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Bruce N. Reed                              REED B      (WHO)
READ:23-SEP-1996 10:24:21.27

TO: Carol H. Rasco                             RASCO C      (WHO)
READ:20-SEP-1996 16:46:50.28

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ:20-SEP-1996 14:50:32.19

TO: Emily Bromberg                             BROMBERG E      (WHO)
READ:24-SEP-1996 08:42:20.29

TO: Diana M. Fortuna                           FORTUNA D      (OPD)
READ:20-SEP-1996 14:54:20.11

TO: Keith J. Fontenot                          FONTENOT K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addre
READ: NOT READ

TEXT:

Please let me know as soon as possible if you feel
the following accurately summarizes our positions on
the first four issues.
On Wisconsin, should I just say our proposal is to
issue the waiver asap?
It looks dicey for a meeting this afternoon.  Carol
cannot do it, and it may be impossible for Emily and
for Ken.
I am out on Monday, as I assume is Kevin and Elena.
One possibility is for Bruce, Diana, Elena and I to
go over this on the phone with John and company and
see where we are.
We will be briefing John Angell on this as well this
afternoon. He will keep Leon apprised and is
satisfied that as long as our group of WH folks are
united, Leon will be where we are.
Please advise.

PRINTER FONT 14 - POINT- ROMAN
ISSUES
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- ROMAN
1.      Waivers
        Guidance to states would require that states identify in
their plans specific provisions of their demonstration that they
believe are inconsistent with PRWORA.  States would be told that
they would not be allowed to operate programs that did not comply
with the lifetime time limit or from the work participation
rates. States would be alerted that subsequent legislative or
regulatory action regarding TANF penalties might limit their
·
flexibility in the future, but such action would be effective
only prospectively.
        Note: This would allow states to continue experiments with
definitions of work that vary from Section 407(d) provided those
differences are flagged in the plan. While this approach does
not rule out subsequently determining that the demonstration is
out of compliance with the spirit of the new law, it does mean
that there would be no retrospective financial penalty.

2.       45 day Notice
         States would be required to provide the 45 day comment
period required by the PRWORA following enactment of the new
statute.
         If permissible, funding should flow on a finding that the
plan is otherwise complete. At a minimum, funding would be
retroactive once the comment period is complete.

3.      Guidance
        Guidance to states would include a one page, ten item list
of questions that must be answered for the plan to be complete.
There would be no lengthy mandatory checklist, but the guidance
could indicate that an optional checklist is available on request
by a state to help in the preparation of the state plan.

4.      Domestic Violence
         The President would issue a memorandum to the Secretary of
HHS and the Attorney General that would direct them to (l) work
with states to inform them of the options available to them in
the treatment of battered women and to encourage states to take
advantage of those options; (2) provide technical assistance to
states in designing their programs and services for this
population; and (3) provide funding for research into the linkage
between domestic violence and welfare dependence.
        Note: This would not provide a waiver of the 20 percent
exemption.
5.      Wisconsin Waiver


