    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Dennis K. Burke ( CN;Dennis K. Burke/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 18-MAR-1997 23:13:23.00

    SUBJECT:   Assault Weapon Clips

    TO: Elena Kagan     CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP.[ OPD 1 )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN;Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Here is my better understanding of the particular facts on the clips
    issue. Then, I guess we should talk about the Dingell issue when you want
    to.

    The 1994 Crime Bill restricted the manufacture, transfer, and possession
    of certain semiautomatic assault weapons and "large capacity ammunition
    feeding devices."

    The Act defined "large capacity ammunition feeding device" to mean:

            "A magazine, belt, drum, feed strip, or ~imilar device
    manufactured after the date of enactment of the Act that has the capacity
    of, or that can be readily restored or converted to accept more than 10
    rounds of ammunition."

    So the definition, itself, grandfathers in clips that were manufactured
    before the effective date.  This definition was inserted into the bill by
    Dingell during conference.

    However, ATF originally interpreted this provision to only to such devices
    lawfully possessed in the United States on or before enactment.

    Two suits were filed against ATF by clip manufactures over their
    interpretation of this provision. Dingell was very vocal about this
    interpretation and I can go into that background w/ you.   In addition,
    the Associate Attorney General informed ATF that the Civil Division would
    not defend ATF's interpretation in court.

    As a result, in July 1996, ATF reinterpreted the clip provision through a
    temporary rule in the Federal Register acknowledging that pre-ban clips
    could be imported. They did, however, require importers to present
    reasonable evidence that the devices were manufactured on or before the
    Crime Bill's date of enactment.

    Treasury informs me that since then and as of March 1, 1997, importation
    records indicate that 157,236 large capacity magazines from a variety of
    countries have been imported, through 21 approved permits.  83 permits
    seeking importation of 2,112,441 large capacity magazines have been
    approved. According to Treasury an importer receives a one year permit to
    bring in a certain number of clips, but the importer might not use all of
    this permit authority.


Feinstein now claims that these clips are coming in from China and it is
because of the Dingell amendment.

since the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989, exports of defense articles
to China have been prohibited. State and Treasury regulations state that
it is the U.S. policy to prohibit imports of defense articles that are
subject to an U.S. arms export embargo.  Before 1994, China was exempted
from this policy.

On May 26, 1994, the President revoked China's waiver --- so that no guns
or clips could legally come into the United States from China.

However, Senator Craig, from the great State of Idaho, added an amendment
to an appropriations bill, effective July 25, 1994, that prevented
appropriated funds from being used to bar the importation of previously
importable munitions from China that were in transit as of May 26, 1994.

According to Treasury, 35,000 large capacity magazines were imported from
China under the Craig amendment -- but none have come in since the Crime
B"ill's implementation date, September 13, 1994.

So, yes clips are coming into the United States because   of the Dingell
provision, but no they are not coming in from China (at   least according to
the Treasury Dept, the same folks who forgot to tell us   that they had
already announce the President's youth gun interdiction   initiative a year
before he did) .
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 006 - FOLDER -004


[03/19/1997]
