RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-l MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna ( FORTUNA_D )    (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-SEP-1996 15:32:16.78

SUBJECT: Here is the draft memo

TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E   (WHO)
READ:30-SEP-1996 15:32:50.67

TEXT:
Carol was hoping to send this out late tomorrow or early
Wednesday. OMB may co-sign it.
It needs a bit of updating for events of last 2 days.

==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:30-SEP-1996 15:30:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna

TEXT:


PRINTER FONT 12_POINT_ROMAN
DRAFT


September 2-, 1996

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
FROM:            Carol Rasco
                         Bruce Reed
SUBJECT:                 Update on Welfare Reform Implementation
We are continuing to work to coordinate the Administration's
efforts to implement the new welfare law. We will be providing
periodic updates on key issues for you, as well as answers to
questions you raise.
PROCESS
We are working closely with OMB, Counsel's office, and
Intergovernmental on all aspects of implementation. We have the
following process in motion:
o        We chair bi
o
-weekly meetings of 11 federal agencies and all
White House offices.
o       A subgroup of key agencies and offices meets more regularly
on nuts
o
-and
o
-bolts implementation issues.
o       We are meeting weekly with the National Governors'
Association, the National Conference of State Legislatures,
and the American Public Welfare Association.
o       We met with the League of Cities, the Conference of Mayors,
and the counties and promised them ongoing input and
consultation.



TANF BLOCK GRANT IMPLEMENTATION
The entitlement to AFDC ends on October 1.  States can elect to
take advantage of the new TANF block grant on that date, but they
must enter the new program by July 1997. The first states to
send in state plans were Michigan and Wisconsin.  HHS expects to
approve their plans by September 30. Approximately 10 states are
expected to file state plans on or about October 1.


o
Determining "Completeness" of Plans -- HHS's role in state plans
is merely to certify that they are "complete" -- a far different
role than they have had in the past. We have worked with HHS to
pare down their list of what is required for a plan to be
complete. As a result, they produced draft guidance for the
states at the NGA conference that was quite brief -- and praised
by the states as a result.
Regulations -- The laws provide only limited authority to
regulate the TANF block grant.   You asked in our last memo
whether we can require states to use TANF funds as wage
subsidies. This is one of the permissible uses of the funds and
one way states can provide work.   HHS will be working with states
to promote this as a model, but it will not be able to require
that states adopt any particular approach to meeting the work
requirement.
Grandfathering Waivers -- Legal counsel advises that the welfare
law allows states to continue to operate waiver programs that
have time limits and work requirements that vary from the terms
of the new law.   We will, however, be making it clear in our
guidance to states that the administration believes that all
state programs should comply with the law's provisions regarding
time limits, participation rates, and exemptions and extensions.
We will also indicate that if states do not bring their programs
into line with the law, there will almost certainly be
Congressional action (which we would support) to limit the
grandfathering provision.
Wisconsin waiver -- We believe we have resolved the Wisconsin
situation. On Monday, HHS plans to inform the state that it does
not need waivers to implement its welfare reform plan, and that
HHS will not grant the state's request for a Medicaid waiver on
the grounds that it goes against our principles on health care.
HHS will offer to work with the state on an alternative Medicaid
proposal.
Wisconsin's state plan includes a 60
o
-day residency requirement
before families can begin to collect benefits. HHS believes this
is unconstitutional, though the law in this area is unsettled.
The provision will definitely be brought to the courts.
Performance Bonus Fund and Contingency Fund -- The new law
requires the Administration to work with NGA and the states to
set up the Performance Bonus Fund and gives them a year to
develop the formula and process. We are setting up a process
with the state groups mentioned above to work out such a proposal
in cooperation. We will keep you apprised as these plans
develop. The Contingency Fund that protects states from economic
downturns will be much simpler to establish. Treasury is taking

the necessary steps and is working closely with HHS.


o
New Mexico -- New Mexico is one of the few states that is
disadvantaged by the conversion to a block grant, because its
case load is increasing. The state has said it may have to cut
welfare benefits by 12% to live within the new law. Senator
Domenici is endeavoring to intercede on the state's behalf with
either a legislative or administrative fix. He has proposed that
the state get access to the Contingency Fund, but HHS responds
that the state is not eligible until it converts from AFDC to
TANF. New Mexico has threatened to sue HHS over its position
that the law does not allow the state to draw down more in
Federal funds than the block grant amount in FY1997.
IMMIGRANTS
The immigration issues raised by the law are clearly the
thorniest and most difficult to implement.
Means
o
-tested Benefits -- Non
o
-citizens who arrive after the law's
enactment are barred from receiving "means
o
-tested benefits." We
have considerable latitude to define that term, and Counsel's
office, OMB, and DOJ are working together to do so.
Interim Verification -- Many government programs such as food
stamps have a new role to play in verifying the legal status of
non
o
-citizens and whether they fall into any of the categories
exempted from the full impact of this law. One particularly
difficult exemption to administer is the "40 quarters" exemption,
whereby legal immigrants who have worked at least 10 years in
this country can still get benefits. SSA is working on a new
system to give other agencies access to this information on an
overnight basis.
However, SSA's records are likely to be incomplete for many
people, such as farmworkers and domestic workers whose employers
did not pay the taxes on their behalf. We plan to get
instructions to food stamp offices next week on how to address
this problem and avoid denying benefits inappropriately.
Food Stamps Implementation -- As you know, states are beginning
to deny food stamps to new non
o
-citizen applicants, although the
interpretation of USDA's guidance on when they must comply varies
from state to state. States are also beginning to process
recertifications of current recipients, which triggers the
benefit cut
o
-off for those legal immigrants.
USDA made a waiver available to states that allows some of them
to delay the impact on current recipients. Over 30 states have
accepted this waiver option to date. California was not helped
by that waiver because of the vagaries of their certification
process, and has requested an alternative waiver. We are working

on potential legislative and administrative options that might
work for them.
Reporting of Illegal Aliens -- The law requires states to report


quarterly to the INS on any illegal aliens they become aware of.
The INS is trying to determine how to implement this provision.
Below are answers to three questions you raised in the last
update memo:
o       Legal immigrants who get SSI will get notices early next
year that SSA will reexamine their eligibility, and benefits
will be ended in August 1997. The INS will send them
information on naturalization this November to ensure that
as many as possible who meet the requirements for
citizenship are able to naturalize before their benefits end
next August.
o       We are working closely with INS and disability and
immigration groups to ensure that the regulation waiving
certain testing requirements for immigrants with
disabilities is finalized as soon as possible. The comment
period ends within the next two weeks, and the rule will be
finalized in December.
o       You had noted the statistic that the INS naturalized 1.2
million immigrants this fiscal year, and asked how big an
increase it represented over the prior year. Approximately
500,000 people were naturalized last year, so it is a very
significant increase.
FOOD STAMPS WORK REQUIREMENT
As you may recall, the new law imposes work requirements on food
stamp applicants who are 18
o
-50 years old, but it allows states to
apply for a waiver of this requirement in areas of high
unemployment. USDA will be issuing guidance very shortly on how
states can designate such areas.
SSI FOR DISABLED CHILDREN
As you know, the law tightened the eligibility standard for SSI
for children with disabilities. The law was effective upon
enactment for new applicants. As many as 190,000 children now on
the rolls will lose eligibility between March and August 1997
because their impairments are not severe enough to qualify under
the new law. Two major issues have emerged:
Cut
o
-off Date for Families Who Appeal -- SSA will determine whom
to drop from the rolls by August 1997, but families can appeal
SSA's decision, and are guaranteed continued benefits while they

appeal. Legally, we have learned that we are able to keep
children on the rolls up to a later point in the appeals process
than we had expected, and we believe we should take advantage of
this option. As a result, children who appeal will lose benefits
in 1999, rather than late 1997 or 1998. We have not yet
announced this decision because we want to announce our decision
on the second issue at the same time.
D
Definition of Childhood Disability -- The law includes a new
definition of childhood disability.  During the lengthy debate on
this issue, everyone assumed the new definition would cut 190,000
children from the rolls, and we included savings in our budget
reflecting that estimate. However, from a legal perspective it
appears we have significantly more flexibility to define
childhood disability than we expected. Advocates have united
around an interpretation that would drop from the rolls only 20%
of the 190,000 children, but Congress would undoubtedly view this


  option as subverting their intent. We are seeking a proposal
  that strikes the right balance.
  MEDICAID
  In the coming week, HHS will layout for us an initial position
  on key Medicaid issues, including how states can reconfigure
  their systems to accommodate the separate eligibility systems
  required for Medicaid and TANF; what happens to the Medicaid
  coverage of those individuals who lose SSI coverage; and the
  impact on existing waivers. States are very anxious to hear more
  from the Administration on these questions.
  Another major question is how many states will accept the option
  to continue Medicaid for current legal immigrants.  They must
  decide by January 1.
  CHILD CARE
  The new provisions of the law relating to child care go into
  effect October 1, 1996. This is a very positive story as HHS
  worked quickly and effectively to help states understand the new
  law, develop interim plans to access the new funding, and ensure
  that states will get their increased money on time.   We will be
  working with Communications to ensure that the opportunity to
  highlight some good news on this front is not missed.
  TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS
  The Secretary of HHS is required to report to Congress within 90
  days (November 22, 1996) on technical amendments and corrections
  that are necessary. The other departments as well as many of the
  groups with which we are working have concerns in this area as
  well. We will be working closely with HHS as the date for this
  report draws closer.


  cc:  Leon Panetta
          Frank Raines
  ================== END ATTACHMENT   1   ==================


RECORI) TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Emily Bromberg ( BROMBERG E     (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-SEP-1996 17:06:07.26

SUBJECT: means tested

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E     (WHO)
READ: 30-SEP-1996 19:20:26.53

TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                           APFEL K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ : NOT READ

CC: Diana M. Fortuna                           FORTUNA D     (OPD)
READ:30-SEP-199617:57:17.06

TEXT:
states brought up again today definition of means-tested benefit. can we meet on
this soon (this week?)?
ken--great job on the food stamp/immigration issue!


