RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jeremy D. Benami ( BENAMI_J      (WHO)

 CREATION DATE/TIME:18-0CT-1996 14:29:38.26

SUBJECT: final forty quarters

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ:18-0CT-1996 16:36:39.08

TO: Diana M. Fortuna                           FORTUNA D      (OPD)
READ:18-0CT-1996 14:30:00.54

TO: Stephen C. Warnath                         WARNATH S      (OPD)
READ:18-0CT-1996 14:35:06.57

 TO: Emily Bromberg                            BROMBERG E      (WHO)
 READ:18-0CT-1996 14:31:57.31

TEXT:
FYI attached is the final version of forty quarters material that
USDA received last night.
This is the version they are sending out! Without question marks,
we hope!
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:18-0CT-1996 14:28:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Jeremy D. Benami

 TEXT:




 SUBJECT:        FSP
o
 -Verification of Noncitizen Eligibility
 TO:             Regional Administrators
                 All Regions

        This memorandum provides guidance to State agencies in
implementing section 402 of the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996.  Please transmit
this information to your State agencies immediately.
        Section 402 generally limits the eligibility of legal
immigrants for the Food Stamp Program, but section 402(a) (2) (B)
provides an exception for legal immigrants who have worked or can
be credited with 40 quarters of qualified work.   The law
provides that quarters worked by a parent or a spouse can be
credited to the individual in determining the number of
qualifying quarters.
        Implementing this requirement will be challenging for the
Social Security Administration (SSA) which is the primary source
of verification of quarters worked, eligibility workers, and the
individual immigrants. While some immigrants may already have 40
quarters clearly established in their Social Security records,
others may have been employed in jobs covered by Social Security


but earnings may not have been appropriately reported.    Many
immigrants, particularly migrant workers, may have difficulty
obtaining verification of employment, and SSA will have to work
with them to establish quarters.   Finally, the definition of a
"quarter" of work may cause some confusion as "quarters" are
credited on the basis of annual earnings rather than on months
work,ed.
         This memorandum and the attached procedures provide guidance
to State agencies in administering the 40 quarters determination.
This procedure has been developed in cooperation with SSA, and we
are drafting regulations to address 40 quarter verification be
based on the procedures outlined in this memorandum. Until
regulations are published, FCS and SSA strongly encourage State
agencies to follow these procedures.    Quality control review
will be based on these certification procedures as well.
         Verification of 40 quarters information for most applicants
and current recipients will primarily be accomplished by an
automated system SSA is developing to provide State agencies with

individual quarters of coverage information overnight through
batch processing. SSA expects that system to be operational in
January.  Pending the implementation of the automated system, FCS
and SSA have developed an interim procedure for processing
households with immigrant members.
o
        This procedure (attached) authorizes certification pending
verification (CPV) for immigrants who have been in the country
long enough to acquire 40 quarters of coverage and who state that
they have met the work requirement.   For individuals who meet
this requirement, the individual's attestation to 40 quarters is
sufficient. No further documentation of earnings is required at
application pending SSA verification. Those individuals who do
not have enough quarters of their own may also attest at
application to quarters earned through the work of a parent or
spouse.
        Within 3 months after the month in which the SSA
verification system is operational, the State agency shall submit
the required information for each CPV individual to SSA. SSA
will report back the number of quarters that can be credited to
the individual and applicable family members.
        If SSA's existing records cannot verify that an individual
has 40 quarters,  SSA will work with the individual to determine
whether quarters can be established.   Individuals in this
situation should be advised of this option and that they will be
allowed to participate for 6 more months provided SSA certifies
that they are working to clarify their records.   The individual
will be required to provide a document from SSA indicating that
the number of quarters, is under review.  SSA is developing a
document to meet this requirement.
        If SSA verification finally indicates that an individual
does not have 40 qualifying quarters, the State agency shall
establish an inadvertent household error claim for the
overissuance.
        We hope that these procedures will go a long way toward
easing these difficulties and ensuring that the law is
implemented in a fair and effective manner.   Please let us know
if you have any questions.

                                                                Yvette S. Jackson


                                                                Deputy Administrator
                                                                Food Stamp Program
Attachments
cc:     Food Stamp Program Director
        All Regions
o
Certification Pending verification Procedures
For Legal Immigrants

The following procedures are for legal immigrants who believe
that they have a work history that meets the forty quarters
exemption in the law. These procedures need not be followed for
those legal immigrants who qualify for other exemptions in the
law (refugees, asylees, deportees, or applicants with a claim to
eligibility based on military service.)
Second para -- In order to determine eligibility based on social
security coverage, the state should ascertain the applicant's
understanding as to the following:
         1.      How many years has the applicant, the applicant's
spouse, or the applicant's parents (before the
applicant turned 18) lived in this county.
         (If the answer to question 1 is less than 10 years, the
State agency does not need to ask question 2) .
         2.      In how many of the years reported in answer to question
1, did the applicant, the applicant's spouse, or the
applicant's parent earn money through work.
         (To determine whether the applicant's earnings were
sufficient to establish "quarters of coverage" in those
years, the State agency may wish to refer to the
attached chart.)
If the answer to the question 2 is 10 years or more,   the State
agency shall verify, from INS documents,   the date of entry into
the country of the applicant, spouse and/or parent.   If the dates
are consistent with having 10 or more years of work, no further
documentation is required at this time; the State agency shall
include the immigrant in the household pending verification from
SSA. The State agency shall inform these recipients that a claim
will be es~ablished for any benefits to which they were not
entitled. The State agency shall keep a record of each
individual certified pending verification from SSA.
If the dates of entry are inconsistent with having 10 or more
years of work, the State agency shall determine the applicant
ineligible. The State agency shall then inform the applicant of
his or her fair hearing rights.
The applicant shall also provide, for purposes of future

verification, the full name, Social Security Number, date of
birth, and sex of each individual (self, parent or spouse) whose
work history is relevant to the determination of eligibility.
In addition, the applicant shall provide a release form signed by
each such individual (copy attached) giving SSA permission to
release information on that individual to the state agency and/or
the applicant. This form shall be retained in the case file to
document the individual's consent.
SSA is drafting an addendum to the current Computer Matching and
Privacy Protection Act agreement between SSA and each state
agency.  In accordance with that revised agreement, and within
three months after the month in which the SSA verification system
becomes operational, the state agency will send the identifying
·

    information provided by the applicant to SSA for overnight
    processing.   In its response, SSA will provide information about
    qualifying quarters of work.   If the immigrant believes the
    information from SSA is inaccurate or incomplete, the State
    agency shall refer the applicant to SSA for review. SSA will
    give the individual a document indicating that the number of
    quarters is under review. An immigrant who provides the state
    agency with this document can continue to receive benefits for
    six months from the date of SSA's initial response or until SSA
    has completed its review, whichever is earlier.



    ==================   END ATTACHMENT   1   ==================


