RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (EXTERNAL MAIL)

CREATOR: M. Jill Gibbons@EOP@LNGTWY@EOPMRX

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-0CT-1996 10:29:00.00

SUBJECT: signing statement for H.R. 1281

TO: KAGAN E                                    KAGAN E@A1@CD   (WHO)
READ:21-0CT-1996 11:09:12.09

TO: DAVIS W                                    DAVIS W@A1@CD   (NSC)
READ:21-0CT-1996 12:07:10.60

TO: Steven D. Aitken                       ( Steven D. Aitken@EOP@LNGTWY@EOPMRX )
READ:NOT READ

TEXT:
Message Creation Date was at 21-0CT-1996 10:23:00

Do you have any comments on the signing statement for H.R. 1281, the War Crimes
Disclosure Act? Thanks

The following is the statement as sent to you on Friday.

                    STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT

     I have today approved H.R. 1281, the "War Crimes Disclosure Act." This
Act, sponsored
by Representative Maloney of New York, urges United States Government agencies
to make
public any records concerning individuals alleged to havecommitted Nazi war
crimes.

     My Administration is committed to ensuring the widestpossible disclosure
of government
documents. On April 17, 1995, Isigned Executive Order 12958, which will make
available
certain previously classified national security documents while safeguarding
information
critical to our Nation's security. Additionally, my Administration worked
closely with Congress
on the recent passage of the Electronic Freedom of Information Act.  I believe
that our democratic
principles require that the American people be informed of the activities of
their government.

     Over half a century has passed since the conclusion of World War II and
the end of the
Holocaust, one of the most horrifying periods of genocide in world history.  I
strongly believe
in the central finding of this Act, that it is important to learn all we can
about this terrible era so
that we can prevent such a catastrophe from ever happening again. To that end,
the Act calls
for more comprehensive disclosure of documents specific to Nazi war crimes.  It
is clearly in
our public interest to learn any remaining secrets about the Holocaust.

    I'm pleased that the Act recognizes the need not to disclose material that


is still important
to u.s. national security interests.  I am hopeful that the Congress and the
Executive branch will
continue to work together to balance the public interests of disclosing
government records with
the national interests of keeping certain documents protected within the
context of future initiatives
 in this area.

     Ensuring a full accounting of United States records on Nazi war criminals
is an important step
in preserving the memory of those who died and honoring the sacrifices of those
who survived.
I am pleased to sign this Act into law.


