RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Emily Bromberg ( CN=Emily Bromberg/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-DEC-1996 10:39:33.00

SUBJECT:   Indian Gaming/Governors

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
here it is--Iet me know. thanks.

The Governors have very strong concerns about a proposed rule currently
under consideration by the Department of the Interior (see the letter to
the President, attached). The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988 (IGRA)
set up a process for states and tribes to negotiate Class III gaming
operation by Indian tribes in good faith.  The Act permitted tribes to
bring suit against states alleging negotiation in bad faith.  The US
Supreme Court, in Seminole Tribe of Florida v. Florida, affirmed the
statesD, Eleventh Amendment defense to a suit and ruled that a Tribe could
not bring such a suit against a state. The Interior Department is
proposing a rule that authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to
intervene with states when tribes allege bad faith and to allow tribes to
operate gaming in the absence of a tribal-state compact.

Because the rule is still in the process of the advance notice of proposed
rule making, we are unable to contact the Interior Department to discuss
the GovernorsD,D,s concerns. The White House CounselD,s Office, while
checking the status of the rule, learned that Interior is not only
considering the rule but alternatives to it, including not proceeding with
the rule.  CounselD,s office understands tnat Interior is still reviewing
its options and that the Secretary will bring the issue to the white House
before reaching a decision. According to the CounselD,s Office, Interior
expects to send an options memo to the President in the next month or two.

Yesterday, Governors Miller of Nevada and Voinovich of Ohio (Chair and
Vice-Chair of the National GovernorsD, Association) requested a meeting
with the President to call for his intervention into this matter (see NGA
Bulletin, attached). Since the White House has not yet received the
options memo from the Secretary, CounselD,s Office is recommending that
the President decline to meet with the Governors.  We will contact·
Governors Miller and Voinovich today.
