          RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

          CREATOR: Andrew J. Mayock ( CN=Andrew J. Mayock/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO j )

          CREATION DATE/TIME:23-MAR-1997 14:25:11.00

          SUBJECT:     Draft Reconciliation Memo

          TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO j )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD j )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TEXT:
          At,tached is the draft memo for your review and comments. Please send
          comments bye-mail or drop off comments at room 176 OEOB by 4pm Sunday.
          (We are trying to get the memo to E. Bowles this evening.)

          Sorry about the timing.

          Thank you.

          ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
          ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

          TEXT:
          Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D36j MAIL426915180. 016 to ASCII,
           The following is a HEX DUMP:




                                                   P2, P6/(b)(6)
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion



MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                        ERSKINE BOWLES, SYLVIA MATHEWS
                             AND THE RECONCILIATION GROUP

SUBJECT:                     ACTION ON RECONCILIATION

PURPOSE

This memorandum is to prepare you for Tuesday's meeting on proposals for combating
intolerance and promoting racial understanding and reconciliation. What follows is background
infonnation and two proposals for your consideration.

BACKGROUND

In examining the question of whether or not to have a race commission, we examined how to
address your concern, as articulated in the State of the Union Address, that America must
become "One America" and that our society confront unresolved issues of race and bigotry.
Over the last few weeks, we have convened a number of meetings (list of participants attached)
to devise a proposal that would enable you to take steps to improve race relations, lessen
intolerance and capitalize on the nation's diversity as a strength.

In order to achieve the difficult balance between study and action, we have concluded that any
proposal must include two elements: I) an ability to provide immediate action on this issue,
which includes creating a greater dialogue between the races in this country; and 2) the means to
examine the difficult policy issues involved and to provide recommendations for addressing
them. This memo lays out two options for pursuing these goals: 1) a commission with an action
entity and a study entity; and 2) a series of town meetings, a national conference and a report
from the President to the American people.

This undertaking is not without risks. A candid discussion of racial divisions is bound to stir
passions, cause controversy and give offense across the political spectrum. Specific remedial
prescriptions are sure to spark controversy. For example, we might receive a recommendation
to change cocaine sentencing, a sensitive and difficult issue. Also, selecting people to
participate will present a challenge to achieve a balance whereby consensus may be found and
still provide a breadth of views. Yet, along with the risks is the unique opportunity to set in
motion a process which reverses the negative trend that has hindered racial progress since the
eighties, and re-establishes the ideal of an America for all.

While any President is in a special position to use the moral authority of the office to promote
healing of racial divides, you are unique because of your deep commitment to racial justice and
reconciliation and your ability to talk about race in a way that the American people respond.
Moreover, we believe that your moving the country towards racial reconciliation could be a
central element of the legacy you leave as President.
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion .


SCOPE

A threshold question that you need to confront is how broad or narrow the scope of this initiative
should be. Three options to consider are the following: 1) an initiative that addresses racial
issues exclusively; 2) a "unity" initiative which broadly encompasses minorities affected by
bigotry and intolerance, including races, women, the disabled, and gays and lesbians; or 3) a
"race and intolerance" initiative, which would be dominated by race issues, but also generally
address other types of discrimination.

The argument for focusing specifically on racial intolerance is that the long history of racial
struggle for civil rights has caused a consensus on the principle of racial equality. Precisely
because that consensus is fragile--witness the attacks on affirmative action and the
anti-immigrant rhetoric--your initiative must focus solely on racial discrimination in order to
reinforce and strengthen our country's commitment to equality. Another reason for focusing on
racial intolerance is the argument that a commission or summit about everything will, in the end,
be about nothing. Also, the issue of race is in itself a very difficult, complex, broad-ranging
problem without the addition of other types of discrimination.

The argument for a broad "unity" focus is the fulfillment of your call for "One America." Many
of the problems of discrimination and hatred are experienced just as strongly by groups other
than racial minorities. By narrowing the initiative's charter, discord may result among key
constituencies.

The argument for a "race and intolerance" initiative is that it focuses directly on race without
excluding other minorities who face intolerance and bigotry.

OPTION I:      RACE COMMISSION

One option is for you to create a commission by Executive Order and appoint its members. The
commission would undertake: 1) a sustained and intensive campaign to build a national
environment receptive to addressing the divisions within our country; and 2) scholarly research
which leads to a deeper understanding and provides recommendations to overcome the
differential treatment accorded various groups. The commission would thus be both
action-oriented and academic.

Membership I Executive Director: The commission would be composed of approximately
twenty to twenty-five members that would have a national, diverse (geographically, racially and
professionally) and bi-partisan composition. We believe that limiting the commission's size is
important to creating a group that can actually achieve something. The members would be
formerly elected public officials, former judges, business and religious leaders, sports and
entertainment notables, scholars, foundation and other non-profit officials, and civil rights·
advocates. Due to the commission's size limitations, the elected officials would not be included
because inclusion would lead to a demand that could not be met. The commission would be


                                                 2
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


administered by an executive director. This position will be a key to the success or failure of the
commission. The selection of the members and the executive director will communicate how
serious, bold and creative you consider this project.

Action Task Force: To pursue an action agenda, the commission would have a task force that
heightens awareness, promotes reconciliation, confronts negative stereotypes and encourages
rational discourse on divisive issues. The action task force would pursue these objectives
through such initiatives as I) Public Service Announcements; 2) the collection and dissemination
of information on best practices to community groups (e.g. ministerial groups, U.S. Conference
on Mayors and National League of Cities); 3) the nomination of Presidential Award recipient; 4)
a nation-wide theme campaign; and 5) town meetings and debates. Also, the action task force
could sponsor a White House Conference on Hate Crimes, which would unequivocally signal the
Administration's opposition to and abhorrence of violence against those who may be different
from others, and bring effected groups together to identify commonalities and possible solutions.


       Action Variant: A variant of a commission option that raises the level of the action
       entity is the creation of two separate entities: a Commission on Race and a Council on
       Unity. The commission would be a scholarly endeavor and focus on the policy issues of
       racial discrimination. The council would be solely action-oriented and broadly focused,
       including issues of discrimination against women and gays and lesbians. The council
       would do all those things that the action task force would do (e.g., Public Service
       announcements, town meetings, etc.). This commission/council option may simplify
       participant selection with academics and experts on the commission and public figures
       on the council. However, this option has its drawbacks in that it may confuse people
       between the two entities, especially if the council is more broadly tailored. Furthermore,
       a dual-entity option could set up ajurisdictional dispute between the council and the
       commission.

Academic Task Force: A scholarly task force created by the Commission would undertake an
inquiry that would reach out to the nation's best thinkers. This task force would organize
working groups to review existing research, pursue original research and recommend action.
The group could focus on the following specific areas: judicial system, education, housing,
employment and health care.

Timing: The action task force would be at work over the next year. The academic task force
would deliver a report to you in one year. Under current assumptions, which includes time for
selecting and appointing the members, a realistic timeframe would probably indicate an initiation
date between July - September 1997 and a report date between July - September 1998.

Funding: An attachment is provided that outlines possible funding options.




                                                3
