RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( CN=William R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1997 20:27:21.00

SUBJECT:   Michigan Package

TO: Jonathan Murchinson ( CN=Jonathan Murchinson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Phillip Caplan ( CN=Phillip Caplan/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below are the following items:

1. One pager on announcement items for Michigan--press office will reformat

2. Final draft directive submitted to Staff Secretary.

3. Bullets on possible results of the directive.

please let Mike or me know if you have any questions.    I'm at 6-2857.

Thanks.


Continuing Progress Toward Raising. Standards and Improving Reading and Math

DRAFT March 6, 1997

MICHIGAN SECOND STATE TO ACCEPT CHALLENGE ON NATIONAL STANDARDS OF
EXCELLENCE IN MATH AND SCIENCE.

Last month, in his State of the Union address, President Clinton
challenged states and school districts to participate in a new, voluntary
national test for individual students in fourth-grade reading and
eighth-grade students mathematics to be administered beginning in the
spring of 1999. Today, Governor Engler will announce that Michigan
intends to participate in the new national tests.  This makes Michigan the
second state, after Maryland, to make this commitment.

FOCUSING FEDERAL RESOURCES ON HELPING STATES AND SCHOOL DISTRICTS IMPROVE
MATH EDUCATION

Today the President is directing the Department of Education and the
National Science Foundation, working with other agencies, to develop an


action strategy for using federal resources and involving the math,
scientific, and technical communities in helping states and school
districts prepare students to meet challenging standards in eighth grade
math, as well as raise achievement in science. The action strategy, to be
completed within 90 days, will include recommendations for the use of
federal resources to help states, local school districts and schools to
improve teaching, upgrade curriculum, integrate technology and
high-quality instructional materials into the classroom, as well as
motivate students and help them understand how math concepts are applied
in the real world.

TECHNOLOGY GRANT AWARDED TO   MIC~IGAN


The President also announced today that the u.s. Department of Education
is awarding Michigan $8.6 million under the PresidentO,s Technology
Literacy Challenge Fund. Under the award, funds will go to local schools
to help teachers gain training in the use of technology, and also help
fund software and hardware, as well as Internet access, to help students
connect with the information superhighway and learn to high standards.

MORE COMMITMENTS TO AMERICA READS

In a sign of progress on his America Reads initiative, the President also
announced today that 16 colleges and universities in Michigan had
committed more than 1500 work study students to serve as reading tutors
over the next 5 years.



                                         March 6, 1997


MEMORANDUM FOR THE:
        SECRETARY OF EDUCATION
        DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

SUBJECT: Preparing Students to Meet National Standards of Excellence in
Eighth Grade Math      and Improving Math and Science Education

Since the early 1980's, U.S. elementary and secondary school students have
begun taking tougher courses, and we are starting to see the results.
National Assessment of Educational Progress scores have improved in math
and science, with gains in mathematics equal to at least one grade level.
On the SAT, average math scores are at their highest in 25 years, even as
the number and diversity of test-takers have increased.  However, the
eighth-grade results of the 41-Nation Third International Math and Science
Study (TIMSS), released this fall, show that the U.S. is below average in
math and just above average in science. That isn't acceptable; in this
technology-rich information era, our students need to perform much better
in both subjects, but especially in math, if they are to excel at higher
level math and science courses that are the gateway to college and to
citizenship, productive employment, and lifelong learning.

The first step in raising achievement is lifting expectations and setting
high standards for what students should know and be able to do. TIMSS, our
National Assessment of Educational Progress, and the standards developed
by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics give us a solid
framework to build on.  Last month, to help parents and teachers learn who
needs help, what changes in teaching to make, and which schools need to
improve, I asked the Secretary of Education to develop a voluntary


national test for individual eighth-grade students based on
widely-accepted, challenging national standards in mathematics. The
national test will be available to states and local school districts to
give to their students in the spring of 1999, and will measure whether
students have reached a high level of mathematics proficiency.

The primary responsibility for achieving high standards rests with
students, teachers, parents, and schools in local communities across
America. However, it is imperative that we work to ensure that federal
resources support student success as well. We must ensure that federal
programs, research, and human resources are used as effectively as
possible to help improve teaching and learning.

Therefore, I direct the Department of Education and the National Science
Foundation, together with other agencies identified in cooperation with
the Office of Science and Technology Policy and the Domestic Policy
Council, to develop an action strategy for using key federal resources to
assist states and local school systems prepare students to meet
challenging math standards in eighth grade, and for involving the
mathematics, scientific, and technical communities in support of these
efforts.

The action strategy should include recommendations for the use of federal
resources to help states, local school districts and schools to improve
teaching, upgrade curriculum, integrate technology and high-quality
instructional materials into the classroom, as well as motivate students
and help them understand how math concepts are applied in the real world.
The strategy should identify significant federal programs, activities, and
partnerships available to improve teaching and learning, ensure that these
resources are appropriately focused on helping students reach challenging
math standards, and determine how these resources can best support state
and local reforms. In developing this strategy, the inter-agency group
should review the current status of improvements in math education, and
identify and address critical areas of need, drawing on research and input
from educators and professional organizations.

Because teaching and learning in math and science are so integrally
related, and because success in both subjects is vitally important in this
information era,the working group should also review how federal
resources and partnerships with other organizations can help improve
student achievement in science.

The working group should make its recommendations and submit its action
strategy to me within 90 days.

                                               WILLIAM J. CLINTON


cc:     ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT FOR DOMESTIC POLICY
ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF SCIENCE
        AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY



DRAFT -- March 5, 1997

HOW THE ACTION STRATEGY WILL HELP IMPROVE MATH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

The working group led by the Department of Education and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) will identify and recommend key strategies for


coordinating. federal resources to help states and school districts upgrade
teaching and learning in math, as well as in science. For example, the
working group could recommend ...

Easy Access to Resources for Teaching to High Standards:

  An easy-access joint Department of Education -- NSF Internet site where
teachers could go to get challenging, classroom-tested instructional units
or materials that are linked to national standards.

Spreading the Word on Best Practices:

 A strategy for producing and disseminating products (such as videos and
CD-roms that compare classroom teaching approaches in the U.S., Germany
and Japan) that states and local school systems could use to compare their
instructional practices with those used in high-performing countries and
outstanding districts in the U.S.

Preparing Teachers for World-Class Teaching and Learning:

 A plan for using Department of Education and NSF programs to foster
closer collaboration among school districts, colleges of education, and
math and science faculties to incorporate the insights of TIMSS and ensure
that teachers graduating from pre-service programs are prepared to excel
in real classrooms.

Textbooks that Challenge Students to High Math Achievement:

 A privately-funded, nationwide competition for the development of a
high-quality middle school math textbook that embodies the high standards
of the national exam.

A Public Service Campaign Linking Academic Performance With Work Success:

 A highly visible, nationwide public service campaign that would help
parents and children understand the real-world importance of basic and
advanced math and science skills for success in the 21st Century economy.

Creating a New Partnership for Math and Science Learning

  A new partnership among federal agencies, laboratories, higher
education, and community organizations to promote greater involvement of
professionals with strong math and science backgrounds in consulting with
teachers to help students and parents understand the real-world
applications of what students are learning.

Fostering Community Schools that Promote Math Excellence

 Develop principles for new community schools focusing on math instruction
geared to high standards, with after-school, weekend and summer programs
to enrich classroom learning, strong parental involvement, and ongoing
opportunities for teachers to stay abreast of the latest developments in
their field.


