     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:10-MAR-1997 12:06:41.00

     SUBJECT:   Draft executive order on disability issues

     TO: William H. white Jr.    ( CN=William H. White Jr./OU=WHO/O=EOP   @   EOP [' WHO 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Here is OMB staff's standard reaction to the CAP idea.  This is why it has
     never gone anywhere.   They think Federal agencies should be doing this
     anyway, and shouldn't need a central pool of money for something they have
     been required by law to do for years. This is true, but doesn't get at
     the reality of the fact that a central pool would make it easier and more
     likely that folks with disabilities would be hired and/or retained.
     ---------------------- Forwarded by Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP on 03/10/97
     12:07 PM ---------------------------




     Lisa B. Fairhall
     03/07/97 05:17:09 PM
     Record Type:     Record

     To:      Kenneth S. Apfel/OMB/EOP, Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP
     cc:      Barry white/OMB/EOP, Robert M. Shireman/OMB/EOP, Keith J.
     Fontenot/OMB/EOP
     Subject:         Draft executive order on disability issues



             I wanted to flag an issue we see with Diana's brief write-up of
     the executive order, dealing with expanding the DoD CAP program to other
     Federal agencies.

             This is not the first time we have seen this issue -- last
     summer, Jack Lew asked staff to find out if there are any particular
     issues he should raise with Carol Rasco in regard to a July 17 memo from
     Carol to Jack. Rasco was at that time endorsing expansion of the
     Department of DefenseO,s (DOD) CAP program, which provides a central fund
     within DOD to provide accommodations for employees with disabilities, to a
     Federal government-wide fund that would cover accommodations for all
     Federal employees with disabilities. While we understood that the DOD
     central fund has been quite successful at helping DOD agencies to choose
     appropriate adaptive technology and other accommodations, we did not
     support the initiative for the reasons explained below and sent you a
     brief note outlining those concerns. Although I have not seen the draft
     E.O., I assume that these concerns would apply to the current proposal as
     well.

            All Federal agencies have been required to provide reasonable
     accommodations for employees with disabilities under section 504 of the
     Rehabilitation Act since 1973, but many do not.  Some technologies that
.:

     enable individuals with disabilities to work are very expensive, and may
     have a chilling effect on Federal employersO, decisions to hire or provide
     accommodations for employees with disabilities.

             We believe that the DOD central fund may serve as a useful model
     for other Federal agencies (agencies could use their S&E funds to
     establish similar programs). However, we have reservations about a
     Federal government-wide central fund:

     o       Sections 501, 503 and 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and
     the Americans with Disabilities Act for 1990 (ADA) establish civil rights
     protections for individuals with disabilities.   Employers governed by
     these laws must make "reasonable accommodations" for "otherwise qualified
     disabled individuals." No specific funding is provided to the Federal,
     State or local governments, or private sector businesses to enforce
     requirements of these laws. The proposed central fund for Federal
     agencies could establish a precedent for such incentive programs, sending
     the signal that compliance is only required to the extent that extra
     compensation is provided;

     o       The Federal government should be a model employer. Establishment
     of special government-wide. incentives for Federal agencies to hire and
     provide accommodations for individuals with disabilities when
     discrimination on the basis of disability is illegal, could not only set a
     precedent for providing special incenttves for civil rights legislation,
     but could also send the wrong signal to both the Agencies and the private
     sector that providing reasonable accommodations for individuals with
     disabilities is too difficult even for Federal Agencies to enforce;

     o       CAP has estimated that the average cost of an accomodation for
     employees with disabilities in their program was $993 in FY 1995. This
     low figure argues that agencies could easily provide reasonable
     accomodations for their employees without establishing a central fund;

     o       There has been an ongoing working group exploring ways to improve
     accommodations for Federal employees. We believe that this group would
     provide the appropriate forum to explore the DOD model further; and share
     effective approaches with other Agencies.

     (Originally, Rasco was proposing that Tony Coelho, chair of the
     PresidentO,s Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities (PCEPD)
     make an announcement on the plan for a central fund during the sixth
     anniversary celebration of the ADA on July 26. No announcement was made
     on the ADA anniversary.)

     We continue to believe that it is probably premature to unveil a
     government-wide, centrally funded CAP program.

     Let me know if you would like to discuss this further.


