RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:2l-MAR-1997 08:50:43.00

SUBJECT:   Articles 3.20.97.6

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Richard Socarides/WHO/EOP on 03/21/97
08:49 AM ---------------------------



        Fenceberry @ aol.com
        03/20/97 11:04:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Richard Socarides
cc:
Subject: Articles 3.20.97.6

1.   CHICAGO DEFENDER Council OK's gay health care bill
2.   CHICAGO DEFENDER Rep. Davis backing Dudycz health bill
3.   DES MOINES REGISTER Letter from GLSTN Co-Chair says gay slurs common
in
school
4. AP ABC won't run gay rights ad
5. FEEDBACK Looking for long-term gay male relationships for book
6. FEEDBACK Tom Stoddard memorial


THE CHICAGO DEFENDER, March 20,1997
2400 So. Michigan Avenue, Chicago, IL 60616, USA
Business/Editorial (312) 225-2400

COUNCIL OKs GAY HEALTH CARE BILL
by Chinta Strausberg
      Despite prayers from some prominent ministers and their parishioners,
the City Council, in a 32-18 vote approved the mayor's same sex domestic
partner health bill that some labeled "anti-family."
      After a 90-minute, emotional debate where some aldermen spewed fire
and
brimstone against the measure, with some saying it will subsidize the
lifestyles of gay and lesbian city workers, it passed.
      Critics also say the bill will cost taxpayers millions in lawsuits
filed
by heterosexuals seeking the same rights and benefits, however proponents
say
it's an issue of fairness and respecting civil rights of gay people.
      While the mayor said his bill is about fairness and is not a moral
issue, Ald. Dorothy Tillman (3) fired up the council chambers when she
chided
Daley about pushing the bill in front of scores of high school students.
      "I'm quite embarrassed as a mother to be standing here today with all
these students and we're discussing same sex partners, (a) gay rights
bill,"


Tillman told Daley who left the chambers turning over the gavel to
President
Pro Tern Ald. Lorraine Dixon (8), who voted in favor of the bill.
      Ald. Sam Burrell (29), who voted for the bill, said "this (bill) was a
distraction to take our attention away from our agreeing to have the
corporation counsel enter into an agreement with the Great Lakes Dredge and
Dock Co. for all claims involving the 1992 Loop flood for $26 million."
      Ald. Edward M. Burke (l4) and others quoted from the Bible to defend
their affirmative vote, but Tillman was outraged at her critics for
"equating
this bill with civil rights.
      "To equate this bill with civil rights is an affront to all of those
who
died," Tillman said. She believes "all the heterosexuals will get ready to
sue the city." Tillman said the bill flies in the face of family values.
       Ald. Virgil Jones (IS) who voted for the bill, said the measure had
nothing to do with family values.
      "I visit many churches. Some of my best friends may be gay ministe
rs,"
he said.
      "I know some gay Rabbis, some gay priests, so are we being
hypocritical
by knowing something exists?
      "When I go to their church, I sit and watch and I never ask anybody
when
they collect the collection plate," Jones said.
      "Did you check before they put the money in the basket to find out if
they were gay or not?"
     AIds. Joseph Moore (49) and Mary Ann Smith (48) said the bill is a
"good
public policy and is about fairness" and Ald Burton Natarus (42) said the
bill "is about love."
     AId Helen Shiller (46), who also voted for the bill, denied it will
create massive fraud in which homosexuals will line up to sign up for the
program.
     And Shiller denied the bill "is creating a situation where it is more
comfortable for somebody to come out and say they are a domestic
partner ... I
don't think this will be reason why somebody comes out of the closet," she
stated.
      In an attempt to inject what he sees as fairness into the bill, Ald.
John Steele (6) introduced a substitute ordinance that included striking
the
"same sex" language from the measure.
      "It doesn't make sense to pass bills if we're going to set up
lawsuits,"
Steele said, alluding to the possibility that heterosexual couples living
together may bring action.

THE CHICAGO DEFENDER, March 20, 1997
REP. DAVIS BACKING DUDYCZ'S HEALTH BILL
by Chinta Strausberg
     State Rep. Monique D. Davis (D-27) Wednesday said she will support
Sen.
Walter W. Dudycz (R-7) in his fight for government health benefits to gay
and
unmarried heterosexual couples that live together.
     When the Senate approve[dl  Dudycz' bill earlier this week, Davis said
this legislation is fair because it includes everyone.
     Referring to the City Council's approving of a similar bill that


restricts benefits to city gay and homosexual couples living together,
Davis
said "It 'opens a can of worms because the door is open for other
relationships -- grandmother/grandchildren.
      "Where do you draw the line," Davis asked.  "All of these other groups
feel they too deserve legitimacy because that's what you're doing
legitimizing a relationship. A lot of other couples feel their
relationships
should be legitimized too."
      Davis asked how will the city version be enforced and if. "sex cops
will
be hired" to enforce the legislation that states the couples must be
"committed" to each other.
      Ald. Helen Shiller (46) who voted in favor of the City Council same
sex
health bill, disagreed: "We're not going to have and I wouldn't care to
have
the sex police.
      "That's a spurious argument raised in order to be able to make fun or
light of this ordinance and I do not believe it'll be true here or in other
cities that have adopted similar bills," she said.
      When asked how will enforcement be monitored Shiller said:   "The
assumption is that there will be massive fraud, but I don't think that will
be the case.
      "It's not like we've created a situation where it is more comfortable
for somebody and [to] say I'm a domestic partner. This is not going to be
the
reason why somebody comes out of the closet."


DES MOINES REGISTER, March 20, 1997
Box 957,Des Moines,Ia.,50304
(Fax 515-286-2511, print run 212,700)
(E-MAIL: letters@dmreg.com)

LETTER:  SLURS COMMON
     The March 7, "Gay Slurs Abound, Students Say," is right on target.
The
statistics compiled by the Concerned Students of Des Moines correspond with
national figures compiled by the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Teachers Network
(GLSTN). At the school district's March 3 in-service, a session sponsored
by
GLSTN Des Moines dealt with this very topic. Although the room was full,
the
need to address homophobia in our schools should be comprehensive. All
students deserve to be treated equally, regardless of their gender
orientation.
-- Steve Person, GLSTN Des Moines Co-chakr;
teacher, Central Academy;
300 Walnut, St., Des Moines


The Associated Press, March 20, 1997
ABC WON'T RUN GAY RIGHTS AD
By DAVID BAUDER
   NEW YORK (AP) - A gay rights group that wanted to place an
anti-discrimination television ad during the "Ellen" episode where the
lead
character reveals her homosexuality has been turned down by ABC.
   Despite the network rejection, the Human Rights campaign said a majority


of local ABC affiliates it asked then agreed to run the commercial.
    The ad depicts co-workers expressing surprise that a former colleague
has
been fired from a job because she is a lesbian. It is designed to build
support for a federal law banning job discrimination due to sexual
orientation.
    ABC's rejection is ironic given its hopes that the April 30 --Ellen"
episode, which will feature Oprah Winfrey, Laura Dern and k.d. lang; is a
big
ratings grabber, said David Smith, spokesman for the campaign.
    --They have determined that an actual depiction of a fact of life for
gay
people in this country falls under the judgment of controversial
advertising," he said. --We strongly disagree with that judgment on their
part. We believe they have made an error. ' ,
    ABC's decision is somewhat mitigated by its courage in permitting the
--Ellen"   story line and strong pro-gay corporate policies, he said.
    The network has a blanket policy against issue-oriented ads and this
commercial fell into that category, said Janice Gretemeyer, ABC
spokeswoman.
    --Topics of this nature are better discussed in news programs, " she
said.

    Smith's group went the more expensive route of trying to convince local
affiliates to run the ad. Traditionally on a prime-time show, time is set
aside for ads bought through the network and through the local affiliates.
    The Human Rights Campaign found that 59 of the 74 stations it asked
agreed
to run the ad. Seven affiliates turned it down and the rest didn't give an
answer, Smith said.
    Ads were purchased in 29 markets, including Boston, Denver, Los Angeles,
San Francisco, Washington, Seattle and Bismarck, N.D.
    Cities where affiliates turned down the ad were Chicago; Houston; New
York; Philadelphia; Wilmington, N.C.; and Nashville and Knoxville, Tenn.
    --We basically don't take advocacy advertising, " said Art Moore,
spokesman. for WABC-TV in New York City.
    The local ad buy will cost the campaign $175,000. A 30-second spot
running
nationally would have cost the same amount, Smith said.
    ABC's Ms. Gretemeyer also said there was no inconsistency between
turning
down the ad and the network's current month-long anti-drug campaign. ABC
has
been pushing anti-drug messages through public service announcements, news
specials and story lines in some entertainment programs.
    --Public service spots are completely different from ads, " she said.

FEEDBACK merle@myost.com
    Would you help me spead information about my project? Any help would be
appreaciated. Thanks, Merle
    A CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS FOR A BOOK ABOUT LONG TERM GAY MALE COUPLES.
    I am putting together an anthology of stories about long term gay male
relationships. There is a mythology that gay men do not form long term
relationships. I believe that when we do couple we tend to blend into the
fabric and are rarely heard from or seen again. I would like to change that
by bringing some of these stories into the light, showing the tr~dition and
history th~t has been largely hidden from view.
    The working title of the book is When Love Lasts Forever:Male Couples on
Lasting Love. I feel strongly that this book is very important at this ti
me,


,both politically and socially. We need to remind the public at large that
 men
 coupling is not a new phenomena, but something that has been happening
 forever.
    Also, I believe that it is important in this age of AIDS to remind
 ourselves and particularly our youth that there is a future for which to
 live
 and work. For many young gay men, being gay means sex and death. We must
 remind them that it can mean love, intimacy, companionship, caring and a
 lifetime of sharing. This book is intended to showcase our relationships as
 we have created and lived for decades. It will be
 respectful, honest and honoring of the relationships.
     Preferably, the couples will have been together at least 10 years though
 some shorter term couples may be accepted. The length of the contribution
 should be no more than 10 pages typed. I would prefer that submissions be
 submitted on a 3 1/2 disk in a major DOS, Windows or MAC word processor,
 though type written submissions will be accepted.
    This will be accomplished in two stages. Those stories that are
 initially
 submitted will be reviewed and those that are chosen for inclusion will be
 asked for any necessary clarification and further information. My
 preference
 is that real names be used. This is not a requirement, but I believe that
 visibility is the best weapon against
 both internal and external homophobia.
    Stories will be edited for length and clarity. A release to use the
 story
 and names will be required for those whose stories are chosen. Release
 forms
 will be provided. There is, however, no guarantee that all stories will be
 included.
    For the first stage, I would like to influence what is in the stories as
 little as possible. Thus, I am not including requirements as to what should
be covered. However, if requested, I will provide a list of possible topics
 that might stimulate thought and writing. In the second stage, I will
 return
 the manuscript and ask for any necessary additions or changes. That is
when I
will ask for a release of the material.
    Please feel free to copy and distribute this request to any long term
gay
male couples who might be interested in participating. If you have any
questions, please feel free to call. Send submissions to the address listed
below.
    About Me: I am a psychotherapist. I am co-author of three books,
published
by McGraw-Hill. My partner and I have been together for 13 years.
Merle Yost, MFCC
5276 College Avenue
Oakland, CA 94618
 510-595-1346
E-Mail: merle@myost.com

FEEDBACK From: DOKCC@CUNYVM.CUNY.EDU
    The memorial service for Thomas Byron Stoddard (May 12, 1948-February
12,
1997) was very well-attended last night (March 19). The speakers were John
Stoddard (his younger, gay, brother), Barbara Shack (with whom he worked at
the NY ACLU at the beginning of his career), and Richard J. Meislin; all
three were close friends. His spouse, Walter Rieman made brief comments at
.. ARMS Email System
,


    the end of the service and introduced a tape of Tom giving one of his
    memorable speeches. Urvashi vaid, Gloria Steinem, The Honorable Alan G.
    Hevesi, and Dr. Mathilde Krim also spoke.
       By chance, I sat next to a man who had been a nurse with him and his
    close
    friends at the time he died. It was a moving tribute to a great man who was
    fortunate to live at the right time. Sadness and anger at his death from
    AIDS
    were major themes. Music by Ives, Schubert, and Nascimento was played.
       Memorial contributions in his name were requested to the American
    Foundation for AIDS Research (733 Third Avenue, NY,NY 10017) and New York
    University Law Schol (40 Washingon Square South NY,NY 10012)--both have a
    special fund; or to an appropriate charity regarding AIDS or equality for
    lesbians and gay men, or your choice.



    ==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    RFC-822-headers:
    Received: from conversion.pmdf.eop.gov by PMDF.EOP.GOV (PMDF VS.0-4 #6879)
     id <OlIGQRCQBSGOOOVDCF@PMDF.EOP.GOV> for Socarides_R@a1.eop.gov; Thu,
     20 Mar 1997 23:18:31 -0500 (EST)
    Received: from storm.eop.gov (storm.eop.gov)
     by PMDF.EOP.GOV (PMDF VS.0-4 #6879) id <01IGQRCODLG0018PYG@PMDF.EOP.GOV> for
     Socarides_R@a1.eop.gov; Thu, 20 Mar 1997 23:18:29 -0500 (EST)
    Received: from emout04.mx.aol.com (emout04.mx.aol.com)
     by STORM.EOP.GOV (PMDF VS.0-7 #6879) id <01IGQRCLWW08007QLE@STORM.EOP.GOV> for

     Socarides_R@a1.eop.gov; Thu, 20 Mar 1997 23:18:25 -0500 (EST)
    Received: (from root@localhost) by emout04.mail.aol.com (8.7.6/8.7.3/AOL-2.0.0)

     id XAA16380; Thu, 20 Mar 1997 23:04:22 -0500 (EST)
    ================== END ATTACHMENT   1 ==================


