 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:23-MAR-1997 18:56:35.00

 SUBJECT:   Articles 3.23.97.2

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Richard Socarides/WHO/EOP on 03/23/97
 06:55 PM -------------------------,--



         Fenceberry @ aol.com
         03/23/97 09:52:00 AM
 Record Type: Record

 To: Richard Socarides
 cc:
 Subject: Articles 3.23.97.2

 MIME-Version: 1.0
 Content-type: text/plain; charset=unknown-8bit
 Content-transfer-encoding: 8BIT

 1. ST PETERSBURG TIMES Church conference linked to support of murdering
 gays
 2. FARGO FORUM Letter supports man "martyred" over recent antigay column
 3. LOS ANGELES TIMES Clergy Celibacy Ruling Seen as Anti-Gay
 4. LOS ANGELES TIMES Letters: Fair treatment policy in schools
 5. BOSTON GLOBE Business: Domestic partner benefits getting to be routine


 ST. PETERSBURG TIMES, March 22, 1997
 P. O. Box 1121,St. Petersburg,FL,33731
 (Fax 813-893-8675, print run 352,135)
 (E-MAIL:   letters@SPTimes.com)

 Reputation for racism taints church's welcome
 By MIKE WILSON
     CLEARWATER - The Easter weekend, the holiest time on the Christian
 calendar, will bring to Clearwater what many will consider an ungodly
 event:
 A meeting of an
 Idaho church group that believes white Europeans are the true Israelites
 and
 Jews have conspired to control the American economy.
   Among those scheduled to speak: a tax-protesting minister from Missouri,
 a
 Holocaust revisionist from Idaho and a Nebraska pastor whom one
 human-rights
 activist describes as "a hardcore racist and anti-Semite. ' ,
   America's Promise Ministries, of Sandpoint, Idaho, has been linked to a
 series of bombings in the Pacific Northwest in 1996. But its pastor said
 Friday the group
 was not involved.


   "We're good people. We're Christians," pastor Dave Barley said. "We're
promoting the Christian Gospel, which I think is a benefit to anybody of
any
race, of any
nation; of any community."
   Why is the group meeting in Clearwater? "Florida is a nice place. We like
to visit there, and that's the end of the story," Barley said.
   Tampa Bay religious leaders were shocked to learn of the meeting.
   "Holy cow! They're having their conference here?" said Roy Kaplan,
director
of the Tampa office of the National Conference, which seeks to strengthen
relationships
among religious groups. "They have a right to have their conference. I just
wish they would go somewhere else."
   America's Promise Ministries will meet next Saturday and Sunday at the
Holiday Inn Select, 3535 Ulmerton Road. About 100 people are expected,
hotel
general manager Richard Maslar said.
   Maslar said the hotel was not aware of the group's beliefs when Barley
booked the room, using the name Gideon's Outreach. Maslar plans to honor
the
reservation. "It's just another group that's having a meeting here, as far
as
we're concerned," he said.
   America's Promise Ministries is the outreach arm of the Lord's Covenant
Church, the Idaho congregation of which Barley is pastor. Barley said the
church "believes
like any other fundamentalist church out there.       . We believe in sal
vation
for all races, and that no man can be saved except through Jesus Christ."
   Although church members believe that northern European whites are the
Israelites described in the Bible, Barley denied that the church preaches
racism or anti-Semitism.
   Asked if he thinks there is a conspiracy among Jewish people to control
the
government - a commonly held belief among so-called "Christian Identity"
groups - Barley said, "I do believe there is a conspiracy among Jews to
control the money system, yes."
   Coalition for Human Dignity, a Seattle organization that monitors hate
groups, said that the Lord's Covenant Church is more malignant than Barley
lets on. Among
Barley's associates is Richard Kelly Hoskins, whose book, Vigilantes of
Christendom, forms the basis for the Phineas Priesthood, according to CHD
research director Robert Crawford.
   "The Phineas Priesthood is an honor that is bestowed on a Christian
Identity believer who com"!its a racist or anti-Semitic or anti-gay murder,"
Crawford said.
Hoskins' book is available through America's Promise Ministries' World Wide
Web site for $20.25, but Barley denied that his church has anything to do
with the Phineas Priesthood.
   "I've never been to a Phineas Priesthood meeting, and I've never heard
anybody call themselves a Phineas priest," he said.
   Other titles available on the Web site:.The Anti-Federalist Papers; Did
Six
Million Really Die? America, Free, White & Christian; and The Way Home
(Beyond Feminism & Back to Reality) .
   Church leaders in Tampa Bay said they were not inclined to disrupt the
Christian Identity meeting.
   "I would not ever go on record as saying that a group doesn't have a
right


 to meet and do its own business," said the Rev. Manuel Sykes, pastor of
 Bethel Community
 Baptist Church in St. Petersburg. He invited Barley and his followers to
 join
 the effort ."to reconcile and to heal - with equal justice for everyone."


 FARGO FORUM, March 23, 1997
 Box 2020,Fargo,ND,58107
 (Fax 701-241-5487, print run 55,664)
 (Email doedend@forumcomm.com)

 Letter: A loyal soldier of Jesus Christ
   As one who has been shot at in the public prints, I can sympathize with
 Martin
 Wishnatsky as a loyal soldier of Jesus Christ.
   Hold your head up, Wishnatsky. Keep going. "Sin shall not have dominion
 over
 you, for you serve the Lord Jesus Christ."
 O;Darold Larson
 Help and Caring Ministries
 Fargo


LOS ANGELES TIMES, March 23, 1997
 (E-MAIL:   letters@latimes.com) (http://www.latimes.com)
RELIGION / JOHN DART
Clergy Celibacy Ruling Seen as Anti-Gay
By JOHN DART
O;O;O;O;O;PANORAMA CITY--All eight Southern California regions of the
presbyterian
Church (U.S.A.), including the San Fernando Valley, voted in favor of the
measure
that passed this week to require unmarried clergy to be sexually
celibate--a
move
designed to bar gays and lesbians from the ministry.
0;0;0;0;0; The "Fidelity and Chastity Amendment" to the mainline
denomination's
constitution also reasserted traditional church teachings about fidelity in
marriage, said
two Southern California pastors who helped frame the measure.
0;0;0;0;0; In a running tally of the church's 171 U.S. regional bodies, the
decisive 87th
presbytery approved the measure early this week. By midweek, the margin had
increased to 91-66. It will become church law this summer.
O;O;O;O;O;The amendment's wording has worried some clergy and church
members who
said that it is sufficiently broad that elders, deacons and pastors seeking
new
positions could now face stiffer scrutiny over a variety of sins, including
gluttony and
gambling.
O;O;O;O;O;Although the originators of the amendment say that it was aimed
at
barring
ordination of gays and lesbians, its text does not mention homosexuality.
 It
 says:
 O;O;O;O;O;"Those called to office in the church are to lead a life in


obedience to
Scripture
and in conformity to the historic confessional standards of the church.
Among
these
standards is the requirement to live either in fidelity within the covenant
of marriage of
a man and a woman, or chastity in singleness. Persons refusing to repent of
any
self-acknowledged practice which the Confessions call sin shall not be
ordained
and/or installed as deacons, elders or ministers of the Word and Sacr
ament."
D;D;D;D;D;Behavior identified as sins in confessional statements adopted by
Presbyterians
through the centuries includes such things as gluttony, said the Rev.
Robert
Fernandez, the executive presbyter of the San Fernando Presbytery, based in
Panorama City.
D;D;D;D;D;"What kind of checklist of 101 sins are [ministerial] candidates
going
to face?"
asked Fernandez, whose presbytery approved the amendment 79-63 at a meeting
of
its 31 churches in late February.
D;D;D;O;D;"Christians are also encouraged [in confessional statements] to
hasten
toward
marriage," Fernandez said. The amendment is "almost going to be
unenforceable
unless we do a very thorough scrutiny of everyone," he contended.
D;D;D;D;D;"These issues are being raised by opponents who sought to defeat
the
amendment," countered the Rev. Roberta Hestenes, pastor of Solana Beach
Presbyterian Church in San Diego County, who headed the convention
committee
that drafted the amendment.
D;D;O;D;O;"This is not about witch hunts, legalism or going after people,"
Hestenes said
Friday. "This amendment says the church does not wish to change its
understanding
of Scripture and its requirements for ordination" despite pressure within
the
denomination for change, said Hestenes, who last year left the presidency
of
Eastern
College near Philadelphia.
D;O;D;O;D;The vote was close--97 to 95 with one abstention--in the
theologically
and
culturally divided Pacific Presbytery, which stretches from San Pedro to
the
Bel Air
Presbyterian Church overlooking Encino.
D;D;D;D;D;But the Anaheim-based Los Ranchos Presbytery, which reaches as
far north
as
East Los Angeles, gave resounding approval, 131 to 66.
D;D;D;D;O;It was one of Los Ranchos' own churches, St. Andrew's
Presbyterian


Church in
Newport Beach, that first suggested the amendment and much of its wording
to
the
national Presbyterian convention last year, said the Rev. John Huffman, St.
Andrew's
pastor, who helped write it.
O;O;O;O;O;Passage generally pleased such pastors as the Rev. William Craig
of
Burbank,
who said the constitutional addition reflects "the biblical view"
disapproving of
homosexual activity.
0;0;0;0;0;"1 was disappointed that it has not been passing by a greater
margin,
which
indicates this is still a very controversial issue in the denomination,"
said
Craig, pastor
of the 400-member Burbank First Presbyterian Church for 19 years.
O;O;O;O;O;"We have lost the conviction that God has the power to heal
sexual
brokenness,
whether we are talking about heterosexual or homosexual sex," Craig said.
He
said
that he believes counseling and pastoral care not only can help
heterosexuals
curb
adulterous or compulsive sexual activity but also rid gays and lesbians of
their sexual
orientation.
O;O;O;O;O;"Is it curable? Yes," said Craig, citing church-related
ministries that
make such
claims.
* * *
0;0;0;0;0; Other church ministries disagree, citing research pointing to
genetic
factors. For
example, the West Hollywood Presbyterian Church for decades has had a
sympathetic ministry to the gay and lesbian community.
O;O;O;O;O;The West Hollywood mission won't change because of the new
amendment,
said
the Rev. R. Stephen Jenks, interim executive for the denomination's Synod
of
Southern California and Hawaii, which is based in Los Angeles.
O;O;O;O;O;"There will continue to be a dialogue on how to do ministry with
gays
and
lesbians," Jenks added.
O;O;O;O;O;The Rev. Gary Hindman, an Upland pastor who administers the
Riverside
Presbytery that favored the amendment by an 8-5 margin, conceded that the
amendment "could sound like something out of the Inquisition" to those
unaware of
the intent of the Presbyterians' General Assembly, or annual convention.
O;O;O;O;O;"Presbyterians want people to really examine themselves--to set
an


 ideal--rather
 than have the church peer over their shoulders," Hindman said.

 LOS ANGELES TIMES, March 23, 1997
 LETTERS: Fair Treatment Policy in Schools
 O;O;O;O;O;Re: "Trustees Aim to Fight Bill," March 17.
 0;0;0;0;0; Assembly Bill 101 needs to be supported by the Ventura County
 school
 boards.
 Our public schools should have a "dignity for all students" policy. AB 101
 is
 an
 anti-discrimination bill. Is there a need for it? Some members of our local
 public
 school boards don't believe themselves to be discriminatory. They just
 believe that
 their biases are "right" and therefore have no qualms opposing a law that
 would
 ensure the equal treatment of other people's school children. Unfortunately
 the truth
 in that tells us there must be a state law.
 0;0;0;0;0; Our public representatives have a responsibility to promote the
 inclusion of all
 children who abide by the rules of school behavior set forth in our public
 schools. An
 employee of a public school should not be allowed to condemn a student who
 attends that school.
 O;O;O;O;O;I'm in agreement with the part of the statement made by Conejo
 Valley
 Unified
 School District trustee Elaine McKearn in which she stated, "The kids are
 in
 school
 for an education--reading, writing, math and s.cience." Students are not in
 school to
 be judged on their sexual orientation.
 O;O;O;O;O;SHANNON ADAMS, Newbury Park
 * * *
0;0;0;0;0; Regarding your article about AB 101, I didn't know there was so
much
ignorance about homosexuality until reading the statements by school
officials Elaine McKearn, Mildred Lynch, Janis DiFatta and Dorothy Beaubien
and conservative activist Debra J. Lorier.
O;O;O;O;O;They have persuaded me that public schools should educate their
stucients
about
homosexuality particularly in biology, social studies and psychology. The
only way to counter intolerance that's spawned by the ignorance
demonstrated
by these women is through education.
O;O;O;O;O;Lorier wants the right to continue teaching her children that
homosexuality is
immoral and asks, "Is it my values against the state's values," and, "Why
are
my
values wrong now?" State schools teach, they don't preach.
O;O;O;O;O;For example, the age of the universe is taught using the most
accepted
scientific
evidence. If this conflicts with the students' beliefs, that the universe


is
10,000 years
old, the school makes no judgment against the student. Believe what you wa
nt,
but
this is what the evidence indicates.
D;D;D;D;D;And, yes, Lorier's values are wrong. They're wrong because they
are
based on
her religious beliefs and/or pseudoscience that causes her to want to
protect
her
children from free inquiry and would deprive the rest of us the same. The
1st
Amendment prohibits that in this country. She is also wrong because her
activism
brings unwarranted pain and oftentimes violence to gay and lesbian
citizens.
D;D;D;D;D;BOB STROH, Fillmore


BOSTON GLOBE, March 23, 1997
Box 2378,Boston,MA,02107
Fax 617-929-2098, E-MAIL: letter@globe.coin
Business: Domestic partner benefits getting to be routine
By Liz Winfeld
    Last year, the number of corporations, municipalities, and universities
that offer so-called domestic partner benefits to employees more than
doubled. This year, if all goes as expected, the number will at least
quadruple. What was once a highly controversial concept in the business
world
is quickly being recognized as simply good business.
    Indeed, domestic partner benefits - used most often by gay and lesbian
employees who want health coverage for their partners - are now routinely
offered by some of America's biggest companies, such as Disney, American
Express, Hewlett Packard, Intel, Kodak, Polaroid, and IBM. Two weeks ago,
the
buttoned-down world of finance joined the trend as the Bank of America
became
the first big-time US lender to offer the benefits to its employees.
    Municipalities have been a bit slower to offer benefits to
nontraditional
families, but they are coming around. In Massachusetts, lawmakers are
considering legislation to allow municipalities and the state to offer
domestic partner benefits. Boston officials have passed a home rule
petition
in favor of the benefits; Newton is considering providing them. Cambridge
already does. Springfield's mayor favors the idea.
    Nationally, San Francisco helped put the issue on the front burner by
going a step further than other communities. Last November, the city's
Board
of Supervisors voted 10 to 0 to require that any contractor who does
business
with the city also provide its employees with domestic partner benefits.
The
new rule is to take effect in two months.
    If the city holds its ground, as it gives every indication it will do,
the
number of organizations in the United States that offer domestic partner
benfits will explode from the current 500 or so to several thousand, as


most
of San Francisco's 8,000 contracting companies seek to comply. united
Airlines - eager to renew its contract at its San Francisco International
hub
- has already agreed to comply, although it has been granted an extension
to
July 1998.
    The example set by San Francisco is certainly responsible for fueling
the
domestic partner benefits movement this year; cities from Seattle to
Detroit
to New York are actively contemplating similar moves. But public opinion is
also driving the move toward domestic partner benefits.
    Surveys by the Human Rights Campaign and the Gallup organization show
that
more than 85 percent of all Americans believe that nondiscrimination
policies
and equitable benefits should be extended to nontraditional families, in
particular those headed by gays or lesbians. So when an organization does
so,
it is in step with the majority of Americans.
    The number of Fortune 1000 organizations that have elected to add the
words "sexual orientation"    to their nondiscrimination policies has
increased from less than 25 percent to more than 75 percent in less than
three years. This is indicative of the growing awareness that a person's
sexual orientation does, to a certain extent, dictate many facets of a
person's life, and it should be accommodated in the same way that, for
example, gender, race or national origin (and cultural differences) have to
be accommodated.
    Externally, offering domestic partner benefits adds to a company's
bottom
line by maximizing inclusivity, thus giving the organization a competitive
advantage in a diverse market. As of the 1993 census, less than one quarter
of all American families were. defined as traditional. In 1975, a
half-million
couples reported themselves as being in domestic partnerships; in 1996,
that
number was more than 5.3 million, and 1.7 million of them were homosexual
partnerships.
    While the battle in favor of benefits for nontraditional families has
been
seen as largely a gay matter, homosexuals have many natural allies on this
issue - among them foster parents and the population of unmarried
heterosexuals, who can also benefit by domestic partner benefits.
    And it has been proven that organizations that are out in front of
societal trends toward openness and inclusion perform better economically
over the long term than those. that lag behind such trends. Consider that
1996
was the fourth straight year that the Stonewall Index comprising 36 gay
friendly companies outperformed both the Dow and the Standard
&PoorsIndex.
    Gay civil rights issues, like all civil rights issues, are matters of
economics. And while there has been no evidence of any organization losing
money over inclusive policies, there is plenty to suggest that being
discriminatory can be costly. Cases in point include the public's reaction
to
recent headlines involving discrimination by Texaco and Avis. Consider,
too,
that Colorado's anti-gay Amendment Two battle, and the boycott that
resulted,


 cost that state more than $140 million. And Cobb County, Georgia, lost more
 than $20 million when its condemnation of homosexuality prompted Olympic
 officials to move the volleyball competition elsewhere for last summer's
 Summer Games.
     Meanwhile, companies who endorse and provide domestic partner benefits
 have nothing negative to report. When Lotus made the move, said company
 officials, the positive reaction outweighed the negative 3 to 1. American
 Express - which has actively marketed its services to the gay community for
 years, subtly and otherwise - reports no economic downside to the move. Nor
 does Disney. And while it might be a stretch to say that IBM's announcement
 of domestic partner benefits last year is the reason its stock has been on
 the rise, it can b~ said with certainty that the decision has not hurt the
 company.
     Internally, when an organization acknowledges the validity of sexual
 orientation, and then accommodates it through workplace policies and
 programs, the company makes itself more attractive to a larger pool of
 potential workers. And that is important, given that companies report that
 their biggest problem is finding and retaining workers.
     Polls show that 75 percent or more of today's college freshmen have no
 objection to the full legalization of gay relationships. Those freshmen are
 tomorrow's work force. They are not all gay, of course, but they do have
 certain expectations about the places in which they will want to spend 8 to
 14 hours of each working day. One thing they expect is workplace
 fairness.
     What do domestic partner benefits cost a company? For an organization
 employing between 100 and 100,000 people, the cost of extending benefits to
 the unmarried partners of employees will be no more than a 1 percent
 increase
 in the benefits budget.
     The prospect of legalized same-gender marriage in Hawaii has enormous
 consequence for employers of all kinds everywhere. Once marriage becomes
 legal in Hawaii, which now seems almost inevitable, many gay couples will
 go
 there to tie the knot. Upon coming home, they will expect to be treated as
 married people.
     As states debate whether Hawaii's law should be recognized elsewhere,
 what
 will employers of these people do? On what basis will the individual and
 couple be taxed? will same-gender spouses be entitled to collect their
 spouse's pensions or not? And how will Social Security benefits be
 calculated?
     Domestic partner benefits will be among the first ways in which
 employers
 can begin to treat all their employees, regardless of sexual orientation,
 equitably. And employees will be demanding - and in some cases suing for -
 such equity.
     When same-gender marriages are reciprocated across the United States, an
 event likely to take many years, domestic partner benefits will either
 cease
 to be an issue or will be a permanent part of the fabric of our society.
     In the meantime, it would be less than candid not to acknowledge the
 fear
 that grips the corporate heart when issues of sexual orientation come up.
 But
 legalized same-gender marriage, domestic partner benefits and
 nondiscrimination policies that are pointedly inclusive of sexual
 orientation
 are an inevitable step in the growth and maturity of our society. Education
 about sexual orientation is the antidote to fear. In every organization
 that


    has decided to implement these benefits, a program of education has
    preceded
    that decision.
       These policies represent an acknowledgment, accommodation, and
    incorporation of something that was barely even discussed 10 or 15 years
    ago.
    And that acknowledgment is growing at every turn.
       Liz winfeld is cofounder of Common Ground, a Natick-based
    education/consulting company specializing in workplace sexual orientation
    issues. She is coauthor of --Straight Talk About Gays in the Workplace."



    ==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    RFC-822-headers:
    Received: from conversion.pmdf.eop.gov by PMDF.EOP.GOV (PMDF VS.0-4 #6879)
     id <0IIGU6L40N4GOOXPPM@PMDF.EOP.GOV> for Socarides_R@al.eop.gov; Sun,
     23 Mar 1997 10:06:46 -0500 (EST)
    Received: from storm.eop.gov (storm.eop.gov)
     by PMDF.EOP.GOV (PMDF VS.0-4 #6879) id <0IIGU6L3GFOW014XV9@PMDF.EOP.GOV> for
     Socarides_R@al.eop.gov; Sun, 23 Mar 1997 10:06:45 -0500 (EST)
    Received: from emoutOS.mx.aol.com (emoutOS.mx.aol.com)
     by STORM.EOP.GOV (PMDF VS.0-7 #6879) id <0IIGU6LOCEHC000040@STORM.EOP.GOV> for

     Socarides_R@al.eop.gov; Sun, 23 Mar 1997 10:06:42 -0500 (EST)
    Received: (from root@localhost) by emoutOS.mail.aol.com (B.7.6/8.7.3/AOL-2.0.0)

     id JAA14831; Sun, 23 Mar 1997 09:52:18 -0500 (EST)
    ================== END ATTACHMENT 1 ==================


