 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Elizabeth Drye ( CN=Elizabeth Drye/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

 CREATION DATE/TIME:25-MAR-1997 17:57:26.00

 SUBJECT:   Status of Policy Ideas

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 1.    Seatbelt Report will be ready early next week.   Report sets new
 national goals of 85% use by 2000 and 90% use by 2005 (from 68% today);
 At its release, we will announce our support for legislation (part of
 pending NEXTEA safety title)   requiring states to implement primary
 seatbelt laws or divert 1% of highway funds to safety (so-called "soft
 sanction"); and 3) update an outdated EO requiring federal employees to
 use seatbelts -- changes will bring EO in line with current belt
 technology and will add provisions to it to increase enforcement of
 seatbelt use on Federal lands.   EO is expected to go to OMB for review
 tomorrow.

 NEC staff (Dorothy Robyn) and I agree we should try to get NEXTEA safety
 title done and release with seatbelt report next week.  In addition to
 soft sanction for primary seatbelt laws, safety title includes truck size
 and weight restrictions (big deal for safety advocates); railroad
 terrorism provisions; and a number of smaller provisions. We suggest
 having POTUS announce seatbelt report and safety title directly following
 CEO meeting next week to a broad-based audience that includes advocates
 and other industry members of the safety coalition. A little strange, but
 DOT is adamantly opposed to POTUS doing safety announcement w/big 3
 alone. NEC and DOT think the Big 3 CEOs will be receptive to that
 approach.

 2. Drunk Driving/.08 BAC -- We could put .08 BAC provision in NEXTEA
 safety title as well, but DOT, NEC, OIRA and I are all ambivalent about
 that. We are on record supporting .08 BAC -- our NEXTEA legislation sent
 to the Hill recently has incentives for states to pass .08 laws. We could
 push for a "soft sanction," but it will be a much tougher fight than for
 seatbelts and the payoff is less clear. DOT anticipates that the industry
 will put up a very aggressive fight, and the effect of .08 laws on crashes
 is not very well documented.   Still, .08 is good public health policy.
 We all agree that we shouldn't put .08 in the safety legislation unless
 the President and Slater are willing to fight for it. We will chew on
 this for another day, but welcome your guidance.

 3. Aggressive Driving -- DOT has been digging for the past two weeks and
 hasn't come up with quite enough yet.   The obvious policy response is
 aggressive local enforcement.   State and local investment in traffic
 enforcement has declined over the last several years as we and others have
 pushed cops toward higher priority efforts.    DOT is taking some small
 steps to promote local law enforcement that we could package together in
 an event. As the Post reported this weekend, DOT is working with DC-area
 jurisdictions to mount a DC enforcement effort later this month. DOT also
 has a "Red Light Running" technical assistance program we could highlight
    DOT is interested in workihng with Justice to push for stronger


     sentencing guidelines, but Dennis is not enthusiastic. These ideas aren't
     enough for a POTUS event, but DOT is trYing to come up with more.  If we
     get a good package, April is a good time for an event. April 20-26 is
     National Drive Safely week. The Network of Employees for Traffic Safety
     (NETS) -- 200 public and private organizations -- would like to do an
     April 17 event in anticipation of Drive Safely week.

     4. PRESIDENTIAL MEMO on FMLA -- I've surveyed people but haven't found a
     good reason why we didn't send this in July.    It may be because we
     prepared it BEFORE we sent the legislation to the Hill in September.  I
     just found out John Angell worked on it and will call him at DOE.  Per our
     discussion this morning, I will ask OMB to circulate to agencies and WH
     offices for comment. Barring any unforeseen objections, we should be able
     to do soon.

     5. Tobacco / Medicaid.      HHS and Justice vetted this earlier. Here's a
     brief overview.    HHS argued strongly against bringing a suit against the
     industry to recover Medicaid and/or Medicare costs for the following
     reasons.    First, under Medicaid, states -- not the feds -- are responsible
     for seeking recovery of Medicaid expenditures from liable third parties.
     However, the feds do share in the recovery (after deducting state
     litigation costs), so feds will be eligible for some of (the limited)
     funds recovered from Liggett. We could raise the profile of this result
     of the suit, but AGs are extremely sensitive about it, and the dollar
     amounts are likely to be very small.       Let me know if you want me to
     explore this.      HHS decided earlier not to go after Medicare costs
     because, roughly speaking,     (1) the litigation and analysis needed to
     support it would be extremely costly and (2) an analysis may indicate that
     smokers save the government money (by dying before their eligible for
     Medicare) .     Let me know if you want me to explore in greater depth and
     with more precision.


