RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Mark J. Mazur ( MAZUR_M )   (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-APR-1997 16:19:20.04

SUBJECT: loan forgiveness proposal

TO: Pauline M. Abernathy                      ABERNATHY P ) Autoforward to: Remote Addr
READ:NOT READ

TO: Cynthia A. Rice                           RICE C ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Jennifer L. Klein                         KLEIN J ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TEXT:
Folks,
In the FY 1998 Budget, there is a tax provision that would exempt from
individual income tax the amount of income attributed to forgiveness of student
loan amounts by educational institutions and charitable organizations. This
favorable tax treatment would be provided where the loan forgiveness was
premised on the former student going to work in certain professions for a broad
class of employers. The basic idea is to provide a tax subsidy to students who
wind up working for certain employers in generally lower-paid positions.   For
example, Stanford Law School provides partial or total loan forgiveness for
students who work in public service positions such as Legal Aid. And I believe
the Heinz School of Public Affairs offers similar loan (orgiveness for students
who work in lower-paid public sector positions.
The legislative language for this provision is so broad that almost any child
care related activity could qualify, so long as the educational institution or a
charitable organization is making the loan and then forgiving it under specified
circumstances. So, for example, a university could forgive loans for those who
go into training day care providers or providing day care themselves. Or a
charity could make loans to students and then forgive them if the student
becomes a pre-school teacher.   In either case, the student would not have to
report the loan forgiveness as taxable income under this proposal.
This is not a big deal, but it seems related to the overall theme. And, it's in
the budget and could be trotted out at the conference. At worst, it's just
another bullet on a fact sheet.
                                 Mark


