RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 26-MAR-1997 08:47:29.00

SUBJECT:    Early Childhood standards

TO: Pauline M. Abernathy ( CN=Pauline M. Abernathy/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
In response to Pauline's message re: Don Hirsch last night, here goes:,

1. I have a draft of the early-childhood standards in my files if you
want to see them.
2. Don's phone number at the Core Knowledge Foundation in Charlottesville
is 804 977-7550. If he's not there, they'll give you his home number
where he often works.
3. With regard to managing the politics of this issue before, at and
after the summit, here are some preliminary thoughts:




                                        P6/(b)(6)




Judy Wurtzel at ED should have a decent handle on the key players and we
should quietly consult with her. After the meeting with Hirsch, Mike
Smith indicated to Bruce and I that he thought the WH, rather than ED,
needed to take the lead on this issue, so it didn't look like ED was
intruding on HHS turf. Mike is out of town until Friday. Judy will
consult with him if she needs to, but when we approach Judy we should be
Clear we are looking at this point for quite advice, not ED leadership.
While I suspect that HHS staff will not be our strongest allies in this,
there is at least one really sharp person I encounter there from time to
time, who works on early childhood issues. I can't remember her name, but
I can get it from Judy.
Carol Rasco has pretty good ties into key parts of this world. We should
check with her as well.                    .
I don't know the format/participants for the conference, but I think it
will be very important if we are going to float this issue at the meeting
to have a few credible validators -- researchers, providers, teachers, or
leaders -- quickly proclaim that this is an idea worth pursuing.
Depending upon how far we can go leading up to the conference, you might
want to create either a high profile commission, or a low key working
group, to develop some specific recommendations focused on ways to
incorporate learning standards into Head Start -- or perhaps simply more


of a focus on learning -- as a follow-up action to the conference.
Marion Wright Edelmen and the CDF are likely to be critical here. Would
the current relationship between FLOTUS and Marion be something we could
draw upon here


Well, that's my first cut at this.  Let me know if you want me to make any
calls, and let me know if you still want a 3-way conference call.


