RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-MAR-1997 09:32:20.00

SUBJECT:   Re: Update on Ideas

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Next time I'll get it right the first time
---------------------- Forwarded by Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP on 03/26/97
09:33 AM ---------------------------




Michael Cohen
03/25/97 05:57:30 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         Re: Update on Ideas

Here is where we are:

1. NAGB (Advisory Group(s) for testing initiative):
The short answer is that we are working with the Education Department to
identify options for establishing an advisory group, and are consulting
with key members of Congress, to determine how best to proceed.
Congressional consultations will begin next week, and we continue for the
next several weeks.

The longer version is:
1. The Education Department is producing an options paper, which Mike
Smith and I will review on Friday. The paper addresses the mission(s) to
be served, the number of groups we might need (e.g., a technical advisory
group to advise on technical aspects of test development, a substantive
group to make sure the test measures the right content, etc.)  and how the
groups would be formed.

The key issues to be resolved here revolve around (1) whether to establish
an independent, policy/governing board that would have responsibility for
overseeing the test development and use; (2) if so, whether this would be
the current NAGB or something separate -- and, if separate, how it would
relate to NAGB; (3) if we decide we need an independent group, when to
engage the Hill on this.


2. Mike and I are meeting with Goodling's staff next Tuesday on these
issues; as appropriate we will then reach out to other key Republicans
(e.g., Riggs, Porter) and Democrats (Clay, Kildee) on the House side.

3. Mike Smith and Kay Casstevens think our biggest risk comes from
getting Congress involved in all of this stuff when so far only a few
Republicans (prodded by 2 outsiders and 1 staff member) have even raised
these issues.  However, I think our biggest risk comes from not creating
 ·

some distance between the Administration and the test development, and by
not taking steps to create an independent, credible buffer between us and
the tests.

2. Teacher News
1. The prime teacher event coming up is the teacher of the year event in
mid April. This event generally generates good local coverage nationwide,
because every state teacher of the year shows up. Because the national
teacher of the year is a board-certified teacher, this event is also an
opportunity to highlight and explain our initiatve in this area; we
haven't done that yet, and the Defense announcement in North Carolina
limited any attention to the National Board there.

In addition, I am working with ED to identify a new step for the President
to announce at this event. My leading candidate is centered around a
proposal (to be included in the Higher Ed Act) to support the development
of standards and assessments for beginning teachers, to complement the
tough standards for existing teachers. There is work underway on this we
can build on. This will get nailed down with the Department by the
beginning of the week.

As a package,. the message from the event will be about excellence in
teaching--teachers of the year, national board standards, standards for
new teachers, and Riley and POTUS listen to the voices of the best
teachers.

2. I'm still working on Shanker memorial, but no progress to report since
yesterday.


