RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Patricia F. Lewis ( CN=Patricia F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]               )

CREATION DATE/TIME:18-APR-1997 16:54:52.00

SUBJECT:   Transcript

TO: Katharine Button ( CN=Katharine Button/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]            )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jennifer ,t.. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP     @   EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: MCHUGH L    MCHUGH L @ A1 @ CD @ LNGTWY [ EOP ] )   (WHO)
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Marsha E. Berry ( CN=Marsha E. Berry/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ UNKNOWN]                  )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Pauline M. Abernathy ( CN=Pauline M. Abernathy/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lori L. Anderson ( CN=Lori L. Anderson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]            )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Walker ( CN=Ann F. Walker/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]          )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Julie E. Mason ( CN=Julie E. Mason/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]            )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]            )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D38]MAIL49001670G.116 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750437C290000010A020100000002050000009EOB0200000200009117F07E811CB39524A325
E87EEA8085EF073AD51BABF95FOFC2BB96CD91FOF16D3CE1460F9EE7D2D8F53402B05BA4BOA6DA
5BCAOE67DB49AAFCA3948D5977FE2C3DF7D72B7614A4565AB78BAC68A5A5EA73E01A5086F9E12A
6B640957912C3C6661F68A4E6B513D067A36D75B605643183021EF68BF45A8FCED882D86A5A9B3
2D455C94B0912EADOF084A8098922318498095F7A331AA456829FF6879EBCOD14814CED08EF7BB
23D6FDF8750F2ACF84EA1E6687FD51C32DC12342095FC1A890DF69A79E8BFD5C40223072DD6B9D
687736523COEE140EOCBE37B6736F145DACEF8B99D9C2CB6059DF7D29894EFDAFDE51AFE83EOED
8962C958BC17695433BOOODA208B007FDEFD69C5944B90A7F9FAODDFF5F3C5BFF239S31C5BE4F1
9AB8D5415COC78ESA34161391E831958B4650FA7FC74B9E3D3EB966SOS8442611F9ED1F5C33ES4
83DAC1824139D1701933546D14A2D2EF1SF8S065E6BB93EB36DE21F53E84F872EFC09331C81D4C
1BC70F73F66AFBODD58B7DB948381267A20BC4209C7012586D80F60088962A529126204064F67D
30CEA1E5317AD7931CB875C9705F2S2CF9B244734S6F2FFE29AD2DA33C38E21B1B5ABBDSE167C4
3B83D029B6A84FBC88667309DFFF697C8FC33AA5F2CD20A2AC9C5613ADC22F10F176AB7FS8COD7
A302C354FD02003400000000000000000000000B30030000007EOO0000D80400000B3003000000
             Hex·Dump Conversion




      THE WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE ON
EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING:
 WHAT NEW RESEARCH ON THE BRAIN TELLS US
       ABOUT OUR YOUNGEST CHILDREN



                  Morning Session




                  The East Room



         Thursday, April 17, 1997
              10:45 A.M. EDT
                              Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                               2

PARTICIPANTS:

THE PRESIDENT
MRS. CLINTON

DR. DAVID HAMBURG, Carnegie Corporation of New York, New York,
New York

DR. DONALD COHEN, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut

DR. CARLA SHATZ, University of California, Berkeley

DR. PATRICIA KUHL, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

DR. EZRA DAVIDSON, Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and
Science, Los Angeles, California

DR. T. BERRY BRAZELTON, Harvard Medical School, Cambridge,
Massachusetts

DR. DEBORAH PHILLIPS, Institute of Medicine, Washington, D.C.
                       Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                              3

                       PRO C E E DIN G S

     MRS. CLINTON:     Please be seated.               Welcome to the White

House and to this very special White House Conference on Early

Childhood Development and Learning.                  We are delighted that you

can join us today not only here in the East Room, but I want

to give a special welcome to the thousands of people who are

joining this conference via satellite from universities,

hospitals and schools around the country.                 There are nearly 100

sites in 37 states.

     Now, at first glance, it may seem odd to hold a conference

here at the White House devoted to talking about baby talk.

But that discussion has never been more important, because

science, as we will hear from the experts who are with us today,

has now confirmed what many parents have instinctively known

all along, that the song a father sings to his child in the

morning, or a story that a mother reads to her child before bed

help lay the foundation for a child's life, and in turn, for

our nation's future.

     So the President has convened this conference with a clear

mission:   to give the leading experts in the field of early
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                       4

childhood development, the scientists and pediatricians, the

researchers and all of the others, the opportunity to explain

their discoveries and to put this invaluable body of knowledge

at the service of America's families.

     But this is not just for America's families.             This

information is crucial for anyone in the position of leaving

an impression on a young child's growing mind - - day-care workers,

teachers, doctors and nurses, television writers and producers,

business leaders, government policy-makers, all of us.

     It is astonishing what we now know about the young brain

and about how children develop.             Just how far we have come is

chronicled in a report being issued today by the Families and

Work Institute, entitled, "Rethinking the Brain."          Fifteen years

ago, we thought that a baby's brain structure was virtually

complete at birth.     Now, we understand that it is a work in

progress, and that everything we do with a child has some kind

of potential physical influence on that rapidly-forming brain.

     A child's earliest experiences, their relationships with

parents and care-givers, the sights and sounds and smells and

feelings they encounter, the challenges they meet determine how
                       Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                        5

their brains are wired.         And that brain shapes itself through

repeated experiences.        The more something is repeated, the

stronger the neuro-circuitry becomes, and those connections,

in turn, can be permanent.          In this way, the seemingly trivial

events of our earliest months that we cannot even later recall

-- hearing a song, getting a hug after falling down, knowing

when to expect a smile -- those are anything but trivial.

     And as we now know, for the first three years of their life,

so much is happening in the baby's brain.            They will learn to

soothe themselves when they're upset, to empathize to get along.

 These experiences can determine whether children will grow up

to be peaceful or violent citizens, focused or undisciplined

workers, attentive or detached parents themselves.

     We now have reached the point of understanding that a child's

mind and a child's body must be nourished.           During the first

part of the 20th century, science built a strong foundation for

the physical health of our children - - clean water and safe food,

vaccines for preventable diseases, a knowledge of nutrition,

a score of other remarkable other lifesaving achievements.         The

last years of this century are yielding similar breakthroughs
                         Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                                6

for the brain.    We are completing the job of primary prevention,

and coming closer to the day when we should be able to ensure

the well-being of children in every domain -- physical, social,

intellectual, and emotional.

      I have very high hopes not only for this conference, but

for what I hope will come from it.                But there are, however, two

things I hope this conference will not do.                    The first is I hope

this information will not burden or overwhelm parents.

Parenting is the hardest job in the world, and the information

we offer today is meant to help parents, not to make them anxious

or imprison them in a set or rules.                     If you forget to read to

your child one night, please, that's okay.                      (Laughter. )

      Think of this conference as a map.                   And like any good map,

it shows you a lot of different ways to get where you need to

go.   Many American parents have been asking for just such a map.

 A new survey, "From Zero to Three," the National Center for

Infants, Toddlers and Families shows a real hunger on the part

of parents for knowledge on how they can play a positive role

in their child's early development.                    And I hope this conference

in one of the ways we answer that call.
                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                     7

      The second thing I hope does not happen is to create the

impression that once a child's third birthday rolls around, the

important work is over.       The early years are not the only years.

 The brain is the last organ to become fully mature anatomically.

 Neurological circuitry for many emotions isn't completed until

a child reaches 15.     So there is always room for appropriate

stimulation, loving and nurturing care by adults who are invested

in a child.   There's always something that concerned adults can

do.   And that has special relevance for adoption.        Adoptive

parents can make an enormous difference for a child at any time,

and especially for older children.

      That said, here is what I hope the conference will

accomplish.   I hope it will get across the revolutionary idea

that the activities that are the easiest, cheapest and most fun

to do with your child are also the best for his or her development

-- singing, playing games, reading, story-telling, just talking

and listening.   Some of my best memories are reading to our

daughter, even if I fell asleep in the nine hundredth reading

of "Goodnight, Moon."       But, reading to her when she was young

was a joy for Bill and me, and we think also a joy for her.
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                           8

But we had no idea 15, 16, 17 years ago that what we were doing

was literally turning on the power in her brain, firing up the

connections that would enable her to speak and read at as high

a level as she possibly could reach_

     I hope that the science presented in this conference will

drive home a simple message, one supported in great detail by

a report being issued today by the President's Council of Economic

Advisors_   If we, as a nation, commit ourselves now to modest

investments in the sound development of our children, including

especially our very youngest children, we will lay the groundwork

for an American future with increased prosperity, better health,

fewer social ills and ever greater opportunities for our citizens

to lead fulfilling lives in a strong country in the next century.

     There's a quote I particularly like from the Chilean poet,

Gabriella Mistral, that reminds us, "Many things we need can

wait; the child cannot.        Now is the time his bones are being

formed,

his blood being made, his mind being developed.            To him, we cannot

say, tomorrow.   His name is today."               We have known this

instinctively, even poetically; now we know it scientifically.
                              Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                              9




     And I'm pleased to introduce someone who has been saying

this and practicing it for a long time -- maybe not in poetry,

but certainly in the countless stories and books and songs that

he has shared not only with our daughter, but with our nephews

and, really, any small child who ever crosses his path.               As the

President of the United States and as a father, he has acted

on these beliefs, putting the well-being of children at the very

center of national policy.           So it pleases me greatly to introduce

my fellow reader of "Good Night, Moon," the President, Bill

Clinton.      (Applause. )

     THE PRESIDENT:          Thank you.        Thank you very much.   Thank

you very much, and welcome to the White House.               I was relieved

to hear Hillary say that the brain is the last organ to fully

develop.   It may yet not be too late for me to learn how to walk

down steps.      (Laughter.)       Or maybe I was thinking it was because

I was always hugged when I fell down as a child, I did this

subconsciously on

purpose.      (Laughter. )

     Let me begin by thanking the members of the Cabinet who
                            Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                              10

are here.     I see Secretary Riley and Secretary Glickman.           I thank

Governor Romer and Governor Chiles for being here.                  I think

Governor Miller is coming.            There are many others who are here.

 Congresswoman De Lauro is either here or coming.                  Thank you,

Governor Miller.      I see I was looking to the left there.

(Laughter.)     He's from Nevada -- he just went up five points

in the polls when I said that.                (Laughter. )

     Let me say, first of all, the first time I met Hillary,

she was not only a law student, she was working with the Yale

Child Study Center, and she began my education in these issues.

 And for that, I am profoundly grateful.                  And I thank her for

bringing the scientists, the doctors, the sociologists, the

others whose work is the basis for our discussion today here.

And I, too, want to thank the thousands of others who are joining

us by satellite.

     This unique conference is a part of our constant effort

to give our children the opportunity to make the most of their

God-given potential and to help their parents lead the way, and

to remind everyone in America that this must always be part of

the public's business because we all have a common interest in
                                 Hex·Dump Conversion .
                                                                  11

our children's future.

     We have begun the job here over the last four years by making

education our top domestic priority, by passing the Family Leave

act and now trying to expand it and enact a form of flex time

which will give parents more options in how they take their

overtime in payor in time with their children, by the work we

have done to expand the Family and Medical Leave Act and by the

work we've tried to do to give parents more tools with the v-chip

and the television rating system, and the work we are still

carrying on to try to stop the advertising and marketing and

di·stribution of tobacco to our children, and other work we've

done in juvenile justice and trying to keep our kids away from

the dangers of alcohol and drugs.

     All these are designed to help our parents succeed in doing

their most important job.     Now it seems to me maybe the most

important thing we can actually do is to share with every parent

in America the absolutely stunning things we are learning from

new scientific research about how very young children learn and

develop.   In that regard, I'd like to thank Rob Reiner and others

who are committed to distributing this information, and I'd like
                           Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                        12

to thank the media here in our Nation's Capital and throughout

the country for the genuine interest that they have shown in

this conference.

     I think there is an instinctive understanding here that

this is a very, very big issue that embraces all of us as

Americans, and that if we learn our lessons well and if we're

patient in carrying them out, as Hillary said, knowing that there

is no perfect way to raise a child, we are likely to have a very

positive and profound impact on future generations in this

country.   So I want to thank, again, all of you for that.

     Let me say there are some public programs that bear directly

on early childhood development -- the Head Start program, which

we've expanded by 43 percent over the last four years; the WIC

program, which we've expanded by nearly 2 million participants.

 I have to say that I was a little disappointed -- or a lot

disappointed to see a congressional committee yesterday vote

to underfund the WIC program.         I hope that if nothing else happens

out of this conference, the results of the conference will reach

the members of that congressional committee and we can reverse

that before the budget finally comes to my desk.
                         Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                             13

      I would also like to remind all of you that this conference

is literally just a start.           We have to look at the practical

. implications of this research for parents, for care-givers, for

policy-makers, but we also know that we're looking at years and

years of work in order to make the findings of this conference

real and positive in the lives of all of our children.             But this

is a very exciting and enormous undertaking.

      This research has opened a new frontier.            Great exploration

is, of course, not new to this country.                We have gone across

the land, we have gone across the globe, we have gone into the

skies, and now we are going deep into ourselves and into our

children.   In some ways, this may be the most exiting and

important exploration of all.

      I'm proud of the role that federally-funded research has

played in these findings in discovering that the earliest years

of life are critical for developing intellectual, emotional and

social potential.    We all know that every child needs proper

nutrition and access to health care, a safe horne and an

environment i and we know every child needs teaching and touching,

reading and playing, singing and talking.
                          Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                          14

     It is true that Chelsea is about to go off to college, but

Hillary and I have been blessed by having two young nephews now

-- one is about two and one is about three -- and we're learning

things allover again that, I must say, corroborate what the

scientists are telling us.

     We are going to continue to work on this, and I know that

you will help us, too.      Let me just mention two or three things

that we want to work on that we think are important.           We've got

to do a lot more to improve the quality, the availability and

the affordability of child care.             Many experts consi"der our

military's child care system to be the best in our country.

I'm very proud of that, and not surprised.

     The man responsible for administering the Navy's child care

system, Rear Admiral Larry Marsh, is here with us today.             He

leads a system that has high standards, including a high

percentage of accredited centers, a strong enforcement system

with unannounced inspections, parents have a toll-free number

to call and report whatever concerns they may have, training

is mandatory and wages and benefits are good, so, staff tends

to stay on.
                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                           15

     I am proud that the military places such importance on

helping the families of the men and women who serve our country

in uniform_   But it's really rather elementary to know that

they're going to do a lot better on the ships, in the skies,

in faraway lands if they're not worried about how their children

are faring while they're at work serving America.

     To extend that kind of quality beyond the military, I am

issuing today an executive memorandum asking the Department of

Defense to share its success.           I want the military to partner

with civilian. child care centers to help them improve quality,

to help them become accredited, to provide training to civilian

child care providers, to share information on how to operate

successfully, and to work with state and local governments to

give on-the-job training and child care to people moving from

welfare to work.

     I think this is especially important.               Let me say in the

welfare reform bill, we put another $4 billion in for child care.

 In addition to that, because the states are getting money for

welfare reform based on the peak case load in             welfar~   in 1994,

and we've reduced the welfare rolls by 2.8 million since then,
                         Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                     16

most states, for a period of time until an extra session comes

along, will have some extra funds that the can put into more

child care.   This gives states the opportunity they have never

had before to train more child care workers, to use funds to

help even more people move from welfare to work and perhaps even

to provide more discounts to low-income workers to make child

care affordable for them.

     This welfare reform effort, if focused on child care, can

train lots of people on welfare to be accredited child care

workers and expand the availability of welfare in most of the

states of the country.      It's not true for every state, because

some of them have had smaller drops in the case load and three

have had no drops.   But, by and large, the welfare reform bill,

because of the way it's structured, gives all of you who care

about child care about a year or two to make strenuous efforts,

state by state, to create a more comprehensive quality system

of child care than we have ever had before.            And I certainly

hope that what we can do here, plus the support of the military,

we'll see dramatic advances in that regard.

     I'd like to thank the people here who have done that work.
                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                            17

 And I'd like to say that we are going to hold a second conference,

this one devoted exclusively to the child care issue here at

the White House in Washington this fall_                 And I hope all of you

who care about that will come back.

     The second thing we want to do is to extend health care

coverage to uncovered children.             The budget I have submitted

will extend coverage to as many as 5 million children by the

year 2000 with the children's health initiative in the budget

proposal - - to strengthen Medicaid for poor children and children

with disabilities, to provide coverage for working families

through innovative state programs, to continue health care

coverage for children of workers who are between jobs.                  There

is an enormous amount of interest in this issue in both parties,

I'm happy to say, in the Congress in this session.                And I quite

confident that if we'll all work together, we can get an

impressive expansion in health care coverage for children in

this congressional session.

     I'm pleased that Dr. Jordan Cohen, the President and CEO

of the Association of American Medical Colleges is with us today

to lend his association's strong support to these efforts.               With
                       Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                            18

the support of leaders in medicine, again I say, I am convinced

we'll have a bipartisan consensus that will extend coverage to

millions more uninsured children.

     The third thing we want to do is this:                  Because we know

the great importance of early education, we're going to expand

Early Head Start enrollment by at least one-third next year.

Early Head Start was created in 1994.                It's been a great success

in bringing the nutritional, educational and other services of

Head Start to children aged three and younger and to pregnant

women.   It has been a real success and we need to expand it.

     Today we are requesting new applications for early Head

Start programs to accomplish the expansion.                And to help parents

to teach the very young, we developed a tool kit called, "Ready,

Set, Read," part of our America Reads challenge, designed to

make sure that every child can read independently by the 3rd

grade.   This kit gives tips on activities for young children.

 It's going out to early childhood programs all across the country

along with a hotline number for anyone else who wants the kit.

     The fourth thing we're going to do is to protect the safety

of our children more.       In particular, we have to help young
                       Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                            19

children more who are exposed to abuse and violence.                Let me

tell you, as you might imagine, I get letters all the time from

very young children.      And my staff provides a significant number

of them for me to read.          The Secretary of Education not very

long ago gave me a set of letters from children who were quite

young, a couple of years ago gave me a set of letters from children

who were in the 3rd grade.            But sometimes I get them from

kindergarten children and 1st grade children, talking about what

they want America to look like.                  And it is appalling the

number of letters I get from five- and six-year-olds who simply

want me to make their lives safe; who don't want to worry about

being shot; who don't want anymore violence in their homes; who

want their schools and the streets they walk on to be free of

terror.

     So, today the Department of Justice is establishing a new

initiative called "Safe Start," based on efforts in New Haven,

Connecticut, which you will hear about this afternoon.                The

program will train police officers, prosecutors, probation and

parole officers in child development so that they'll actually

be equipped to handle situations involving young children.             And
                          Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                           20

I believe if we can put this initiative into effect all across

America, it will make our children safer.                And I'm glad we're

announcing it today during Victims of Crime Week. We all know

that it's going to take a partnership across America to help

our children reach their full potential.                But the toughest job

will always belong to our parents -- first teachers, main

nurturers.   Being a parent is a joy and a challenge.               But it's

not a job you can walk away from, take a vacation from, or even

apply for family leave from.           (Laughter.)       The world moves too

fast, and today, parents have more worries than ever.              Work does

compete with family demands, and finding a balance is more

difficult than before.       That's why this must always be part of

the public's business.

     Let me come now to the bottom line.                The more we focus on

early years, the more important they become.              We know that these

investments of time and money will yield us the highest return

in healthier children, stronger families and better communities.

     Now, let me say, finally, I know that none of us who are

in politics, none of us who are just parents, will ever know

as much as the experts we're about to hear from today.              But what
                           Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                            21

they're going to tell us is the most encouraging thing of all,

which is, they have found out that we can all do the job.                  No

matter how young, a child does understand a gentle touch or a

smile or a loving voice.          Babies understand more than we have

understood about them.         Now we can begin to close the gap and

to make sure that all children in this country do have that chance

to live up to the fullest of their God-given potential.

     Again, I thank you all for being here.              I thank our experts,

I thank the First Lady.        And I'd like to ask Dr. David Hamburg

to come up and sit there and take over the program.

     David?

     Thank you.     (Applause. )

     MRS. CLINTON:      I wanted to add to the President's

introduction.     Dr. Hamburg brings to this position a lifetime

of commitment, improving the quality of life of Americans and

people around the world; and in his latest incarnation as the

President of the Carnegie Corporation, has overseen the

production of a series of reports about our children.                And the

one that is most relevant for today is a report called "Starting

Points, " that really was, in many of our eyes, the seminal report
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                   22

on early childhood development, and out of which has sprung much

of the public attention over the past three years to the issues

we're going to discuss today.

     Dr. Hamburg.

     DR. HAMBURG:      Thank you very much, indeed.    I know I speak

for everyone in thanking the President and the First Lady for

outstanding leadership on this vital issue, which is simply the

fundamental building blocks of every human life.         That's what

this is about.     This month is a historic one in the annals of

disease prevention.       Do you remember infantile paralysis, we

used to call it?      In April, 1995 -- in April, the Salk Polio

Vaccine first became available.

     It so happens that the late Jonas Salk was a member of the

task force that prepared Starting Points, and he said, about

that report when it came out, liThe encouraging news in Starting

Points, that there is a way to prevent the crippling of the minds

of infants and children, may be a similar historic opportunity.

 I think today's White House Conference does indeed signify

historic opportunity, the nation coming together on behalf of

all our children, our most precious assets.
                            Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                    23

     Now, the fact is that our nation's infants and toddlers

are in trouble.     Compared with most other established

democracies, the United States has more casualties and more risk

factors, more serious risk factors, than the other democracies.

For example, a higher mortality rate, a higher proportion of

low birth-weight babies, a smaller proportion of toddlers

immunized against childhood diseases, and a much higher rate

of babies born to adolescent mothers.

     Now, if a poor start leaves an enduring legacy of impairment,

then high costs follow.       Now, it's quite true, as the First Lady

just said, it doesn't necessarily follow that bad experiences

in the first few years doom a person for the rest of their

lifespan, but such bad experiences do change the odds in a

negative way.     And, when there is an enduring legacy of

impairment, then it may show up in different systems:      in health,

in education, in justice.          We call them by a lot of different

names:   disease, disability, incompetence, ignorance, hatred,

violence.   But, by whatever name, these outcomes involve severe

economic and social penalties for the entire society.

     During the 1990s, an important consensus has emerged within
                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                      24

the scientif ic and professional communi ties, on ways that parents

and others can cooperate in meeting the developmental needs of

very young children.       Our aim at this meeting is to clarify that

scientific and professional consensus as far as we can, and to

make it widely understood throughout country.             The President

referred to Rob Reiner's initiative, which is a major thrust

toward fostering public understanding, which is so vital in a

democracy, and this meeting gives a very big boost to that effort.

     Our report, to which the First Lady referred, Starting

Points, published the three years ago this month, in 1994,

formulated four main approaches to preventing damage to the

youngest children and provided a solid basis for hope, as the

President said.          Those four thrusts were:        first,

preparation for responsible and competent parenthood; second,

health care; third, child care; and fourth, community

mobilization.     You will hear at least samples of each of those

approaches in today' s program, partly this morning, partly this

afternoon.

     Now, when Starting Points was released, we were somewhat

surprised by the extraordinary positive, constructive, extensive
                        Hex·Dump Conversion                                 25

media attention that focused on the strong evidence from research

on brain and behavior development, indicating the long-term

effects of early experience. Starting Points also noted the wide

gap between scientific research and public knowledge, between

what is known and what we do about that knowledge, what we do

to meet the essential requirements for healthy child development

in the earliest years, so today's meeting is a major step in

filling that dangerous.gap.

     In the morning session, we will first hear from three

distinguished scientists about highlights of basic research in

the biological and behavioral sciences.               These are important

samples of emerging knowledge, only samples.               Because of the

time constraints, we cannot possibly be comprehensive.               This

field is simply flourishing beyond any prior expectation.              But

they will be sufficient to suggest the profound importance of

early development.

     Then we will hear from three highly respected scholars on

professional services.       How can the powerful advances in

fundamental knowledge be put to work for the wellbeing of all

our children and for the strengthening of their families?               I
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                            26

·think the President himself will guide that part of the

discussion.   In essence, that part of the discussion will focus

on a developmental sequence of valuable services that starts

with early prenatal care and goes on to preventive pediatric

care, to parent education, social supports for young families,

high-quality child care and early childhood education which,

as you heard, will be the focus of a conference in the White

House this fall, a vitally significant subject.                A new Rand

cost/benefit study shows that, for every dollar spent on such

early opportunities, many dollars are saved in later years.

     It is important to note, and I want to reinforce what the

President said, that most of the research in this field, and

almost all of the basic research                  the basic research -- has

been supported by the United States Government, primarily by

the National Institutes of Health, and also by the National

Science Foundation.      These institutions are highly respected

throughout the world.       Wherever there is serious interest in

science, or medicine, or public health, the NIH and the NSF are

well known and deeply respected.

     Now, let me briefly introduce the speakers, and I will do
                           Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                                27

them in turn.     To save time, I will do the whole batch together

and then they will speak:           Dr. Donald Cohen is director of the

Yale Child Studies Center and Irving B. Harris Professor of Child

Psychiatry, Pediatrics, and Psychology at the Yale university

School of Medicine in New Haven.               The Center is internationally

recognized for its multidisciplinary research and its clinical

programs, its professional education, its services, and its

advocacy for children and families.                      You also heard that Mrs.

Clinton had one of her very first jobs in that Center.                  Dr. Cohen

is deeply involved in ways of coping with the problems of urban

child development.

     Then, we'll have Dr. Carla Shatz, who received her Ph.D.

in neurobiology at the Harvard Medical School, working with David

Hubel and Tosten Viesel, Nobelists who really opened up this

crucial line of inquiry with respect to the development of the

nervous system.     She is now professor of neurobiology at the

University of California at Berkeley.                     Her ongoing studies of

how the orderly sets of connections present in the adult brain

are actually wired up during development -- these studies have

gained her great respect in the international scientific
                             Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                                28

community.       She is immediate past president of the Society for

Neuroscience, which is the umbrella organization in this field.

 Her research has broad implications for our understanding of

the normal development of the human brain, including learning

and memory, but it also has implications for neurological birth

defects.

     Then, we will hear from Dr. Patricia Kuhl, who is the current

chair of the Speech and Hearing Sciences at the University of

Washington in Seattle.            Her research interests focus on the

development of language and speech and how language information

is stored in the brain.            Her studies have        illu~trated   how

infants   I   early auditory experience plays a critical role in the

acquisition of language in the first year of life.                       This

work has broad implications for the identification of crucial

periods in development and also in respect to bilingual

education.

     Then, we will hear from, in the second half of this session

on professional services, we will hear from Dr. Ezra Davidson,

who is Professor and past Chairman of the Department of Obstetrics

and Gynecology of the Charles Drew University of Medicine and
                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                               29

Science in Los Angeles, where he headed, for many years, one

of the largest obstetrical services in the country.                  He was an

early contributor to our understanding of fetal development,

and he has been at the forefront of efforts to improve maternal

and child health.

     Next will come Dr. Barry Brazelton, one of the best-known

child health specialists in the world, a distinguished scholar

and tireless advocate for children.                   One of Dr. Brazleton's

foremost achievements in pediatrics is his behavioral assessment

scale, which is used worldwide to assess neurological responses

of newborns, their emotional wellbeing, and their individual

differences.   He is Clinical Professor of Pediatrics Emeritus

at Harvard Medical School.          His Touchpoints Project at Boston

Children's Hospital formulates curricula for use in outreach

programs across the nation to bring high-risk children into the

preventive primary health care system.

     And, finally, Dr. Deborah Phillips.                 She is a distinguished

child development psychologist.             She is Executive Director of

the Board on Children, Youth, and Families of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Research Council.
                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                       30

     She has done highly illuminating research and analysis on

child care, most recently serving on the group responsible for

the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Longitudinal Study of Child Care Outcomes that was reported two

weeks ago at the Society for Research and Child Development_

     So it's a wonderful panel on a sampling of absolutely crucial

topics for the future of our children and, thereby, for the

nation's future.

     Dr. Cohen, please start us off.



     DR. COHEN:      Thank you very much, Dr. Hamburg_

     Mr. President, Mrs_ Clinton, we are all very grateful,

indeed, for your focusing national attention on children's

development and on the implications of research for the lives

of children and families_

     As you have pointed out, research reveals that babies are

born with remarkable abilities and potential.           Their experiences

during the first years and months of life will either facilitate

this potential or blunt it.              These early experiences have an

during impact on children's behavior and also, as you know, on
                          Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                     31

the maturation of their brains.

     While there is far more to learn about young children,

scientific knowledge already can and should be used to help assure

that children receive the care that will move them forward.

Available knowledge also can help families, teachers, and

clinicians recognize when a child is first starting to have

problems and to provide effective treatment to help move

development back on course.

     Much that science has learned confirms the truths that our

grandparents took for granted -- that babies need devoted care

of adults who love them, protection from harm, a chance to play,

to feel proud of their achievements, and to be comforted when

they are upset.

     Our grandparents also knew that children need to be treated

fairly and provided with moral examples to develop their own

inner sense of values.

     Science has confirmed these beliefs, but we have also

learned some things about the first years of life that would

have surprised our parents.           Researchers have discovered that

the minds of infants are active from the time they are born,
                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                     32

and are shaped by experience.

     Infants see and hear and taste, and they try actively to

make sense of these impressions.            They recognize patterns and

are interested in shapes, and they remember what they have heard

and what they have felt.      Babies, in short, are smarter, more

competent, more curious and eager than ever was suspected.

     Most importantly, we have learned that social relations

are central to every aspect of a child's development. Active

and engaged care is essential for children's brain maturation

and for the social, emotional intellectual development.

     Ordinary devoted parents are what makes development go

forward because their care provides the basic ingredients for

brain maturation.   However, it's artificial to distinguish brain

and behavior.   Everything that the baby thinks or feels or does

is the result of brain activity.        In turn, the baby's experiences

actually changes the way the brain works.

     As the child looks at the mobile above his crib or later

as the child and father play blocks and talk about what they're

ding, specific groups of brain cells are activated and

connections between parts of the brain are formed and
                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                          33

strengthened_

     A baby comes into the world ready to adapt.               On the first

day of life, a baby can search the room with his eyes, can visually

trace the edges of the triangle, and look intently at his mother's

eyes during a feeding.       During nursing, a baby exercises every

sense, vision, touch, taste, temperature, smell, and organizes

these perceptions as he learns about his mother's appearance

and her style of giving care.

     When parents and other care givers take care of a child,

they're doing a lot more than just feeding or bathing or

comforting.     They're helping the child's brain to develop,

shaping his temperament and teaching the child about the world.

     These social interactions are the building blocks for a

young child's mental and emotional abilities.                When the child

plays with his parents or care givers or listens to them talk

and babbles back, he learns to focus and to concentrate, to

recognize the familiar and to study the unfamiliar, to

communicate and to take pleasure in learning.                These same

processes later allow a first grader to focus on a book, quiet

down, filter out the noise in the classroom and feel good about
                            Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                34

learning to read.

     Children who are provided with warm care and attention

become attached to their parents and then to the one or two or

even three other adults who take care of them on a regular basis.

 They build up an internal emotional portrait of their parents.

 When the parent isn't there, when she's at work or busy with

something else, when the child is upset, the baby remembers the

internal portrait and comforts himself.

     The more securely attached a child is, the more easily she

can cope with new experiences, including out-of-home child care

or recovering from illnesses or brief separations.

     The experiences during the first years of life at home,

in child care, in the community are especially important because

they lay down the patterns for all future development.     A

fortunate child who has been loved and stimulated, talked with,

comforted, given predictable care, will see the world as

basically safe and secure, will feel valued and effective, will

have trust in himself and others and will be able to use his

intellectual potentials to his limits.

     The nation has far too many children who are not so
                        Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                               35

fortunate.   Children who have had difficult experiences in one

area or another are likely to have problems.                   In subsequent

years, there may be opportunities for earlier brain and

behavioral patterns to be reshaped.             A child with low self esteem

from repeated failures and neglect can blossom with a mentor

and an opportunity for success.            An anxious child can be helped

with therapy and emotional support.                   Over-active children can

learn how to calm down in kindergarten and first and second

grades.

     No child's potential for recovery and achievement should

ever be written off, but we can't count on the success of such

renovation when early maladaptive patterns have been too severe

and have gone on for too long.

     There are important lessons from research on early care

and stimulation for the lives of the most vulnerable young

children, such as those who have been abused or neglected or

moved from one foster home to another.

     Mrs. Clinton, your teacher and mine, Sally Province, was

among the very first researchers to show that children who are

deprived of the continuity of individualized, active attention
                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                36

and care are at great risk to fail emotionally and physically_

 They're at jeopardy of ever forming secure, stable attachments

and trust in others.

     Dr. Province used these insights to create one of the first

early intervention programs for infants and children.     She

demonstrated that sensitive child care and family support can

lead to long-term gains in children's development.

     We need to make this advanced developmental knowledge and

training and resources available to those providing care and

security for the most vulnerable traumatized children.

     Scientific research also provides important new information

about children from loving and devoted families who are born

with constitutional vulnerabilities such as autistic children.

 These children are unable to communicate or participate in

social relations because of inborn dysfunctions in brain

maturation that no amount of loving, devoted care can really

reverse.   They benefit from education and treatment, but the

ultimate hope lies with the type of behavioral and brain research

that you are encouraging today.

     Scientific research on healthy children and on vulnerable
                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                        37

children pass new light on the many factors that go into normal

development and the many ways in which development may become

derailed.   This research helps to define what children and

families need to develop their fullest potential.           We must strive

to meet these needs.

     We thank you, Mr. President, Mrs. Clinton, for your making

the future of children a shared national concern.

     Thank you.

     (Applause. )

     DR. HAMBURG:     Dr. Shatz?

     DR. SHATZ:     Well, I'd first like to echo that thanks for

focusing this day and also future events on the importance of

knowing about child development and brain development.

     Dr. Cohen began his talk by mentioning that the baby is

born ready to go, ready to adapt to the world, and I would like

to talk about what's going on in the brain during those times

and even earlier in development.

     The brain after all is the most incredible computational

machine imaginable and its precision of circuitry really

underlies our abilities to see, to talk to fee and in fact to
                           Hex.Dump Conversion
                                                                          38

be human, so a huge question that neuroscientists have spent

the last 25 years addressing is how in the world is this incredible

machine assembled during development.

     I am very happy to say that the last 25 years of research

have yielded a huge amount of new            an~    important insights and

I want to try to fill you in on some of those in the next few

minutes.

     First, I want to talk to you about the magnitude of the

problem.   The brain actually consists of nerve cells and

neuroscientists argue about how many there are but there are

probably something like a trillion nerve cells.             And I know those

of you who are dealing with the budget deficit understand that

number.

     Now, a nerve cell consists, you could think of a nerve cell

kind of like a telephone, but, unlike a phone, it communications

with other nerve cells by a combination of chemical and electrical

signalling.

     Now, like a phone, a nerve cell gets inputs, gets signals

from other cells and it sends signals through a very long fiber

or process called an axon.         And the axon itself connects with
                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                  39

maybe up to anywhere from 10 to even 10,000 other nerve cells,

so when you place a phone call, maybe one or maybe even 10,000

other phones will ring.

     Now, that means there's something like over a hundred

trillion connections that the brain has to form during

development and yet the precision of those connections is such

that it's almost as if nothing has been left to chance.

     Now, another amazing problem that the brain has to solve

during development is that none of these connections are there

to start out with.       Nothing is connected to anything else in

the brain.     In fact, the way things work is that individual nerve

cells come from dividing cells that divide like mad, produce

progenitors.     Those cells then have to spin out, they're very

long axons, to reach the appropriate parts of the brain.        So

nothing is connected at first.

     And you could make the analogy that the problem of brain

wiring is kind of like the problem of stringing telephone wires

from one city to another in the brain, from New York to Washington,

D.C., and there are sort of two levels of problem that have to

be solved.
                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                       40

     The first is you have to string the trunk lines, so you

have to connect up New York to D _C _ and not to Providence, Rhode

Island_   And what I mean by that is in the brain connections

from the eye have to grow to the visual part of the brain.

Connections from the ear have to grow to the auditory part of

the brain and so on.      All these things have to happen de novo.

     But then the problem of wiring isn't over once that happens.

 The trunk lines are formed and then within the cities the

connections have to go to the right address, so when your

grandmother calls you up in Washington that your phone rings

and the phone at the White House doesn't ring.           So there is this

problem of address selection as well.

     It's not a trivial problem.             The connections from the eye

to the brain, there are about a million connections from each

eye and there are about two million possible phones that each

one of these connections could make in the target.           And yet only

something like 10 or 20 or 100 connections are selected from

this huge subset and that's just in the visual system.

     Now, what I want to talk about is the solution here, how

this works.   Well, one idea is that the brain could be wired
                         Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                  41

like a computer, so, like a computer, take all the component

parts, solder them all together, flip the switch and, voila,

it works.    But, actually, the brain solution is much more

adaptive and elegant than that and the bottom line is the solution

involves starting out by doing the gross wiring of the brain

and then halfway through, before all the wiring is complete,

just flip the switch, and then actually the wiring continues

the process. the functioning of the braining continues the wiring

process.    So the brain is on from early times in development

helping in this wiring process.

       Now, research all the way from flies to mammals have shown

that this wiring occurs, then, in two broad phases.       There's

a basic framework of brain wiring, these would be the trunk lines,

that are laid down through following a strict genetic blueprint

that sets down very clear molecular clues allowing axons to grow

along the right roadways and select the right targets within

the brain, so laying down connections from New York to Washington,

D.C.

       But those connections, when they first form within the

target structure, are not in the adult precision.      In fact, the
                       Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                 42

phones, when you place a phone call in development from New York

to Washington, phones ring allover Washington, so not only your

phone rings, but the White House phone rings, too_

     Then there is a second phase of development in which brain

function is required and it's actually as if the brain is placing

phone calls and using those phone calls to correct the initial

errors that have been formed in the addressing that occurs early

in development.    So the brain is almost running test patterns

on all these connections, phoning home, essentially, to figure

out which are the right phones to ring and which are the wrong

and the incorrect connections are eliminated and the correct

ones are actually strengthened and grow like mad.

     So the baby's brain is actually not just a miniature version

of an adult brain.      It's a dynamic evolving structure that

requires its own function to wire itself in the second phase,

this kind of phoning home.

     Now, I want to give you a famous example of this.     In the

last 20 years or so, many people have looked at vision and

development of visual connections and I want to ask you a question

and see if you can answer this.
                            \-Iex·Dump Conversion
                                                                    43

     When your grandmother gets a cataract as an adult, she cannot

see out of that eye, but if she has that cataract for five years

and then a surgeon comes and corrects the optics of the eye and

replaces the lens and the cornea, she has good vision again,

no problem.

     Now, an unfortunate situation is that sometimes children

are born with congenital cataracts and they might not be operated

on for about five years.          So let's say a five-year-old is then

operated.     The optics of the eye are corrected, yet tragically

the child is blind in the eye that has the cataract.

     What's the difference?

     Well, Hubel and Viesel who were Nobel laureates in 1981

set out to make an animal model to answer this question and what

they discovered is that they eye that wasn't used because it

had the cataract actually lost many of its connections with the

brain.   They withered away and that actually accounted for the

blindness in that eye.         So this is a classic example of use it

or lose it.    And Hubel and Viesel could look right in the brain

of the animal models and see that those connections had actually

gone away.
                             Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                            44

     So this idea, then, gave rise to the whole concept of the

importance of early experience in brain wiring and it's still

one of our best examples of how early experience is needed for

the proper wiring of connections and how abnormal experience

can literally lead to a loss of connections in the brain.

     Now, don't worry, grandma was fine because once the

connections are formed, in most cases, they don't go away again.

 So once formed, the connections are there.                And this then means

that there must be early periods of development, windows of

opportunity or critical periods, as scientists call them, during

which time experience is essential for brain wiring.

     Now, because the brain and different parts of the brain

develop at different rates, scientists think that there probably

are different critical periods or different windows for different

parts of the brain, so it's not just as if there is one critical

period for vision.       It's very likely that there are many

different critical periods and you're actually going to hear

about another nice example from Dr. Kuhl in the next talk,

language development.

     Now, you can ask how early do these periods begin?                 Well,
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                         45

we know now that this phoning process is going on even before

birth.   In fact, even before babies can see, their eyes are

running test patterns on their connections in the brain and they

do this, actually, starting out by a kind of automatic,

auto-dialing process.       And then, of course, afterbirth, this

auto-dialing process is superimposed by vision.               Vision takes

over and vision places the phone calls.                So in a way, even in

utero the brain is in training for experience and it's using

its activity in order to help refine connections that are formed.

     So what I've told you, then, is that there is actually a

two-step process to brain wiring and this is actually an extremely

elegant solution.     If after all things were just hard wired,

if everything in the brain were just strictly programmed

genetically by molecules that wired everything up, A to B, C

to D and so on, then of course we wouldn't be nearly as adaptable

as we are as organisms.

     Brain function selects and refines.               The second step is

actually very prolonged in humans.               As I've said, it begins in

utero and it persists all the way through puberty and, actually,

in the spirit of Mrs. Clinton's remarks earlier, I have to just
                          Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                   46

remind you that it doesn't just stop there, in fact, it's going

on right now and I can guarantee you that after today your brain

is going to be different in structure from what it was before.

     Now, this is a risky process, of course, this process of

allowing experience to sculpt connections, but it allows

adaptability.     And just think of one example here and that is

you don't know if you're going to be born in Japan or in the

United States and you don't know which language you're going

to have to learn.       Well, what's elegant about the superb

flexibility is that the brain lays down a basic circuit that's

designed to learn language and then experience essentially makes

decisions about which connections to keep and which ones to

eliminate.   And without this superb flexibility, of course, we

couldn't do anything.         We couldn't learn, remember, change, in

short, we wouldn't have those properties that make us uniquely

human.

     Thank you.

     (Applause. )

     DR. HAMBURG:       Thank you very much indeed.

     Dr. Kuhl?
                           Hex.Dump Conversion
                                                                           47

     DR. KUHL:    Thank you.         I also want to thank the President

and Mrs. Clinton for putting the spotlight on infants and children

and their development.

     Today I want to describe a specific instance of how the

brain wires itself up for a specific and complex activity like

language.    We want to talk about what those phone lines that

Carla Shatz described are transmitting.

     Over the past 25 years, we've learned a tremendous amount

about the child's acquisition of language.               We previously

thought that language began when first words appeared, at about

one year of age, and when kids started talking to us.              The new

research shows that this is incorrect in that infants are mapping

the sound structure of language in the first six and 12 months

of life.    There's always something going into the brain mapping

the elementary building blocks of language that infants will

use to communicate with in the next year.

     What I'll tell you today is that by six months of age, infants

are well on their way to cracking the language code.              Let me

unpack this a little bit.

     It takes both nature and nurture or, to say it another way,
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                          48

both biology and culture, to bring this about.             Infants are very

well prepared for the acquisition of language _            At birth, infants

across the world can discriminate all of the sound contrasts

that are used in any language of the world_                I like to refer

to them as citizens of the world_

     As Carla said, they don't know what language they're going

to have to acquire, whether it's Japanese, Spanish, Swedish or

English, they're prepared for any thing_               This is quite a feat

because the acoustic events they have to pay attention to are

very, very minute_     But it's not finished yet_             The fact that

they're citizens of the world doesn't make them a speaker of

a particular language_        The job is yet to be done_

     Infants have to change from their citizen of the world status

to a culture-bound language specialist and, again, the news is

that there is concrete evidence that by 12 months of age infants

are well on their way to mapping the sound structure of their

particular language_       We know this because we've been doing

studies in all parts of the world_              We're observing the results

of nature's experiments_         Nature constructs life such that

babies being reared in these different countries are all
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                        49

listening to a separate language and so we have studied infants

at various phases in their development to see when they diverge

from their citizen of the world beginning to the culture bound

citizens that we all become as adults.

      In studies conducted, for example, in Sweden and in

Stockholm and in Seattle, Washington, we observed that by six

months of age, babies are already focused on the particular

language sounds that their language uses contrastively rather

than the sounds of all languages.            So by six months of age, they

have already moved from the citizen of the world status to their

culture-bound language specialist status.

      For example, by 12 months of age, we've just learned from

studies in Japan, infants who originally at six months in Japan

were able to hear the distinction between Rand L no longer do

so.   They don't respond to the difference between Rand L at

12 months.   This is very good for Japanese because it doesn't

contain those two sounds, just R.           So babies have begun to ignore

the variations that are not critical to their language and pay

attention to just that set of sounds that are critical for

distinguishing words in their particular language.
                             Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                          50

     So what this research is showing is that by six months of

age, infants' perceptual systems have been altered simply by

listening to us speak.

     Now, I don't know when the last time is that those of you

in the audience have looked at a six-monther.              They're very

little babies.   They have yet to produce a single word, they're

yet to understand a single word, and yet the lesson from the

research is that they are listening to us speak and their brains

are busy coding the sound structure of the language they're going

to have to master in order to be able to talk back.

     So if infants are listening to us at this wee age, who are

they listening to?     Well, they're listening to us, to you and

me, to the speakers of their language and culture.             So the

language we produce to infants is vital to them and that puts

some responsibility on us.

     So that brings us to the question what do we know about

the language that we produce when we speak to infants and

children?

     Well, there's plenty of research on what we call parentese,

the kind of language we produce when we talk to infants and
                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                              51

children_   We seem to do this unconsciously_                  When you bring

a person into the laboratory who has a child, she comes into

the laboratory, a mother, and she says, "I'm glad I'm here, the

traffic was awful_"     And then she looks at her two-monther and

she says, "Hi_   How are you?"           So we see there that the grammar

is simpler, the vocabulary is simpler, and it has a unique sound_

 The sound of motherese attracts babies _                 It's like an acoustic

hook that pulls their attention to the speaking adult_

     We know from laboratory tests, again, that babies prefer

this kind of signal hands down over any other_                 If you give them

a choice between adult-directed speech like I'm producing now

and infant-directed speech, there is no contest_                   A baby will

do whatever they have to do to turn that signal on_

     The most recent research says that that signal has very

well formed phonetic units ideal for the baby's job of learning

those particular units, so this motherese, this parentese kind

of information, it contains both melody, it has a very good and

enticing sound, and meaning _        It conveys the warmth and attention

we're trying to give to our children, as well as providing a

tutorial on language_
                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                          52

     So language development is this intricate interplay between

biology and culture_       Nature and nurture don't compete, they

cooperate _   Biology provides a kind of blueprint _          The blueprint

is that baby's exquisite ability to hear the differences between

all sounds, but then culture jumps in and provides this

information, the input, language information, that the baby's

brain begins to map _    This all occurs in a deeply social context.

     This is where the village comes in that Mrs. Clinton has

written so eloquently about.            Language is a social enterprise,

one that the community of people surrounding the infant have

to help them with.      Young infants learn to communicate by

watching and listening to us.             Again in the laboratory, we can

see that if you expose a very young baby, a 20-week-old infant,

to a face of a person speaking simple sounds, within about a

minute the baby starts to coo back, producing the best instances

of those sounds that they can do.               So this give and take, this

turn-taking, that we do, the communication dance begins very,

very early in infancy.        By 20 weeks, babies know that they get

to have their turn.

     So this early learning, this plasticity as scientists refer
                           Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                                53

to it, makes infants both responsive to the environment and

vulnerable.   Infants' early propensity to learn reminds us that

we have to pay attention to the intactness of their ability to

hear and see and process information.                    It's important to look

at early hearing, early speech and early language abilities to

that we can jump in with intervention strategies if there is

something amiss.    Timing is extremely important.

     Timing is also important in learning a second language.

This propensity to learn means that infants can master a second

language quite easily during their pre-school years.                  It's much

more difficult to learn it at the age that we are.                  The window

for language learning is wide open in early infancy.                 It doesn't

shut for we adults, thank goodness, but it does narrow a bit.

 So if we're going to expose children to second languages, it's

best to do it early.

     Now, one last point, and it's a caveat.                   These findings

on early learning shouldn't put additional pressure on parents.

 Research can't tell us yet how much communicative interaction

it takes to allow this kind of development to occur.                  We don't

know if it's 30 minutes a day or two hours a day of conversation
                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                   54

that's needed to support this kind of learning.

        As researchers, we don't advise parents who are

communicating with their children to try and accelerate the

normal pattern of development.              We don't recommend flash cards

to try to teach words to three-monthers.                      Nature has provided

a perfect fit between the parents' desire to communicate with

the child and the child's ability to soak this information up.

        Parents should take pride in the hard work that they do

to develop their baby's mind.             They should also understand that

while infants are very, very clever, they're not adults, they

have a long way to go and that we participate in this developmental

process.

        Let me sum up wi th an analogy.            When we see a young baby's

physical growth, we're very comforted.                     Seeing the doctor's

scale go up one pound when I had a child made me feel very good.

 We think our child is then healthy.                      Mental growth is more

difficult to see.      One day your child produces his or her first

word or his first sentence and you say,                     "Where did that come

from?     What's going on up there?"             Modern behavioral and brain

science is providing answers to the questions.                     When we speak
                         Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                          55

to our children, something is happening.               We're bringing about

changes in the brain that will allow them to eventually

participate in the communication game.

     Infants are born to learn.            Our role is to be good partners

in this learning process.

     (Applause. )

     THE PRESIDENT:      I'd like to ask one question.        You say that,

as I think all these presentations that we've heard today, lead

a parent to the question that you say there's not exactly an

answer to yet, which is you don't know whether you need a half

an hour or two hours a day of speaking or if two hours a day

makes a lot more difference to a child in the first six months

of life, but do we know that there is at least some minimum

threshold that has to be crossed and do we know, for example,

that there is a big difference between hearing a soothing human

voice in motherese, if you will, and just leaving a child with

a radio going on or a television going on and do we know anything

about what children do with that sort of language if they're

exposed to it for hours a day in those early months?

     DR. KUHL:      Well, first of all, I guess we can say that
                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                   56

without language input, language doesn't develop, so if you look

at deaf children who do not have the advantage of sign language,

they will not learn to map language sounds and produce the

characteristic milestones of language.                       It takes input to build

a language system.

        We don't know how much it takes, however, there's just no

answer to that question, and we can only guess whether or not

language would develop if you hung a tape recorder on the child's

crib and said, well, this is going to do it.                   My guess is, however,

that it wouldn't happen, that a disembodied tape hung on the

side of an infant's crib is not what it's about.

        It is again this social game, this desire to communicate

on both individuals' parts.            And we're learning a little bit

from animal models that in social contexts in which communication

occurs, there are all kinds of changes in hormone levels and

perhaps the biochemistry of learning will eventually tell us

that it's the social context that prompts the kind of neural

machinery and chemistry that's needed to lay these memory tracks

down.

        THE PRESIDENT:   Thank you.
                             Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                           57

     David, should we go on to the next panelist?

     DR. HAMBURG:     Dr. Davidson?

     DR. DAVIDSON:     Well, I too, want to thank the President

and the First Lady for just opening up what is clearly a very

exciting area.

     Just on the basis of what we've heard so far, preparing

to be a parent should be no less important than preparing for

one's life work.     We have long understood that good health and

medical care for women before and during pregnancy had very

important influences on their infants' health.             In view of this

recent remarkable scientific finding about brain development,

all prospective parents, men and women, must become actively

and knowledgeably involved to assure the best possible health

status before and during pregnancy because of its importance

to newborn and early child development ..

     A heal thy mother, a heal thy baby, born into a heal thy family,

offers the best chance for full advantage of this new science

demonstrating how much the young child's brain development

benefits from stimulating and interactive environments.              The

general society should be so infused with this information that
                         Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                                      58

no child should escape its benefit_

     Formal and informal education should ensure that future

parents, especially girls and women of all ages, understand that

proper personal habits, balanced nutrition and family support

are among the factors that improve pregnancy outcome_

     There is proven value in a specific medical visit and

evaluation when pregnancy is contemplated_             This provides the

opportunity for a complete family and personal history, physical

examination, needed laboratory tests that could            id~ntify


conditions that might require special consideration and

counselling.

     For example, medical conditions that might harm the woman

and fetus and lead to a less healthy start could be identified

and corrected.    These could be as obvious as problems of obesity

or conditions that are less obvious and important as high blood

pressure or diabetes and even unrecognized risks such as genetic

condi tions, hazards in the workplace, diets, and even medications

that patients may feel that are not harmful.            Personal habits

such as smoking, drinking, drug abuse could be stopped or reduced.

     While all of these will be addressed as a part of prenatal
                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                59

care, often the harmful influences can occur even before

pregnancy is suspected or diagnosed, so this good healthy living

life style is important before pregnancy_

     At the present time, medical care begins with pregnancy

for most patients, since preconception care that I've just

described is relatively a new recommendation and is not often

exercised_

     There is no question that early and comprehensive prenatal

care provides an added assurance that there will be a healthy

mother joyfully interacting with a vigorous newborn that is

responsive_     Such newborns have the best chance of maximal

development _    Mental and physical impairment or disability that

could have been avoided with proper prenatal care may otherwise

greatly increase the difficulty in reaching developmental

potential_

     Risks that should be identified and can be modified with

health promotion or prevention or treatment are rich

opportunities that can be exercised during this prenatal

experience_     Advantages of this care are insufficiently

recognized by many who consider pregnancy to be only a normal
                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                           60

condition and not recognize that very harmful and serious changes

can occur without warning_

     Prenatal care not only proves an advantage for mothers and

infants, but over many times has been documented to decrease

overall costs _    Too many women still in this country do not get

adequate prenatal care because of lack of knowledge, motivation,

resources or insurance, and we mus t work to reduce these barriers _

     The time immediately after birth, the postpartum period,

is another critical opportunity to be captured for evaluation

and examination_       A smooth transition from birth to parenting

a newborn at home that provides comfort and reassurance about

the details of newborn care and feeding is enhanced by

professional observation and evaluation_

     As a matter of fact, I am sure that common wisdom

understanding this and the advantages that it offers contributed

to the mass public and professional outcry over postpartum

hospital stays that were cut short for financial and

administrative reasons without this due professional concern_

     Throughout our population, many barriers interfere with

ideal prenatal and perinatal care:               smoking, drinking, substance
                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                         61

abuse, poor nutri tion, family violence, stress, lack of knowledge

and inadequate medical care.            And we must remember up to one

in four children in this country is born in poverty.               Special

efforts need to be made also that we are bringing the benefit

of this science and support to these less fortunate members of

the society.

     Importantly, much more emphasis needs to be placed on

planned child bearing to pursue a more orderly and productive

preparation for pregnancy and its care.               Over half of the

pregnancies in this country are unplanned or untimely.               This

is not only a problem as we focus on teenagers, but in numbers

is even a larger problem in the adult population.           Only 15 percent

of this risk is among adolescents.

     It would be an enormous benefit that would have major impact

advantage to newborns if there were a large reduction in this

unplanned pregnancy.       There is no comparison between the

attentive mother eagerly anticipating the birth of a child and

doing everything possible to make sure it is healthy and will

be received in a warm environment compared to a person who has

a much less interest in that pregnancy and does not afford the
                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                   62

prospective opportunity for this support and comfort_

     It was clear even before today's findings that it was

necessary to improve the general advantage for newborns to have

this kind of start.       Hopefully, with this kind of new

information, it will be impelling enough that the necessary

social and policy actions can be accomplished.

     I really do appreciate an opportunity, as brief as it is,

to bring this maternity care and obstetrical perspective to these

important issues.

     Thank you.

     (Applause. )

     THE PRESIDENT:       Doctor, what's the best delivery system

we could develop to get this information especially to poor

prospective mothers?

     DR. DAVIDSON:     Well, I think part of that is a medical answer

and part of it is a general support and educational answer that's

even beyond medicine, but clearly, it is important that all women

and families have an opportunity to participate in quality

medical care that provides the springboard for the other

necessary services to be provided because that context allows
                                     Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                                   63

the easy assessment as to whether or not there are other physical,

psychological or other needs that help prepare a parent to engage

in this exciting enterprise with the newborn.

              DR. HAMBURG:      Dr. Brazelton?

              DR. BRAZELTON:       Well, first of all, I want to thank the

President and Mrs. Clinton for every family in this country

because I can guarantee you that all of them are watching today

with the kind of feeling that nobody before has cared.

              When I was on the National Commission for Children with

Jay Rockefeller for two years with many of the people in this

room, we went around this country and were really horrified that

we were one of the least family and child oriented countries

in the world.           How can we have gotten there?              And yet I have

identified in my own work ten stresses that have made parenting

much harder today than when we were raising our own children.

 It   I   S   escalating.       Parents are under more stress every day than

we are meeting.

              Why has a country like ours not met this responsibility

when we know what the outcome is at the other end?

              And I have some biases.             Biases only operate if you are
                              Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                               64

not willing to face them.            If you bring them to the surface,

you can say, hey, I don't want to be dominated by that bias,

I want to act on it.        Ope of them is that we basically feel

families ought to be self-sufficient and if they're not they

ought to pay a price for it, so we don't do anything really

important to help them.         Even welfare reform, we turn the wrong

way.

       We should have looked at what we were going to do with

children before we pushed women out into the workforce.                      It's

so obvious to anybody.

       (Applause. )

       So, you know, we don't do it.               The next one is women ought

to be home with their kids and if they're not, their children

ought to suffer and they're going to suffer.                  You know, we aren't

paying attention to what 70 percent of families are going through

with that bias.

       The third is that we don't like failure and we don't like

diversity.    We have made diversity into a negative in this

melting pot society.        How have we done it?

       When I play with newborns around the world, they bring us
                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                       65

a fantastic kind of diversity to our country.           We ought to be

so proud and valuing that so much that we could change that model.

     Well, what I want to do is use that to say to you that I

think what you all entered into your presidency with last year

was wonderful.   When you did the family medical leave bill after

we had worked for 10 years to get it, it seemed like it was failing

because it only affected 5 percent of families, but it had a

spread effect that all of you ought to be aware of.       It certainly

is the one thing in my elderly life that looks good_

     Businesses began to wonder what are we doing to our families

and they are now planning family support systems in many of the

businesses in this country.         And we're working with four major

businesses to set up centers in every business site with not

only quality day care but preventive health care, support systems

if they deserve food stamps and so forth, they get them right

there, they go right into Head Start right there.          These are

community centers and people are beginning to feel a sense of

community again at a time when we've lost that in this country?

 Isn't that exciting?

     The same thing went on, Hillary, with the health care bill.
                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                             66

 You may feel like you've lost it, I don't.                  You shook medicine

to its roots.     It's running for cover now and it ought to.                It

has not been successful.

     In pediatrics, which you've asked me to talk about in five

minutes, I can tell you that pediatricians are very

disillusioned.      They know that what they've been doing is not

satisfying anybody, including themselves.                   Middle class people

only get a baby weighed, measured, and immunized.                   That's-not

what they come for.    Lower class women don't come.              Forty percent

of our kids are getting no effective preventive health care.

Aren't immunized.     What country can say that about their

children?

     So we'd better re-look at our health care, as we have that

opportunity.     And I would like to ask you for something today

and I hope all of you in the. front rows are going to respond

to this.    I'd like to see universal coverage at least for all

children and pregnant women.

     (Applause. )

     And it's not costly, it's an investment.                 As William White

had said, will it cost us a lot more?                  Compared to what?   You
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                          67

know, we are paying a terrible price for our lack of attention

to this area later.

     Well, we can't just fall back on universal coverage.                 We

need a special kind of outreach medicine in this country.                 It

not only has to be available, affordable, but it has to be

respectful.    It has to begin to pay attention to what families

want when they come to a doctor.

     When a mother comes into a pediatric office, she comes with

two questions:     How am I doing?            How is my kid doing?   But she

doesn't just want back his height and weight.              That may be very

important, but she wants to know whether that baby is right on

target.

     The Academy of Pediatrics has asked me to help them with

their immuniz?ition program and I said, sure, if you'll do one

thing:    every mother who brings a baby in for an immunization

hopes she's going to get something back from that visit.               When

she walks in the door, have somebody at the door who says, oh,

what a beautiful baby, look at that baby, look at you with those

lidded eyes and look at you look back with those lidded eyes,

aren't you having a great time.                And then you have one other
                        Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                           68

person in the office who hands that baby a toy, if that's age

appropriate, and as the baby grabs for it, they say he's right

on target, isn't that wonderful.              No mother will ever miss

another immunization, I can promise you.              So these are the things

we've got to begin to incorporate in our medical outreach.

     I think we need to change our medical system from a deficit

model which we were all so well trained in in medical school,

look for all the problems, we never miss one, but then say, hey,

what kind of strengths are giving these people the opportunity

to raise five kids in the ghetto with no supports?               And as soon

as you ask a mother that, she sits up, her eyes come alive and

she begins to answer and then she'll tell you things that are

important to her.

     And I would recommend that we change our preventive health

care system from one that welcomes, that reaches out, when they

come in you never look a baby in the face, anybody that looks

a baby in the face gets what they deserve, a screaming baby.

What you do is look just past them and as they pick up on just

what you're looking past, they begin to do something. They've

just learned.
                             Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                           69

     I saw an eight-month-old baby the other day who just learned

to go "phfft".     So I said to the mother, "How is she phfft doing?"

 And the baby sat up straight.              Eight months.   Right in the

middle of stranger awareness.             And I said, "Is she phfft eating

all right?"      By the third "phfft" she reached out for me, a

stranger.     I took her and went "phfft" a fourth time and she

looked up in my face, felt my mouth and went "phfft" back.             And

how long did that take out of the 10 minutes I had for those

patients?

     The other thing you can do is the same thing with mothers.

 As you're working with them, watch their rhythms,use their

non-verbal language and they're right with you.              And I think

we can change our model by touching in on what I call touch points.

 The vulnerable times in a child's development are like a map.

 There are six of these in the first year, three in the second,

two each year after that, when a baby regresses just before they

take a spurt in development and these spurts in development are

going to cost everybody in the family a lot, but these regressions

cost the most if parents don't understand them because they think,

oh, my lord, she's starting to lie, steal, suck her thumb, wet
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                  70

the bed, any of the things kids can do.

     If you're there to touch into the sys tern and say, you know,

regression is a time for reorganization and for learning and

she's just going to take off in such and such a way, a cognitive

way or a motor way.    These parents, the next time they come in,

"Wow, you were right," you have not only empowered the child,

you have empowered the mother and all of these efforts we've

been hearing about, about brain development, ought to be looked

at with that in mind.       Are we just talking about the brain

development in the child or are we talking about the parents'

development, too?      And every time we are rewiring the brain

of the baby, we're rewiring the brain of the parent.

     We have a chance through preventive health care, preventive

education, to give back to parents this feeling I matter, what

I do matters.   And every time they look at their baby and the

baby goes ooh and they go ooh back and every time the baby smiles

and they smile back, that baby is not only - - I'd go a step farther

than you did, Dr. Kuhl, I would say that the reason we talk to

a baby in a special way is they know we're talking to them.

If I hold up a newborn with its head here and its bottom here
                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                         71

and say, "Hi, how are you doing?              Come on, you can turn to my

voice."   That newborn stops breathing, the face lights up,

breathing starts up again.          He keeps himself under control so

he won't startle and turns to my voice and arches toward me like,

"There you are_"

     If I get a mother over here and I'm over here and we both

talk, any newborn worth its salt chooses the mother's voice,

turns to her, and I've never done it yet, I was in the nursery

yesterday, that the mother doesn't grab her baby and say, "You

know me already."

     And if we want fathers in there, Bill, what we have to do

is put the father over here, macho types, you know, and get them

to talk and fortunately 80 percent of babies choose their father's

voice instead of mine, and the other 20 I tip their head.

     (Laughter. )

     The father does the same thing that a mother does and grabs

his baby and says, "You know me."          Well, this has worked at Howard

University with unwed African-American fathers, it's worked with

addicted women, it works with anybody who cares.

     Now, if we have a country that still cares and is still
                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                 72

hurting because they care so much, can't we capture that energy,

put it to use to do just what we've been talking about in capturing

these pathways, not only in the baby, but in the parents?

     Thank you_

      (Applause. )

     MRS. CLINTON:       Dr. Brazelton, I wanted to follow up on a

couple of things that you said today and that I've heard you

say many times before.

     As I mentioned earlier, the organization Zero to Three has

just completed an extensive nationwide survey of parents of young

children.   They used this survey to try to find out what parents

know and what they don't know about children's development and

we find out from this survey that parents know a lot about what

they should be doing, there are some things they have

misconceptions about, but there is a clear finding from this

poll of parents that they are just hungry for information on

what they can do to enhance their child's development.

     You and I have spoken together many times and we have said

over and over again, in your much more extensive work and my

more limited observation and contact, I have met very few parents,
                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                   73

very few, who I thought didn't care about their children, but

I have met many parents who were overwhelmed, stressed out,

anxious, unsure about what it is they were supposed to do.

     What would be the best things that you would want every

parent to know to do to nurture their young children?        If you

could have a face-to-face conversation and look into the eyes

of every young mother and father, what would you want them to

know to do?

     DR. BRAZELTON:        I'd want them to know two things, I'm

afraid.   One is to learn how to follow their. baby's behavior

and when they talk to them watch to see when that baby pays

attention.    If you talk like I was just talking to a full-term

baby to a specially vulnerable baby like a preemie or one who

has been addicted in the uterus, you'd stop that baby from

breathing and they'd turn away from you, spit, up have a BM,

turn blue around the mouth, show you in every system I'm

overloading you.

     On the other hand, if you reduced your voice and said, "Hi,

how are you doing?       Come on, you can turn to my voice," even

these very fragile infants pull it together, turn to your voice,
                            ~pv-Ol'mp Conversion
                                                                               74

put four modalities into action in terms of the brain's

development in order to turn to you.

     Now, I think parents need to learn how to watch their baby's

behavior as their language and learn the baby's temperament as

their language and then they'll feel like I know my baby.

     And the other thing I want them to know is the ghosts from

their own nursery and how much those dominate your behavior when

you hit a snag.     If they can look back and say, "I don't need

to do this just because my mother did this to me," in terms of

chi ld abuse, "I can make a choice."                    And then I think they can

make the right choice.

     THE PRESIDENT:        Let me ask you something.               This goes back

to something Dr. Davidson said, too, about the whole perinatal

care network.     If a lot of the parents that are most at risk

of messing this up because of their own difficulties are in fact

already covered by public programs and if in -fact, which basically

underpay the doctors in many ways, wouldn't the most

cost-effective way of dealing with this be to sort of build into

the Medicaid expansion program to treat these things as actual

services that ought to be given to pregnant women?                    Or if women




                     Automated Records Management System
                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                          75

don't come in in prenatal care, at least immediately after

childbirth, before they get out of the hospital, at least somebody

goes through some of these things?                And then there's some

understanding that they can come back for this kind of

consultation?

     Shouldn't we try to develop a more systematic way of

imparting all this scientific information and all this kind of

stuff?

     (Applause _)

     And isn't it really rather inexpensive and easy to adapt

the program to this?

     DR. BRAZELTON:      Do you want to answer first?

     DR. DAVIDSON:     Well, I will give one reply.             It has been

suggested to me that this level of interacting with parents or

parent education ought to be in the same category as immunizations

and we ought to be as concerned about this and maybe have bench

points, as immunization is required to get into school.               And

this is for parents across the board, because there is so much

information that they want to know and once they are engaged

there is so much more information that they want to know and
                          Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                            76

it certainly should be built into the situations where the parents

are naturally found.

       DR. BRAZELTON:      Bill, I would say not the way it's set up

now.     AFDC is handed out as a top-down gift to people and with

it goes a kind of derogatory approach that I think is so

destructive.

       If we change the model to a shared model in which we were

looking for relationships in our training, touch points, it takes

us a week to get people who are very dedicated to come around
                                 ,
to want to make relationships with other people not at a top-down

level.     And then we try to get them out of the model of just

looking at deficits to looking at positives.                Those are big

steps, but we can do it.             We can train people.

       And if you could get us universal coverage and if we could

retrain people to come out of the old medical model of negative

failures, we could sure do it.               We'd reach everybody in this

country.

       THE PRESIDENT:      When we break, it might be worth having

a conversation with the governors who are here, because we do

have some governors here, but in virtually every state in the
                         Hex·Dump Conversion

                                                                             77

 country now, I think every state, the Medicaid program covers

people who are above the welfare level.                 There are people on

AFDC and then people who are working poor.                And there will be,

 I believe this anyway, I believe the chances are overwhelming

 that there will be a dramatic expansion of medical coverage to

children who don't have insurance now and we might get all the

way there.   Sometimes a fever overtakes the Congress in a

positive sense and we get things done.                 It's building in the

right direction, anyway.

      But the thing that strikes me about all this, if you go

back to what all the first speakers said, if you go back just

 to begin with Dr. Cohen and you go through what Dr. Shatz said

and certainly what Dr. Kuhl said, there has to be                 the defect

 in America is we hate systems about everything.

      We need a system to have the kind of networking relationships

with parents, hopefully before but at least immediately after

birth, that we don't have and those things are, compared to what

. we're spending money on now, relatively inexpensive if you can

do what you're talking about.

     MRS. CLINTON:      I would like to just add to that.            There
                        Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                     78

are a lot of interesting programs out there.          Some of them have

been highlighted in starting points, I know that Rob is going

to be highlighting some of them in his upcoming special.         I know

many of you have worked in them.

     It's not that we don't know what works.          We do   know what

works.   We know what can help get a parent more engaged.          We

know how to intervene to try to create better conditions for

a non-responsive depressed parent, an over-stressed parent, to

have this kind of interaction with his or her child.           But we

do not have any systematic way to do it and I think what the

President is saying is a very important point because we have

this reaction against systematically helping people, and yet

we systematically pay the costs of not helping people, in a very

sensible preventive way in the first instance.

     I think that it's not only something we should look at from

the point of view of what public programs like Medicaid can or

should do.   There are also great opportunities for HMOs and for

insurers that are serious about cutting costs down the road and

I know that at least one, Kaiser Permanente, is represented here

that is very interested in trying to figure out ways of creating
                        Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                        79

better conditions for prenatal and post-birth relationships

between parents and children.

     And I also think that we can't look at this solely as a

problem of our poorest, most disadvantaged families . . That is

where we have perhaps a greater pool of parents and children

at risk and where the social costs are more obvious, but I think

that the stresses that Dr. Brazelton has talked about and that

he's worked on for so long really affects society across the

board and so it's not just a question of public response, it's

a question also of private response.

     And to that end, I would like to ask Dr. Cohen, because

he referred earlier to Dr. Sally Province whom I had the privilege

of working with and watching work with mothers and infants, and

in the observations that I watched those many years ago, she

was dealing with primarily stay-at'-home mothers, middle income,

upper income mothers, who knew that they had a problem, who knew

because of some referral from a physician or a neighbor or just

what they felt themselves that their child was not thriving the

way that they had hoped their child would.             So they would come

for this intervention and assistance from Dr. Province and then
                           Hex·Dump Conv0Nlion
                                                                            80

Dr. Province after observing, it was predominantly, I think,

all that I ever saw were mothers and children, after observing

the parent-child relationship, would then work with that mother

to understand how not to startle the baby, how to read the baby's

temperament, how to be more attuned to her child.

      And, Dr. Cohen, that's much of what the work that you've

done all these years at the Child Studies Center has been aimed

at.   How do we take that knowledge which is there, that trained

people like yourself and Dr. Brazelton and Dr. Hamburg and others

on the panel have, how do we take that and systematically provide

it to parents who want to make these changes so that they are

better able to develop their children?

      DR. COHEN:    Well, thank you.                One important part of the

work in the Child Studies Center this last decade has been to

move the clinical work of Dr. Province out into the community,

so now the clinic that you worked in is represented in every

school in New Haven where psychologists, social workers, child

psychologists are out there in the schools working with teachers,

in preschools working with Head Start teachers.

      In our most recent work, it's been working with police
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                    81

officers and teaching police officers the basic concepts of child

development and how do you work with families and police officers

are out in the community_          They are still making house calls_

     And I think that one of the important parts of our work

is to work with all those other aspects of the community where

families are met, the faith community, pediatricians, primary

care, education, social service agencies, as everyone buys into

the idea of thinking about the first years of life.          And that

will transmit the kind of knowledge we have about parent-child

relationships to the families.

     We shouldn't underestimate how hard the work is because

after you do work with the families and you bring them in, it

is sustained, hard work to make a change, especially when you

have multi-generational difficulties of the sort that you saw

also with Dr. Province.       It means long-term work, work with the

parents, work with their extended community, and work with the

child.   And we have to recognize that as well, that this is not

going to be simple work once we identify the children.

     Thus, when you go out into the community, what you find

is more and more need and that is what we have to recognize as
                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                  82

providers, that it won't be a few children, it will be more

children.   Every highway once it's built is filled with cars

and every time you reach out into the community, you find more

parents who want our care.

     Finally, we'll have to find ways of doing this not just

with professionals like Dr. Province and high trained

professionals, but extenders of our clinical care and I think

there, too, the President is quite right in saying can't we create

systems in which there are a range of providers working in a

systematic way, delivering to all children at their

socio-economic class differences what they need.       And it's not

always a highly trained physician, but sometimes it is a highly

trained physician.

     DR. BRAZELTON:      I didn't get your question but absolutely,

for my money, one of the good things about managed care is that

it can provide us multi-disciplinary opportunities.        We could

train the woman on the phone, the woman when you first enter

a doctor's office, somebody to asses the baby so the doctor in

his 10 minutes doesn't have to do that, but he then can use it.

 The second I think you reach out for somebody and offer to become
                            Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                  83

an advocate, they know it and they'll respond to it and you could

bring them in in pregnancy in such a way.

     And then I've found in my own work that modeling is the

quickest way for a parent to learn how to nurture a child.

     DR. HAMBURG:     Well, Dr. Phillips, you're not forgotten,

you're down there on the end, but we remember you're there and

the very important subject you have to address, so, please.

     DR. PHILLIPS:      First, Barry, I want to thank you because

my ll-month-old has perfected that Bronx cheer of yours after

three months of almost constant practice and I'm very glad to

know that's normal development.

     Thank you, Mr. President and Mrs. Clinton, for highlighting

research on child care as part of the evidence that you want

American families to know about in the context of this very

important gathering.       It's not often that we get to sit on the

same panel with neuroscientists, so it's a deep honor.

     Just as the research on the inner workings of the brain

have somewhat ironically directed attention outward to the

importance of the environment, research on child care has

affirmed the centrality and durability of the family in the
                             Hex-Dump COnVGmion
                                                                                   84

development of young children_

     We now know, for example, that placing a baby in child care

does not interfere with the development of the mother-infant

attachment relationship or the father-infant attachment

relationship_   These bonds are extremely resilient.                      Today,

however, the vast majority of families are sharing the rearing

of their children with child care providers, starting in the

very first few weeks of life.

     We know from the new national study of infant child care

funded by the National Institute of Child Health and Human

Development that 80 percent of the infants in the United States

experience some regular non-maternal child care during the first

12 months of life.       Most of these babies started child care

before their four-month birthday and most of them are in care

typically for close to 30 hours a week_                       We are talking about

very high dosage, very early exposure to child care for most

U.S. babies_

     As millions of American children are moving into child care,

most of these settings fall short of any standard that any of

us in the room would consider optimal.                       Barely adequate has
                          Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                          85

become the term of art to describe the typical child care

arrangement in this country.              Virtually every study that has

involved actually going inside child care settings and observing

what happens has found that about 15 to 20 percent, about one

to five or six, are in fact dismal and even dangerous and those

are the settings that will let us in to observe them.              Compared

to older children, infants seem to get the poorest quality of

alL

      We also see fabulous child care in all kinds of arrangements,

whether it's from the grandma or a teacher in a child care setting.

      Neuroscience tells us that these suboptimal child care

environments should affect early development.               Child ·care

research confirms that they do.               The quality of the child care

environment significantly affects virtually every domain of

development that we know how to measure, whether it's problem

solving skills or social interactions or attention span or verbal

development, whatever we can measure, you get an effect for

quality of care.

      We've known this for a while now about three and four and

five-year-olds.     What this new study is telling us is that it's
                      Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                             86

also true for infants and toddlers_                 Contrary to persistent

concerns, young children, including babies, can thrive in child

care when it is of good enough quality.

     Now, the key to quality lies with the care giver.                 Good

care giving looks a lot like the good mothering and the good

fathering that you've been hearing about on this panel.            Children

show significantly better" cognitive and language and social and

emotional development when they are cared for by adults who engage

with them in frequent affectionate responsive interactions, who

are attentive and know how to read the baby's signals and the

baby's temperament and know when to turn up the volume on an

interaction because the baby wants more and when to turn down

the volume because the baby is absorbed in something on their

own or is tired and needs to take a nap.

     We have learned that language stimulation in child care

settings is one of the most important facets of that care-giver

child interaction, starting with babies.

     Consider the difference between a baby in a child care

setting who holds up a toy car and says' "cah" and is greeted

by a care giver who knows to get down on her knees, look at the
                          Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                    87

baby's eye level, clap, hug the baby and say, "Yes, you have

a car."     Maybe she even has a book about cars to pullout and

show the baby.   As compared to the baby whose gleeful exclamation

of "cah" is ignored, completely ignored, and frequently ignored.

     These are precisely the kinds of differences that we see

when we go in and look at child care settings.           It's the

difference between high quality and that barely adequate care

that we see all too often.

     Research also tells us that adult-to-child ratios are a

critical ingredient of quality because it's humanly impossible

to offer an infant enough of these kinds of nurturing, stimulating

exchanges when a care giver has to juggle the demands of more

than a few babies, more than six to seven toddlers.          Ask any

parent of twins or ask any parent who has just survived their

two-year-old's birthday party and say to them, "Oh, theY're

coming back in 10 minutes, they've just been out for a play

session."

     We also know that better trained and educated providers

interact more effectively with young children in both home-based,

even those informal care settings, as well as in centers.
                        Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                                             88

Experience alone does not appear to make a difference.

     Children are also affected by the stability of their care

givers because what we in my discipline euphemistically call

staff turnover or care giver turnover, infants experience as

loss of loved providers and this brings us to the difficult issue

of how little we value and reward the individuals who provide

child care in this country.

     Wages predict turnover.             It's a simple and direct

relationship.   Yet we pay child care workers among the lowest

wages of any workers in this country, including people who guard

our cars in parking lots.

     Parents understand the importance of quality in their

children's child care.        It affects not only their children, but

their performance on the job.           Some parents call it safety, some

parents call it trust, some call it learning opportunities, but

they all care deeply about it and they worry deeply about it.

 They struggle one by one to find child care and then to keep

it, which is sometimes even harder.                   They do their best under

very tough circumstances, constrained by what's available and

convenient and affordable near their homes or their jobs, and
                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                             89

constrained by the nature of their work hours and the demands

of their jobs into which their child care have to fit_

     We all share a responsibility for meeting the needs of

America's children for high quality child care.                   Parents need

real choices, starting with the choice about when to start using

child care, which is a matter of family leave policy and I applaud

you, Mr. President, for expanding the range of activities that

that act will now cover.         It will provide parents now with

precisely that time they need to find high quality child care

and the necessary time it takes to look for it.

     I also applaud you, Mr. President, for highlighting the

exemplary efforts and extending the exemplary efforts of the

Department of Defense.        I have been particularly impressed by

their understanding but efforts to enhance training must go hand

in hand with efforts to enhance wages.                  And, as a result, staff

turnover in their child care programs has plummeted.

     The questions this conference raises for child care are

big ones, but unlike some other areas of child policy, we do

know what to do here, as you said, Mrs. Clinton.                   We know how

to provide high quality child care.              The unified efforts of the
                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                 90

four branches of the military have proven this, as has Head Start,

as I'm sure will early Head Start, as have the wonderful child

care programs that are available to people who work in the federal

agencies and in the u.S. Congress that I was fortunate enough

to be able to avail myself of who are accredited and who also

offer decent wages to their employees.

     And today we're hearing very compelling evidence about the

high stages involved in decisions either to follow or to ignore

these models and I am delighted to hear that you're going to

keep looking at this issue in the months ahead.

     Thank you.

     (Applause. )

     MRS. CLINTON:      One of the reasons we want to look at this

issue and we will have a conference later this year is because

this is one concern that is shared by Americans no matter where

they live or what their station in life might be.      And I think

we need to clear the air and have a very honest national discussion

about child care, the good, the bad and the ugly, and try to

give parents more guidance about what good child care is and

look for ways of creating real choices for parents because that
                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                             91

is what I think we should make available to parents but in reality

many parents have no choices _         They don't have the choice about

whether or not to go back to work, especially if they're a single

parent or if they're a parent in a low income family that needs

two paychecks just to keep body and soul together.               They often

believe that they don't have a choice about the quality because

of the cost of the programs that they are looking at.                And I

think that part of what we have to do with this research that

we now have available to us is to take a hard look about what

real choices are and try to do more to provide them.

     Now, some people argue, Dr. Phillips, that what the research

that we've heard about from Dr. Shatz and Kuhl and Cohen and

others, really tells us is that women with very young children

should not work outside the home period and that all of our

problems would be solved and all of our babies' brains would

be well wired if women just stayed home.                And I think it's

important that we talk about this and not either adopt an

ideological point of view one way or the other about this question

and it seems to me that part of what this conversation about

scientific research should lead us to do is to look for ways
                             Hex·Oump Conversion
                                                                     92

to give real choices to women so that women feel that they are

making the choice that is right for them and their family.

     But could you comment on what this research is telling us

and whether it's fair to conclude, as some now argue, that it's

the absolute definitive word on whether or not women should work

outside the home?

     DR. PHILLIPS:      Yes.      I have always been dismayed by how

zero sum the debates are about work versus child care.         All

families in this country do both and both need child care and

also need the freedom to make choices, especially about when

they start child care.         And I would love to see family leave

policies in this country extended to cover more employees, a

longer period of time and to address that thorny issue of wage

replacement.

     Placing a child in child care is one of the most agonizing

and frightening decisions a parent has to make and it's very

important that that parent be comfortable about when they first

enter into that system or non-system that we have now.        But in

fact the research on child care and the research on infant child

care now is extremely reassuring with respect to working parents,
                             Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                    93

mothers and fathers, in a couple of ways.

     First, we know, we find again and again in analyses, that

regardless of when families first start child care, regardless

of how much child care they use, the family remains by far the

most powerful, by far the most powerful, influence on their

children's development.          In many ways, how a child fares is in

the parents' hands, so that's one reassuring message.

     The other message is that if you can place your child in

high quality child care, you can actually supplement what you're

giving them as a parent and that's why the value of making high

quality child care affordable for more families cannot be

undervalued.   Children can thrive when their child care is good

enough and I think people weren't even sure that was possible,

but it's very, very possible.

     MRS. CLINTON:      One of the questions that I'd like to ask

the scientists about kind of arises from that.

     There was an interesting study that I wrote about in my

book and I saw today mentioned in a New York Times article called

"Meaningful Differences" about the amount and kind of verbal

interaction that goes on in a home and the kind of stimulation
                          Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                      94

that occurs.

     And I think one of the issues that we need to address is

how do we make it possible for more parents and those who are

substitute care givers to understand what appropriate

stimulation is, what kinds of activities are going to really

help wire that brain and what might short circuit it, because

I know that I often observe parents in various settings allover

the country, and I'm always interested in what they think an

appropriate way to talk to a child is, and does that make a

difference and, in addition to verbal stimulation, what about

physical stimulation?

     And Dr. Schatz, or Dr. Kuhl, would you comment on that?

     DR. KUHL:   I think we can say that the kind of stimulation

definitely makes a difference.            I mean, obviously, we wouldn't

think that shouting at a child more would improve their

development.

     We think that interaction is extremely important and that

the sort of mood and temperament of the child needs to be taken

into account.
                           Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                            95

     So, if a parent comes in to address a baby and is rushed

and stressed, maybe that interaction isn't ideal, and if a parent

simply decided, "Look, I have to crank up the level a little

bit here, I have to do more of this, I am going to talk to this

baby four hours a day," but talking isn't interactive and doesn't

take into account where the baby is at that moment in time I

don't think we could guarantee that that would do any good at

all and, in fact, we might guess that it would have some negative

consequence ."

      I think Barry was mentioning that one of the things that

you try to train a parent is to understand and read the child,

that the temperament and the tone that mothers and fathers adopt

when they talk to children is this higher pitch and slowed-down

level of communication.

     The slowed-down    lev~l    of communication says, "Go ahead and

take your turn.    I'm addressing you.               It's your turn now."   I

think that's the kind of stimulation that we have to teach parents

how to do.   Some of them have the intuition to do it, not every

single one of them does.         Teen-age mothers don't," always.

     DR. SCHATZ:   Brain research actually has allowed us to begin
                     Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                               96

to understand what is going on in the brain when these adequate

interactions occur.

     We know, for instance that this process of strengthening

synaptic connections or weakening synaptic connections can

actually be influenced by the state of arousal or the state of

mind that you're in, and this is both -- you probably know this

from your own experience in terms of, you know, trying to learn

or remember things.

     Obviously, a state of stress makes a difference, and we

know this at the level of these individual synapses and

connections that. I talked about earlier.

     DR. BRAZELTON:      I do think there is a danger in what we

are proposing, of playing into something that is going on in

this country, which is to go after children, to teach them

language, teach them judo, teach them violin, all the rest, at

a time which may not be age-appropriate.

     The first three years maybe ought to be put more into

learning about themselves, learning about their environment,

learning how about discipline, things like that, which may be

more age-locked than learning how to read or learning some of
                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                   97

the other things_

       I would be worried about families who took away from this

that they've got to start all these programs early, and push.

       DR. COHEN;   I think it's important to think about the baby's

schedule.    If we think about early child care, it's meeting the

baby when the baby is awake and ready for you, which is so

difficult.    It may not be exactly on the schedule of the parents.

       Quality care of children means being there when they need

you.    Sometimes when they need you - - and we haven't talked much

about it -- is when they're upset and distressed, at moments

of high affect.     There, a lot of important work goes on between

the parents, who are devoted to this child, whose primary

preoccupation is this child, and the child.

       So, when the child is crying or is hungry or has fallen

down or is disappointed, how the parent responds to those highly

charged moments is critical, and it makes an enormous difference

whether it's your child or a child you really love and care about,

or somebody else's child.        It also makes a difference how awake

you are, how stressed you are.

       I think that we need to find ways of allowing parents to
                     Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                     98

be there for their children at such times_         That's one of the

advantages of worksite child care, is to be there not only when

things are going well, but when theY're not going so well, and

the child is sick or upset or is frightened.

     I think these charged moments is something which we need

to think about, too, in our curricula, as we talk with parents,

as we talk with other people who are dealing with children, which

is how do you deal with a child who is having a temper fit, how

do you deal with a child who has just pulled another child's

hair, how do you deal with a child whose hair has just been pulled?

 These issues begin, really, very, very early.

     I was doing a home visit two weeks ago, and there were two

one-year-olds, and one little boy just reached out and just

grabbed this other child's hair and just gave it a big yank,

and the mother screeched, said, "Don't do that."        So the child

then looked at the mother, looked at the little girl, and crawled

away and started to cry.

     The mother then picked the child up and consoled the child,

and then put the child back down on the floor.        The child is

back down on the floor, looks at this little girl, whose hair
                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                          99

he just pulled, and he takes his hand and he gives it a

little -- "Don't do that_"             It was like,     "Hand, don't get me

into trouble again_"

     (Laughter. )

     DR. COHEN:     Now, that moment, that highly charged moment --

     MRS. CLINTON:       That's good advice for adults.

     DR. COHEN:     Right.

     (Laughter. )

     DR. COHEN:     That highly charged moment of assertiveness,

of how the parent dealt with the assertiveness, comforted the

child, and the child begins to internalize, what do you do.

A year or two later, he may not have to hold his hand.               He will

know his hand belongs to him.

     That, I think, is really very hard, unless you have

appropriate training in child care, where the staff understands

that this is a moment to learn, there are enough child care

workers, where the parents understand how to deal with

assertiveness and aggression.

     I think they are, especially for very stressed families,

a place to really do a lot of our thinking.
                       Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                   100

     THE PRESIDENT:      I'd like to make just a couple of comments.

 I'm going to ask all of you to help me figure out what we're

supposed to do here.       First, I believe the national government

has a continuing and heavy responsibility to fund this basic

research, to keep pushing the frontiers here.

     There are, as has been acknowledged here, some things we

don't yet know the answers to, and I'm very heartened that the

distinguished head of the NIH, Dr. Harold Barmus, is here, and

the President's Science Advisor, Dr. Gibbons, is here, and I

think it would really matter if we knew how much was enough

interaction - - something you could tell. a busy parent, something

you could tell a parent who maybe was a high school dropout and

felt not very worthy, and you could empower them . . You can empower

them now by telling them that they can do enough, but if you

really -- if you knew a slightly more precise answer it could

really matter to this.      So I think we have a heavy responsibility

there.

     The second thing I'd like to say is I wish you all would

think about these issues we've discussed today where there are

shortcomings in our society and ask yourself, is this primarily
                        Hex·Dump Conversion
                                                                  101

a money problem, and if so, what is the federal responsibility

here; or is it -- maybe there's a little money problem, but is

it primarily a question of education and proper networking, in

which case, as Dr. Davidson said to me when we had a personal

moment here, maybe it's something that has to be done community

by community.   But I think it's important to dis aggregate these

problems.

     The third thing I'd like to say to you is that as we think

about -- we were talking about the Navy's child care network

-- we're living in this, as everybody knows, in this really

dynamic time, and I'm trying to figure out all the time what

should I be doing here that will make America better 10 or 20

years from now, and I think about these decisions that we're

trying to harmonize as having basically three major elements.

 There's the sort of the modern social elements of the

technological changes and the global competition and whatever

the social pressures are.         There's the enduring need to have

an appropriate amount of personal responsibility from

indi viduals, without which no society succeeds.      And then there

is the constant need we have that's always being redefined to
                                              Hex-Dump Convemlon
                                                                                          102

            have a certain amount of security in our society because we share

             common tasks together_

                     And if you take the United States versus France, for example,

            our unemployment rate is seven points lower than theirs _                That's

             a big deal_          We would be inconsolable if we had a 12 point

            unemployment rate_             And the President of France and I have had

            a lot of wonderful conversations about this and he's tried to

            make his society more flexible and his labor markets less rigid

             to try to get more jobs and lower unemployment_

                     On the other hand, if I suggested that there is no social

            responsibility for a child care network, they would go crazy

            and they would think it was laughable, that it had nothing --

             that they're pretty proud of the fact that they take better care

            of their children than we do _                 And I don't think it has anything

            to do with the difference in our unemployment rate_

                     In other words, I believe that every society today in this

            period of change is trying to identify where do I need to let

            competition and responsibility hold major sway here and get out

            of the way; and where do we need to do these things together_

              And no society has it perfect; no advanced society has a perfect




                                         Automated Records Management Svster-
Automated Records Management System              Hex-Dump Conversion
        Hex-Dump Conversion
                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                       103

decision.   But I would argue that we pay a terrible price when

we don't take shared responsibility for our children.              And I

think the research here supports that.

     Consider how all the - - consider how I would answer Congress

and the Republicans in Congress if I were to say, well, we've

got a lot of problems in the military budget, so what we're going

to do is to dismantle this system of child care, it's just a

silly little add-on we can't afford; and we're going to let all

these people in the Navy go out and find their child care the

same way Americans do, everybody else does.           It seems a

reasonable thing to do.         And, oh, yes, we do have all these fine

young people who serve in the Navy at what would be very low

salaries compared to the private sector, but that's just tough.

 Why, there would be an uproar, and there ought to be an uproar.

     But if you think about it, the children of people who aren't

in the Navy are just as important to our future as the children

of people who are.

     So I think it would be very helpful to all of you to think

over the next five or 10 years, whenever some problem comes up

you ask yourself, is this something where it ought to be a matter
                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                      104

of -- as we build a new society for a new century, something

that we have to do together as a society, or something that we

should just set up the right rules and then let people deal with

individually.

        And that's how I try to think of every issue that comes

to me.    And when I -- was just captivated by what Dr. Shatz said

about the whole way the brain -- my brain is racing, you know

-- what are the implications of this in terms of what parents

have to do and what the rest of us have to do.             And if we ask

and answer those questions right, then this country will be just

fine.

        Thank you.     (Applause. )
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 059 - FOLDER -008


[04/18/1997] [2]


