RECORD TYPE:    PRES~DENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna ( FORTUNA_D)      (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-APR-1997 15:02:10.17

SUBJECT: FYI; states were mad at us for siding ago them on this suit

TO: Bruce N. Reed                                REED B ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                                  KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ:NOT READ

TO: Cynthia A. Rice                          ("RICE_C) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ:NOT READ

TEXT:
Date: 04/21/97 Time: 11:04
SCourt bars parents' child-support suits against states
    WASHINGTON (AP)    Parents cannot sue states to force them into
overall compliance with a federal child-support enforcement
program, the Supreme Court ruled today.
    But the unanimous decision left open the possibility that
parents" still might have some rights to sue under a program that
ties federal welfare funds to states' child-support enforcement
efforts.
    The ruling keeps alive a lawsuit by a group of Arizona women who
had trouble getting child-support money from their children's
fathers.
    Under the child-support program, states accepting federal money
must help parents collect support from the noncustodial parent. The
law says states must be in "substantial compliance" with
collection standards, which means being in compliance in 75 percent
of the cases reviewed.
    Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for the court that parents
cannot sue in an effort to force states to meet that overall
standard.
    "Far from creating an individual entitlement to services, the
standard is simply a yardstick for       (federal officials) to
measure the systemwide performance of a state's ... program,"
O'Connor said.
    " I t is clear, then, that even when a state is in 'substantial
compliance' ... any individual plaintiff might still be among the
10 (percent) or 25 percent of persons whose needs ultimately go
unmet, " she said.
    But O'Connor said some provisions of the law still "may give
rise to some individually enforceable rights"    that she did not
specify.
    The justices ordered a lower court to take a new look at the
Arizona lawsuit to determine whether it asserts any such specific
rights.
    Five Arizona women sued state officials in 1993, accusing them
of not doing their part under the federal Aid to Families with
Dependent Children program, which is run by state agencies with
federal money.
    In exchange for the federal money, states must help parents who
have custody of their children    including those who are not on
welfare    collect support they are owed by noncustodial parents.
    Enforcement services are to include establishing paternity and


going after deadbeats who do not comply with court orders to help
pay the cost of bringing up their children. States that are not in
"sUbstantial compliance"    lose part of their federal funding.
    Arizona's lawyer argued that allowing individual parents to sue
over alleged noncompliance would, in effect, create a 100 percent
compliance rule.
    The five women sought to represent about 300,000 custodial
parents in Arizona.
    A federal. judge threw out their lawsuit, saying Congress did not
intend to let private citizens sue under the welfare law. But the
9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the women could sue
under a federal civil rights law.
    The Clinton administration supported the women's argument that
they had a right to sue Arizona officials. However, 42 states and
the District of Columbia urged the justices to bar such lawsuits.
    The Supreme Court said the compliance rule "was not intended to
benefit individual children and custodial parents, and therefore it
does not constitute a federal right. ' ,
    Congress enacted sweeping changes to the federal welfare law
last year, ending the federal guarantee of cash assistance to the
poor. But the justices last October turned down a request by the
Arizona women to return the case to a lower court for
reconsideration under the new welfare law.
    The case is Blessing vs. Freestone, 95-1441.
APNP-04-21-97 1116EDT


