RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna ( FORTUNA_D )   (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-MAY-1997 17:27:57.28

SUBJECT: wire story on cea report

TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED B ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Cynthia A. Rice                           RICE C ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TEXT:
Date: 05/09/97 Time: 17:06
SEconomy, welfare changes shrink welfare rolls
     WASHINGTON (AP)   The booming economy is responsible for almost
half a dramatic drop in welfare numbers nationwide, a White House
report concludes. It poses the obvious question: What happens when
the economy inevitably slows?
     The report released Friday by the Council of Economic Advisers
also credits states that experiment most boldly with welfare
changes, particularly those that punish recipients who don't
participate in work requirements.
     "This study is further proof that welfare reform works, " said
Bruce Reed, President Clinton's chief domestic policy adviser. " I t
isn't just 'the economy, stupid.' It's welfare reform as well."
     But the economy is responsible for 44 percent of caseload drops,
according to the analysis of unemployment rates, welfare policies
and caseload changes. It concluded that policy changes enacted by
states under federal waivers account for 31 percent of the decline.
     The other 25 percent was unaccounted for, although
administration officials credited policies such as expansion of a
tax credit for the working poor.
     Low unemployment means more job chances for people leaving
welfare, and the current economic expansion is already the third
longest in history.
     Welfare rolls jumped during the 1990-91 recession and began to
fall as the economy strengthened in 1993 and 1994. So what happens
if the economy turns down?
     "We did not pretend when the president signed the bill that
there were enough protections in an economic downturn, " said Donna
Shalala, the secretary of Health and Human Services.
     But she pointed out that federal payments to states are based on
caseloads at their peaks, meaning states will have more money per
welfare recipient than ever before. Many states are saving that
money for an economic rainy day, she said.
     The report comes as states, freed from all but a few federal
restrictions, take responsibility for creating welfare programs.
The six-decade federal guarantee of aid for the poorest Americans
disappeared when Clinton signed the welfare law last summer.
     States begin the task a step ahead. The number of people on
welfare has fallen dramatically since peaking in 1994    20 percent
nationwide and more than 40 percent in states such as Wisconsin and
Oregon.
     But no one knows how long that will last   or what has happened


to people who leave the rolls.
     "The key question is, are we pushing more people into poverty?
We don't know, " Shalala said.
     The report notes the relationship between economic conditions
and welfare is not perfect. For instance, welfare rolls in Virginia
dropped 20 percent although unemployment was above average between
1993 and 1996.
     Robert Rector, who analyzes welfare for the conservative
Heritage Foundation, argues there is "virtually' no relationship"
between the economy and caseloads. In the booming 1960s, caseloads
rose as welfare was expanded, and in the early 1980s, case loads
remained steady during a recession because eligibility standards
were tightened.
     "Over the long term, anybody who knows anything about this can
see the welfare policies are much more important than the economy
in terms of reducing caseloads, " Rector said.
     The study also credits welfare policies including the effects of
state experiments. By 1996, 35 states operated under major
statewide waivers.
     Analyzing six popular policies, the report concludes only one
had a significant effect: punishing people who won't participate in
work programs. That often means reducing benefits, or sometimes
removing people from rolls. The policy is estimated to reduce
caseloads by nearly 10 percent.
    But states often began a variety of changes at once, making it
difficult to determine the effect of each. Further, severity and
frequency of sanctions vary by state.
    While administration officials welcome the declines, they
acknowledge they don't know how much further they can fall before
the most employable people are in jobs, and only people with the
toughest problems remain.
     "One of the things that we don't know ... is whether the drop
continues, or whether you get to a point where it '.S a much tougher
population to move from welfare to work, " Shalala said.
    Rector counters that many never thought case loads would decline
this far.
     "We've been waiting for the bottom of the barrel, " he said.
"The bottom of the barrel is far, far lower down than anyone
imagined. ' ,
APNP-OS-09-97 1719EDT


