RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Kathleen M. Wallman ( CN=Kathleen M. Wallman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]   )

CREATION DATE/TIME:15-MAY-1997 11:55:32.00

SUBJECT:

TO: KAGAN_E ( KAGAN E @A1 @ CD @ LNGTWY [ EOP ] )   (OPD)
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Kathleen M. Wallman/WHO/EOP on
05/15/97 12:55 PM ---------------------------




Kathleen M. Wallman
05/15/97 11:52:23 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      KAGAN E @ A1 @ CD @ LNGTWY
cc:
Subject:

'Absolutely No Need'

 TWO DOZEN GROUPS SEEK MANDATORY COUNTER ADS TO TV-RADIO ALCOHOL
COMMERCIALS

     Citing cigarettes as precedent, 24 groups petitioned FCC Wed.
to require TV and radio stations to air counter ads for beer, wine
and hard liquor commercials.  Petition claimed that ads "threaten
the public interest and public safety by glamorizing their appeal
to children." Request was filed by National Council on Alcoholism
& Drug Dependence (NCADD) and Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) ,
plus 22 other groups.  In immediate response, NAB Pres. Edward
Fritts said "there is absolutely no need" for Commission to require
such ads.

     In related action, American Academy of Pediatrics urged FCC to
"investigate the impact of liquor advertising on television on
children." In letter to FCC Chmn. Hundt, Council Pres. Robert
Hannemann said group supports Commission investigation of liquor
ads and "strongly urges that such a hearing be inclusive of the
beer and wine industry ... As pediatricians, we see the influence
the media ... historically have had on America's children and
adolescents. Equating alcohol use with athletic prowess, social
popularity and physical beauty serves to draw this particularly
susceptible population into illegal use and abuse of alcohol."

     NCADD and MADD charged alcoholic beverage industry "has used
the nation's airwaves to create a distorted view of a product
which, in reality, is associated with the leading causes of death
among teenagers. Without intervention of the kind the FCC has
taken before [on cigarettes], parents, schools and public health
organizations will never have the resources to compete with the
millions of dollars worth of prodrinking messages that are
broadcast into American homes every year."



     Petition asks FCC to require any station or network that airs
commercials for alcoholic beverages (including beer and wine) to
carry "a significant amount" of counter ads free "within reasonable
proximity" of alcohol ads.  Petition cites as legal justification
1967 FCC rule (before cigarette ads were banned by Congress) under
now-defunct fairness doctrine that required stations to air one
free antismoking spot for every 4 paid cigarette commercials.
Catalyst for petition, groups said, was Distilled Spirits Council
deletion of ban against broadcast hard-liquor ads from its
voluntary code.

     Beer Institute official Jeff Becker said brewers "have a
history of responsible public service announcements ... We've done
a tremendous amount of work in being part of the solution to drunk
driving and alcohol abuse." Elizabeth Board of Distilled Spirits
Institute said TV stations and networks have refused to accept
industry efforts to pay for commercials on alcohol abuse when
sponsoring company is named.

     Fritts said surveys indicate that TV-radio stations are
"widely disseminating antialcohol abuse prevention messages ... Our
latest estimates indicate that approximately one billion dollars
annually" in time are donated to such messages by broadcasters.
NAB's own effort -- Stations Target Alcohol Abuse Reduction (STARS)
-- has "played a significant role in creating an awareness of the
dangers of alcohol abuse," he said.

     Hundt has called repeatedly for FCC investigation and hearing
into alcohol ads, but has been unable to get necessary 3 votes to
start inquiry (CD May 13 p6). Comrs., Chong and Quello contend that
FTC, not FCC, has authority over liquor ads; Comr. Ness said she
believes Commission could conduct investigation but she hasn't
decided whether it has jurisdiction to take any specific action (CD
May 14 p7). After filing of petition Wed., Hundt said "FCC's
statutory duty to ensure that the public airwaves are used in the
public interest requires us to act." President Clinton also is
among those calling for FCC action on liquor ads.


