RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne I. Johnson ( CN=Leanne I. Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-JUN-1997 10:57:07.00

SUBJECT:    English as official language

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Hi Elena,

I understand that this is your issue.  Following is the current form
letter draft I have on this subject.  The language was was cleared 8/96 by
Leg Affairs and Steven Warnath.  Could you please let me know whether it
still reflects the Administration's position on this issue? I spoke with
Leanne Shimabukuro and she suggested that it may be a bit too strong.
Please let me know what you think. Also, is there anyone else who should
review this before it is released for use?


DRAFT:


     Thank you for sharing with me your thoughts on "English-only"
legislation.

     Everyone throughout the world recognizes that English is the
common language of the united States, and I consider legislation
such as the English Language Empowerment Act, the Bilingual Voting·
Requirements Repeal Act, and the Language of Government Act to be
divisive and unnecessary.

     These measures would have numerous objectionable effects. They
would effectively exclude Americans who are not fully proficient in
English from equal participation in society, denying them equal
access to education, social services, and other interaction with
their government and their communities.  Restricting the
government's ability to communicate clearly with citizens simply
because their English proficiency is limited would infringe upon the
most basic tenet of participatory democracy -- a citizen's right to
vote. We would no longer be able to effectively conduct required
business in writing with the millions of u.S. Citizens, in Puerto
Rico and many States, who do not read English.

      We are a great nation of many voices. The Constitution and the
Bill of Rights serve to unite all Americans and seek to guarantee
freedom of speech, representative democracy, respect for due
process, and equality of protection under the law.  Proposals for
"English-only" laws, which would require the federal government to
conduct the vast majority of its official business only in English,
contradict these principles.


