RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1997 18:43:07.00

SUBJECT:   Wade Henderson

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I got your message about going to the Wade Henderson meeting at ED this
evening; I also got a voice mail message from him inviting me to come as
well.  I didn't get back to my office and get either of your messages
until 5:45. Here is what I did:

1. Called Wade's office to find out where the meeting was being held; he
was gone and they didn't know.  I made sure they got the message that we
were trying to be responsive.

2. After several calls, found out that they were meeting with Mike Smith
(I got to Mike at 5:59). They are meeting about a teacher licensure basic
skills test in California.   (C-BEST) You need to be aware of the issue,
because it may come our way.

Several years ago a number of civil rights groups went to court (or to the
EEOC, I'm not sure which) seeking to stop the test because minorities have
a higher failure rate than whites. The Justice Department civil rights
office was considering taking the side of the plantifs in the case. A
number of us at the Education Deparment met with the Justice staff and
argued strongly against this step, on the grounds that we ought to be
supporting higher standards for teachers, not opposing it. Whatever the
reason for the higher failure rate for minorities, the test if anything
was too easy and there was no good reason to let teachers who fail it
teach kids. We prevailed, and Justice stayed out of the case.

The civil rights groups lost the case. They have asked EEOC to file an
appeal.  ED is taking the same position now with EEOC as it previously
took with Justice.  I think Wade was coming into to try to get the
Department to change its position.

I agree with ED's position (since I helped formulate it), and I didn't
see much merit in rushing over to ED in order to oppose Wade's position.
Unless the facts have changed over the years, I think ED is on the right
side and he is on the wrong side of the issue; if in fact EEOC decides to
file an appeal, and I would argue that we try to stop their effort.

Given that it was a minute before the meeting was scheduled to begin, I
thought the best course of action was for both of us from the white House
to be unavailable, but seen as trying to be responsive to Wade's request
to show up on short notice.  I asked Mike to let Wade know that neither of
us was able to make it on short notice.  I'm sure Wade will come directly
to us if he wants to, and we can deal with him then.


