RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Todd Stern ( CN;Todd Stern/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-JUN-1997 18:04:39.00

SUBJECT:   1997-06-12 Briefing by Sylvia Mathews and Maria Echaveste

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Glad to see that the you're the one who's supposed to deliver the goods.
tds
---------------------- Forwarded by Todd Stern/WHO/EOP on 06/12/97 06:04 PM




        SUNTUM M @ Al
        06/12/97 03:46:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject: 1997-06-12 Briefing by Sylvia Mathews and Maria Echaveste




                             THE WHITE HOUSE

                     Office of the Press Secretary


For Immediate Release                                    June 12, 1997


                            PRESS BRIEFING
                SYLVIA MATHEWS, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF,
                                  AND
      MARIA ECHAVESTE, DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC LIAISON


                            The Briefing Room


1:15 P.M. EDT


             MR. LOCKHART: Good afternoon, everyone. Before Mike
comes out, we wanted to spend a few minutes to talk about the
President's initiative on race, which he will give a speech in San
Diego on Saturday, as you well know.

             I'm going to invite a couple of people who've worked
very hard -- long and hard -- and have done excellent work on this
process. Deputy Chief of Staff Sylvia Mathews has led the process
working with Maria Echaveste, the Director the Office of Public
Liaison. Sylvia will walk you through who's on the board and how we


went about setting up the board, the goals of the initiative, and
also some of the elements of the initiative.

               So with that     but one other note

               Q    will there be paper on it?

               MR. LOCKHART: Yes, the paper is being xeroxed right
now.    It will be, when we're done, available in the bins.

             On one logistical note, as we've told you, the advisory
board will be here tomorrow. And Beverly Barnes, whom most of you
know, who works with the Chief of Staff Erskine Bowles, will be
handling the inquiries for the board, because I know a lot of you
will be interested in talking to them. So, if you want to get in
touch with the board members over the next few days, work through
Beverly.

               Q    Got a meeting here tomorrow with them?

                MR. LOCKHART: They are traveling out to San Diego with
th~    President, and this is a get-together tomorrow.

               Q    What time will that be?

               MR. LOCKHART:   It's late   in the afternoon, I think
4:30 p.m.

               Q    You're all going on Air Force One?

               Q    We can't be on the charter and be --

               Q    will there be a readout here or will there be photo
ops      what's the logistics of the meeting?
0,


             MR. LOCKHART:  I believe we'll do a pool spray at the
top of the meeting and do something here. And then I'll be on the
plane going out to San Diego.

0,

             Q    But what about those of us -- somebody else is
going on the plane but somebody is writing the story here because
it's awfully late by the time you get there. Can there be a
readout --

               MR. LOCKHART:   Yes, we'll try to do some sort of read
out here.

             Q    For those of us who want to cover the news and then
also be on the charter, is it possible to delay the charter?

               MR. LOCKHART:   Well, let me go and look at that, Wolf.
I'll see.

               Q    Why does the charter have to leave so early?

               MR. LOCKHART:   Well, let me -- I'll go back and look at


it, okay?   I will.     Okay?

                with that, Sylvia.

             MS. MATHEWS; Thank you. The first thing I wanted to
spend just a minute on are the goals and methods of the President's
initiative and review that, and then talk about the elements of the
initiative and then share with you the members of the President's
Advisory Board.

                Q     Why don't we have the members first?

                MS. MATHEWS;     I'm happy to do it that way if you all
would prefer.

             The President's Advisory Board, which is -- it has a
seven-person membership -- is going to be structured to advise him
over the period of the -- a year-long period for the initiative. And
the Chairman of the Board will be John Hope Franklin of Durham, North
Carolina, who I'm sure many of you are familiar with, a retired
historian and educator.

             William F. Winter of Jackson, Mississippi. Governor
Winter is a former Governor of Mississippi and has served in a number
of capacities both inside and out of government and is in a law
practice right now.

             Linda Chavez-Thompson of Washington, D.C. I think many
of you know her. She is the Executive Vice President with the
AFL-CIO.

             Robert Thomas of Coto DeCaza, California.         Mr. Thomas is
the President and CEO of Nissan USA.

             Angela Oh, of California. Ms. Oh is a practicing lawyer
in L.A. right now. She is also a person who was very involved in the
L.A. riots, in part of the reconciliation efforts that occurred there
-- the multiracial issues that were occurring there between African
Americans, as well as the Asian and Hispanic communities, and she's
been involved in that effort in her home city.

             And, finally, Suzan Johnson Cook. And some of you may
have met Suzan when she was a White House Fellow.  Suzan is an
African American female minister in New York City. Right now, she's
senior pastor of what's called The Bronx Christian Fellowship in the
Bronx. She was also the first female chaplain of the New York City
Police Department.

             The other name that I'll go ahead and announce now --
and you'll understand how it fits in the structure as I go on -- oh,
I'm sorry, I skipped over Tom Kean, who I think you all are familiar
with -- the former Governor.

                Q     Tom who?

                MS. MATHEWS;     Kean.   And it's spelled K-e-a-n.

             The other name that I will go ahead and announce now is
Christopher Edley. Chris Edley is not a member of the advisory
board, but what Chris is going to do is he's going to be a senior


advisor to the initiative, and he will help us with our policy
development. He'll be a consultant and will come down periodically
and work with our Domestic Policy Council, Elena Kagan and Jose
Cerda, to organize and develop policies over the period of the year.

             So those are the names, and why don't I now go to

            Q    Wait a second, what's Taylor Branch's role going to
be? Is he going to sort of work with the President to write his
report?

             MS. MATHEWS:  If it's all right, can I get through the
initiative and then return to the question, or -- I think that might
be helpful if we could get    we'll do it that way, then. Good.

             First, under the goals:  Goal number one is to
articulate the President's vision of racial reconciliation, and we
think that's an important thing because it is his vision of how we
want to take the country into the next century and talk about what he
believes and why that's right, and that will be the focus of the
speech.  Part of why we're doing this briefing now is so that he has
that ability in the speech on Saturday.

             Goal number two is to help educate the nation, both
about the facts surrounding the issue of race and the history. At
this point, we have a generation -- the education has two focuses to
it:  the past and the future.  We have a situation now where many
people don't know the history of the civil rights movement, or a lot
of the nation's history with regards to race relations, whether it's
black, white, Hispanic or Native American. Additionally, the
education part is about talking about what the future is going to
look like.

             If you looked at the Gallup study, I think you all
probably saw some very interesting statistics. While that was
black-white only and the initiative is broader than that, you saw the
number of people, whites, and what they thought the racial mix was.
There are some misperceptions in education there on what our racial
balance is now, but also I'm not sure how many people in the United
States realize that in the year 2050, we'll be at about 53 percent
white and then 47 percent other minorities.

             The third goal is to promote a constructive dialogue.   I
think that's something you all have talked and heard a lot about
leading up to this effort. And one thing I would add there, it's a
constructive dialogue on the difficult issues.  In order to have a
dialogue, we need to have a dialogue on some of the positive things,
like the Tuskegee apology, but we also need to talk about some of the
tough issues like the kind of issues you all face every day, whether
it's in your news organizations and hiring or in your communities.

             The fourth goal is to recruit and encourage leadership.
In order to give the effort breadth and depth, part of what we will
do is try and work to get others involved, whether it's in business
or in state and local government in the states throughout the nation.

             And finally, the fifth goal is to find, develop, and
implement solutions in critical areas, such as education, economic
opportunity, housing, health care, crime and the administration of
justice. And these solutions that we're looking for are for


individuals, communities, for corporations, and for state and local
governments.

             On the methods, just a couple of points. One is
Presidential leadership. This contrasts with past issues because of
the close involvement of the President. That's why he chose to do an
advisory board instead of what has been viewed as a traditional
commission.

             Then let me just say, it has three elements really, if
you think about it:  dialogue, study, and action. And I can spend
time, but I will wait for questions to do that.

             The elements of the initiative: one, the advisory
board, which we just talked about.  Those people will help scope and
focus the study and dialogue work that we do over the year. They
will also help us with policy ideas, with outreach to the community,
with working with experts, and talking to the American people.

             Two, the President is going to do significant events
throughout the year.  I think as it has already been reported, some
of those will be town halls; others of those will be events like
Tuskegee, and today we're announcing that we will be going to Little
Rock for the Central High anniversary.

             Q      When is that?

             MS. MATHEWS: September -- I don't know the exact date
that we're going, but we can get that for you.

             The third element is the outreach and consultation of
leadership, which our advisory board will help us with and our staff
that we'll set up will.

             And the fourth thing is the President's report to the
American people.  Instead of having a report from a commission, the
President will be doing his own report to the American people.

             Finally, something that won't be in your paper but is an
important element, is that we will be selecting an executive director
and a staff. The staff will be about 15 to 20 people and will be a
combination of detailees, agency reps, and a few hires.  That will be
funded -- we're working with -- Justice is working with its
appropriators right now to try and do a reprogramming of funds to do
that -- to pay for that.

             I think with that, I should stop and we should take
questions, unless you have anything to add, Maria.

             MS. ECHAVESTE:  I just wanted to add that in formulating
this initiative, we did engage in a process of outreach that was both
wide, but also close in. Senior staff, as well as the President,
talked in depth with between 25 to 35 individuals in the course of
the last two and a half months.  But we also spoke to over 100 people
before we finalized the initiative -- getting their reaction and
their thoughts about what road he should take. We have ongoing a
process of contacting over 300 people around the country -- opinion
leaders, constituencies, organizations, others who we hope will be
part of this initiative in the course of the next year.


             I think the best thing to say is that the reaction from
a number of different people -- and frankly the majority -- was
positive in having the President take on this initiative, but also
urging the President to take on the hard issues. And that is why the
initiative has taken the form that it has.

             So I'll stop there.
D,


            Q     What is the ultimate goal? Is it integration?   A
total reconciliation? And what are you really striving for in
English?

             MS. MATHEWS: Our hope is that in a year's time that we
will have ways that both policies and people can help the nation
respect each other's differences, but at the same time, grow together
as one. And that's it in a simple sentence, but let me just
elaborate a little bit. And that's the idea that we're going to
continue to become more and more racially diverse, and as we do, we
need to learn that we have to start with the respect of each other's
differences before we can focus on those things that are our shared
values, our shared concerns, our shared problems and do it as one
nation.

             Q    There's already been some criticism of the fact
that the solutions come at the back end. There are people out there
already saying what the President needs to do is talk about solutions
to these problems on the street -- crime, justice, so forth -- now.
And they want money as well.

             MS. MATHEWS:  I think two separate parts there. One is
that we are going to start talking about those issues now, and as far
as policy actions that will come over the time. The three different
parts -- study, dialogue, and action    are iterative, and they will
feed into each other over the period of the year.

             On the separate question of money -- did you want to
             MS. ECHAVESTE: I just wanted to add that this is a
different time than it was, say, 25 or 30 years ago.  There was a
consensus, if you will, that there were legal barriers, things that
the government needed to do.  I would argue that at the moment, there
is not a consensus that in fact racism still exists. There are many
places around the country that believe that, in fact, we've solved
all our problems. So before you start advocating particular
solutions, there needs to be a process of shared views that, in fact,
problems exist and how to address them.

             Q    Can you describe those problems? What is the
problem that the President hopes to address with this? Is it racial
prejudice and bigotry that he thinks is out of control or something
of that nature?

             MS. MATHEWS:  I think that there are a number of
different problems, and that's a part of what the initiative will
show over time.  We see problems in perception, and then you see
there are really two categories: problems in perception and problems
in reality.  In the perception front, what's actually stereotypes and
what's reality, and we saw, I think, a perception gap in the Gallup
poll and we see that in a number of different places.



             On the question of what's really wrong, the reality of
how much racism does exist and how do we work to correct for that.

             Q    The Kerner Commission addressed all this 25 years
ago or so, and a lot of people would say things have gotten a lot
worse since then. How is this going to succeed where the Kerner
Commission failed and the Lyndon Johnson initiative failed?

             MS. ECHAVESTE: Well, I think for starters, the Kerner
Commission, number one, focused only on African American and white
relations. Notwithstanding that in different parts of the country we
already had a multiethnic, multiracial community.

             Number two, the Kerner Commission came as a result of a
particular time in terms of violence and riots and that type of
crisis. This is a different time.
0,


             And, number three, there are issues in terms of really
asking -- there are some issues that relate to economics, and there
will be those critics on the left who say money is what's needed,
investment in the inner-cities, but there are others that would argue
that, notwithstanding the strides that have been made in terms of
increasing opportunities for different minorities, that there
continues to be racism even, for example, a company like Texaco,
where the issue wasn't getting a job, it was actually the
interactions among people and what kind of atmosphere people worked
under.

             So those are issues that aren't necessarily solved by
money, but nonetheless have to be attacked.

             Q    Where is the staff going to come from? Which kind
of staff are you looking for? You're reprogramming people, but from
what functions?

             MS. MATHEWS:  From all our departments.  They'll come
from the Cabinet departments is where they will come from. When we
talked about some of the substantive issue areas, like housing, the
administration of justice, health care, Secretary Shalala in our
Cabinet briefing yesterday expressed her interest in ensuring --

               Q    So many Cabinet -- it will be sort of a subset of
the Cabinet?

             MS. MATHEWS: We'll have people from all -- we have to
have people from a number of the departments representing those
different areas to help guide the policy development as well as the
dialogue and the study.

             Q    I don't want to be excessively negative about this,
because I understand that that's unpleasant and you're trying to do
something good here and so forth, but I guess the interesting thing
for a lot of us is that you keep -- the folks who talk about this
keep saying, well, there was a consensus 25 years ago, there's no
consensus today, and that's why we have to have this big sort of
discussion to figure out what to do.


             I think people who cover these issues would dispute that
there was any consensus about that. Why was there a year-long battle
over the Civil Rights Act in 1964? So I guess some people who have
been analyzing this initiative wonder whether this idea that it's so
unclear what to do, we don't know what the problems are, we have to
figure it out before we can act, is kind of a way to avoid doing
something; it's just a way to talk about these issues without really
having to decide something and actually do something, those things
that are within the President's power to do, like, for example, make
certain appointments. integrate the White House staff a little bit
more thoroughly than it is -- things of that sort. Do you know what
I'm talking about, and could you speak to that?

             MS. MATHEWS:  I would be interested in the consensus
point.  If you want to articulate what you believe the consensus is
-- that there is a race problem, that there isn't or that --

              Q   The idea that 25 years ago it was so clear what
direction the country needed to move in cannot be the case if there
were just the profound legislative battles we had over every major
civil rights initiative that's ever been passed in this country --
there were tremendous pitched battles. There were fist fights on the
floor, off the floor. screaming fights.  So clearly there was no
consensus 25 years ago, and yet legislation was passed, moved forward
and so forth -- and with the President's leadership.

             See, my point is -- so it isn't just that everybody
jumped up and said, we need to pass the Civil Rights Act. They
didn't do that.

             MS. MATHEWS:  I think though that we believe that we are
showing leadership. The truth is that -- I think that while this is
an issue that often is sailing against the political headwinds in a
number of ways    by going to California and choosing that as the
place in which we make our speech, I think we're making a statement.

             Already, we've seen ads that are cut.  I think the
President is showing leadership on the issue and we're starting to
see reaction. We're going to have critics from the left and critics
from the right. They're going to be paSSionate and they're going to
be vocal. That's why this is a tough issue and an important issue.

             As far as the action. part of the thing that we believe
is an important thing to do -- there are the policy elements, and we
have already started work. The Domestic Policy Council. under Elena
Kagan and Jose Cerda, working with our council's office have started
the interagency process with the Justice Department and Education on
specifically looking at the ramifications of Hopwood and Prop 209.
We are on our way on those things.

             The other things in terms of action -- the issue of
dialogue -- when we've discussed things with a number of people
outside, the importance of having people talk about it and having the
President show the leadership -- to have the American people talk
about the tough issues that we all aren't willing to talk about on a
day-to-day basis.

             Q    Sylvia. how did you figure out that this would be a
year-long process? It seems like an awful long time for issues that
are on the front burner for a lot of people right now.  Why will it


take so long?

             MS. MATHEWS: As I said, it will be an iterative
process. And it's our expectation that policies will be announced
along the way, and we will do that along the way.

              As far as deciding on a year, we wanted to get the
President's report out within a year.

             Q    Sylvia, let me just again ask you about this. If
you find, as the President talks, that he doesn't build any
consensus, will you then not put out policy? I mean, is this idea
that he has to build the support for it first and if that isn't
there, you won't build?

             MS. MATHEWS:     No.    We will put out the policies that we
believe are best.

             Q    And secondly, if I could, people who met with the
President the other night said that he talked about looking at
polling data that showed what American whites are ready for
discussing. How much has this been polled by the White House or by
DNC pollsters for the White House?

             MS. MATHEWS:     That's a question I'll have to defer.

             Q      Well, why?      I mean, you don't know?

              MS. MATHEWS: In terms of how much -- I think
understanding some of the issues that -- in terms of, do people think
it is a problem and that sort of thing.

             Q      No, did you poll?

             Q      Did you do polling?
D,


             Q      Or did Penn & Schoen or Greenberg do polling?

             Q      Anyone?

             MS. MATHEWS:     The issue in question of, do people
consider this a problem.

             Q      No, the question is polling.

             Q      Just did you do --

             MS. MATHEWS: Yes, yes, I'm answering the question with
the issue that we examined.

             Q    Did they consider    can you say how extensively
and how many weeks you were polling on this?

             MS. MATHEWS:     Not extensively.

             Q      Not extensively?

             MR. LOCKHART:       I mean, I don't have any more exact


numbers, but in addition to our own -- I mean, we -- Sylvia and a
group were

             Q      Joe, by,   "our own" who do you mean?   Do you mean
Penn & Schoen?

             MR. LOCKHART: Oh, I'll get that answer for you.   I
mean, I don't know.  But I know there was some look at sort of levels
of perception on the issue.  But also, there is a lot of information
out there. Gallup is a very comprehensive, and we've looked at that.
They came in and talked to us about that.

             MS. MATHEWS:      They came in and talked to us privately.
There's a number of --

             Q    Did you fund it like the usual polling or was that
from some other source?

             MR. LOCKHART:      I'll find out.

             Q    Sylvia, why did it take seven months for the
President to nominate an Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights?

             MS. MATHEWS:  I think in selecting a person of the
quality that we believe that we have -- that we went through and
examined a number of different candidates around the country to
ensure that we got the best candidate.

             Additionally, I think you all know that the vetting
process on our candidates is an important one that we like to do
before we announce the candidates. And that took a while to do.
Many people in this area -- when you look at this area, it's an area
where people have a lot of writings. And in order for you to do
that, you need to look and examine and understand what they've
written and what they've said and what they think.

             Q    So, basically, what you're saying is you didn't
want another Lani Guinier example?

             MS. MATHEWS:  I think what I'm saying is, we wanted to
make sure that we had a candidate that we felt was the best candidate
for the job and that we believed was a person who would represent our
views.

             Q    Sylvia, can you flesh out some more on the task
force? I mean, are they going to meet regularly or are they going to
all move here and work full-time? Give me some examples of what they
will actually do in a real-life basis.

             MS. MATHEWS:  Some examples of the types of things that
the task force will do -- they will, on a regular basis, communicate
as a group with the executive director in helping scope the project
in terms of work plans and the type of issues we need to focus on.
That's one type of activity they'll do.

             Another one is, they'll be participants in the
President's activities abroad as he -- out in the country -- as he's
doing outreach and. doing things like town halls.

            Q       It's not a paid position that they're doing, of


course?

             MS. MATHEWS:    No.   It is neither a paid position nor a
full-time position.

             Q    Is it right to think of them as like a board for
the executive director and the staff?

             MS. MATHEWS: They are the advisory board to the
President, yes. That is correct. And that's why we've called them a
board.

             Q    Okay, but now does it -- I mean earlier it was task
force -- they're like the board of directors would be for a college
president or something like that.  Is that a fair way of thinking
about this?

             MS. MATHEWS: Not being familiar with all that college
presidents do, but, yes, that's a general --

               Q    They're going to be there giving advice and so
forth.    They're not actually doing study, research

             MS. MATHEWS: They will not be doing their research.
That's the purpose of the staff.

              Q    You said you were making a statement by going to
California.   What statement are you making?

             MS. MATHEWS: We believe that going to California --
Maria, do you want to do this one?

             MS. ECHAVESTE: Yes. Going to California, as everyone
knows, is a place where -- sets trends.   It is the state that has a
very diverse population, it is the home of Proposition 187,
Proposition 209, the UC Regents.   It is -- going to San Diego,
generally thought of as white conservative; nonetheless, this campus
happens to be among the most diverse of the UC.   It's saying that we
believe in taking this issue and having a dialogue about it and
finding ways to confront the problems facing us.

             Q    Right. But the question -- when you made the
statement about making a statement by going to California, it was in
the context of --

             MS. MATHEWS: We believe it's bold to go to California
to a UC system when Prop 209 is an issue that is so relevant there.

              Q     So the statement is --

             MS. MATHEWS: The statement is, we want to be clear that
the President is -- he's expressed his view on this issue and we're
going to continue to express our view on that issue and what he
believes.

              Q     So the statement is we're opposed to Prop 209.

              MS. MATHEWS:   And we

              Q     That's not bold -- I mean, you've said that.



             MR. LOCKHART: It's broader than that. It's that this
year-long initiative is not going to shy away from the controversial
issues -- now, it's not going to deal with only broad, academic
issues that aren't relevant to the political dialogue that's going on
now. And by going to California, we're going into the place where
you have one of the most active discussions going on within
California, within the university system, and we're going in there
and we're going to layout what we plan to talk about for the next
year.

             We thought it was about the most relevant place you
could go to give this, and I think there is a statement there.

             MS. MATHEWS: And the future-oriented focus.    The only
other thing I would add is the future-oriented focus of the
initiative, that the demographic changes that are occurring in the
nation -- California is a place that is on the front edge of that.

             Q    Will he speak directly to the question of
affirmative action when he speaks on Saturday in California? I mean,
you've said that that's one reason he's going there.  Is he actually
going to talk about it?

             MS. MATHEWS:   It will be in the speech.

             Q    Can I follow? Maria, you've just mentioned the
campus having a good record. As I know you know, in the last two
days there's been quite a lot of racial turmoil on that campus
because the Provost of Thurgood Marshall College has quit because
they rejected his plan to reach out to disadvantaged blacks and
Hispanics. Does that embarrass you? Does that give you pause about
picking that campus?

             MS. ECHAVESTE:  It highlights that, in fact, the answers
to what do you do in light of a UC Regents or Proposition 209 or the
Hopwood case, the one response that had been considered had been,
have universities make partnerships with local high schools in order
to educate and prepare them for the university system, shows that UC
San Diego's decision not to accept the charter high school, that
those answers are not easy, but they definitely need to be
considered. We don't -- shy about going there.

             Q    Sylvia, given the President's problems with Lani
Guinier, the affirmative action review, the fact that his closest
friends, like Marian wright Edelman practically walked out on him
when he did welfare reform, what makes you think that the President
can succeed at this race initiative? What makes him believe that he
can actually do something?

             MS. MATHEWS: First, I would like to kind of go back to
a little bit of the premise. On affirmative action, I think this
President's stand on affirmative action, to stand up and say that he
believes that amend it, not end it for affirmative action is very
important.  I believe that our proposed rulemaking right now on
procurement that is out for comment right now will be a very
important part, preserving and narrowing -- tailoring, as we've been
advised by the courts to do.

             So on that front    in terms of the others that are


around him and have been around him, if you look at our Cabinet and
the people from Rodney Slater to Alexis Herman to Federico Pena that
have been here -- and there are a number of others that we have
within the administration we have a large group, both in the Cabinet
and here in the White House -- I think that we think that the
President can succeed, I think, because he is dedicating himself to
it personally.

             And the other thing I would say is that there isn't a
silver bullet, this isn't an easy problem. We recognize it and we
recognize the difficulties that we're going to face in trying to do
it.  But we also believe that it is the time -- at a time when the
nation is in reasonable -- is economically healthy and a time when
we're on the verge of some big changes as far' as our demographics,
that we need to do this, and that's why we're doing it now.

             Q    Could you talk a little bit about the process of
boiling down the list of possibilities for this panel -- what were
the criteria and who were some of the people who signed off on these
people, other than the President?

             MS. MATHEWS: The process started with a very long list
of I'd say probably about 250 names. And what we attempted to do was
find people from different walks of life who could contribute both
their ideas and the people that they communicate and have contact
with. We wanted -- John Hope Franklin, as you all know, is 82, but
Suzan Cook is very young.

             We wanted to get a mix because part of the initiative
will focus on youth. We wanted to get people from different
backgrounds. Suzan comes from a religious background.   Thomas comes
from a business background. We tried to get a mix of people in terms
of views and perspectives. Governor Winter is a Southern governor;
Governor Kean is from the North. And what we tried to do was get a
balance of people that represented a number of different things so we
could have a good mix of advice going in to the President.

             Q    Who did you run these names by? I mean, were they
among the people who met with the President the other night? Did you
run the names by them, or who exactly has signed off?

             MS. MATHEWS:    Some of those people we consulted early on
with our names.

             Q    So did you consider people who were just simply
opposed to affirmative action or government preference policies, or
does the President want people who already basically support his
premises?

             MS. MATHEWS:  Those names were considered, but what we
tried to do was put together a group that we feel could advise us on
the policies and issues that we want to pursue.

             Q      Basically agree with the President?

             Q    Why bother having that board if you've already
decided -- that you want these people to support what you already
believe.

             MS. MATHEWS:    I think that what we're talking about when


we talk about affirmative action is a pretty fundamental core, one of
the policy areas that we'll be looking at. So in that area -- and
actually, I think the truth is, we didn't ask that question when we
asked the members to serve. Do you --

               Q    Why not?

               Q    They knew their record.

D,
               MS. MATHEWS:  I'm answering the question of, did we have
people      is the question, do we have people on the board who support


             Q    -- like a full debate.  I mean, did you take --
there's plenty of prominent people who made it clear they're opposed
to affirmative action.  I mean, did you seek out those kinds of
people, or was it clear that you want essentially people who
basically agree with the President's approach to advise on more
narrow questions rather than the whole spectrum?

             MS. MATHEWS: On the issue of Prop 209 and affirmative
action specifically, there were names on the list that are opposed to
our position that we originally put together. However, on that
particular issue, we did not directly ask people -- do you support
that, do you not support that.

               Q    But you ruled out the people you knew who were
opposed.    Is that correct?

               MS. ECHAVESTE:     This commission is more

               MS. MATHEWS:     It wasn't based on --

             MS. ECHAVESTE: -- it's not a commission, it's an
advisory board. You're thinking of a commission --

             Q    But you ruled out the people you knew were opposed.
Isn't that correct?

               MS. MATHEWS:     They're going to be part of the dialogue.

               Q    But they won't be on the advisory board.

             MS. MATHEWS: At this point, all the people -- the
people that are mainly vocal against affirmative action are not a
part of the advisory board.

               Q    Did you consult with any people like that in the
process?    Can you identify any people that were consulted with?

              MS. ECHAVESTE: I just don't have my list of names, but
we did talk to people who thought -- who had different views about
how to deal with racism in this country that -- where the answer
isn't in affirmative action, but economic opportunity, as a way of
dealing with those issues. We did talk to people like that.

               Q   Sylvia, you are talking about healing racial
divide.    What American are you specifically hoping to target or to


bring into the fold with this whole initiative?

             MS. MATHEWS:  I think that it is our hope that the
initiative will reach everyone. When we say "race," we are referring
to whites, Hispanics, blacks, Asian Americans, and Native Americans.
We believe it's very important for whites in the country to be a part
of the initiative.

             Q    Are you looking more so to get more white people to
understand there is a problem, especially since you said earlier that
the majority here in America is white?

             MS. MATHEWS: We're looking for both. We're looking for
both people of color as well as whites to look and examine the issue
and see. That's part of why in the study section we talked about
stereotypes versus reality, to understand which groups have --we're
going to look at which pieces are right and which are reality.

             Q    Is there concern that the California affirmative
action will spread through the country -- it's contagious?

             MS. ECHAVESTE:  I wouldn't use the word "contagious";
the fact is is that a lot of people allover the country are saying
that affirmative action is not needed, that in fact, racism and
discrimination is no longer a problem.

             Q    I mean, in the states and so forth, infecting the
college preferences?

             MS. ECHAVESTE:    Absolutely.

             Q    Can I try a question that I asked in a briefing
again? Is the President prepared to deal with the possibility that
this full discussion, as often occurs in, say, employment, in
workplaces, that this could exacerbate racial problems at least in
the short term, and what would he be willing to do about them?

             MS. MATHEWS:  I think that as we discussed before, that
the President is ready for a difficult discussion.  I think as was
reported today and has been reported before, that sometimes people's
efforts on this front do create strains and stresses, and I think
we're ready for taking that on. I think we've already seen the
advertising that's occurred both in Washington and San Diego, which
are signs. We are, as I have said, going to have critics from the
left and the right. And that's because it is a very important issue
that many people feel very passionately about. And we're already
hearing that, and I think we're ready to take that.

             Q    You said you talked to some people who disagree
with the administration position. Was Ward Connerly one of them?
And what is your reaction to the fact that he    while he's running
these radio ads against the President -- will be there at the
commencement address Saturday?

            MS. ECHAVESTE:     He's a UC Regent.

            Q       Is he somebody you talked to?

            MS. ECHAVESTE:    No.


             Q    What do you say to a lot of these civil rights
leaders who are very upset that they are not on this advisory board,
like Jesse Jackson, Kweisi Mfume, and people of that nature?

             MS. ECHAVESTE:  Part of the reaction we got when we were
doing our outreach was the fact that a lot of people said, don't try
to do a committee, don't try to do a group. You'll never figure out
who should be on it.  The fact is, the President cannot take on this
issue alone and -- he is a full-time a President. And when a small
advisory group that can help guide and help us identify the key
issues -- what we should focus on when we're traveling around the
country, what is the way to go -- and that was the decision that was
made.

             MS. MATHEWS: And we'll be consulting with those people.
I think you all know Reverend Jackson was in last week and Kweisi
Mfume was in as well this week.  So the effort is not limited to the
advisory board.

             Q      Sylvia, does the President still --

             Q    -- the main concern is the fact that they deal with
civil rights and issues like this on a daily basis --

              MS. ECHAVESTE: And they have the expertise. And we
will be working with them. Think of it as -- the way we think of it
is it's a year-long process in which, at different points in time,
different groups of people will be convened, a conversation had, at
which, certainly in the process here in the White House that we had
- - there was, in fact, different views around that table that wa·s
very enlightening and eye opening.

             Q    Sylvia, does the President believe that the
fundamental conclusion of the Kerner Commission is still accurate
today; that there are two societies in this country -- one black, one
white, separate and unequal?

             MS. MATHEWS:  I think that he would say that we have
made some progress, but that there is still a long way to go. And I
think the other thing that he would say is, it's not a black and
white; it's a black, white, Asian American; that it's a different
--in that sense, it's also different from Kerner; that it's not just
two -- it's 100. And that that's a part of why the initiative is so
important at this time.

             Q    Was the Justice Department civil rights jobs, did
that -- did you make a concerted effort to get that filled prior to
the announcement this weekend? Does that explain the timing of that?

             MS. MATHEWS: We've be working on that for a while.   We
were pleased that we were able to announce it before we go to
California.

             Q    Can you elaborate on just what the President's role
is envisioned to be? You talk quite a bit about the board here.   Is
he going to be -- does he see himself as a mediator, a conciliator, a
moderator? What exactly is his ultimate role in this process?

             MS. MATHEWS: I think the President will have a number
of different roles. We will depend on his intellectual leadership as


we go through our processes with the executive staff as well as the
White House staff. He will be the person that will be on the line in
terms of his events -- leading dialogue in different settings, such
as town halls. He also will be the President speaking to these
issues in terms of like how he will do in the speech in California,
which are three different ways that the President will be involved
and engaged in the process.

             Q    Sylvia, do you all have a sense yet of what kind of
venues you're going to do the town halls in, and when the first one
will be?

             MS. MATHEWS: No, we've had a number of requests that I
think once we get -- we want to consult with the advisory board as
well as the executive director. We've had a number of requests from
everyone from communities to news organizations.

             Q    When do you anticipate -- how long a time before
you do the first town hall?

             MS. MATHEWS:     I think that will be dependent on the
President's schedule.

             Q    Is there some core set of beliefs that the
President has at this point that he will just want to do that he
thinks is right and that maybe he wants his advisory board to help
him find a way to implement it -- but coming into this? And if so,
can you tell us, what the core is of the beliefs he has, and in terms
of -- I mean, very specifically, something that should be a piece of
D,

legislation, something that could be remedied by one way or the
other? Where is his ferment here going into this?

             MS. MATHEWS:    I think sort of two different answers to
that question -- the speech.   (Laughter.) We'll let Mr. McCurry --
that will come out in the speech. All right.

             Thank you.

             MR. LOCKHART:     The Little Rock Central High visit in
September 25th.

             THE PRESS:     Thank you.

             END                             1:54 P.M. EDT




Message Sent
TO:~ ___________________________________________________________
Julie E. Mason
April Mellody
Darby E. Stott
Julia R. Green
Lorraine L. Wytkind
Laura D. Schwartz
Lori E. Abrams
Lori Anderson


Brenda M. Anders
Eli G. Attie
Kris M Balderston
Beverly J. Barnes
David S. Beaubaire
Marsha E. Berry
Lanny A. Breuer
Laura Capps
Joseph W. Cerrell @ OVP@EOP
Steven A. Cohen
Michelle Crisci
Carolyn Curiel
Suzanne Dale
Lanny J. Davis
Marilyn DiGiacobbe
James A. Dorskind
Jennifer D. Dudley
Christopher A. Dwan
Dorinda A. Salcido
James T. Edmonds
Anne M. Edwards
Rahm Emanuel
Karen E. Finney
Jay K. Footlik
Ben A. Freeland
Jeremy M. Gaines
Michael A. Gill @ OVP@EOP
Adam W. Goldberg
Jason S. Goldberg
Ricardo M. Gonzales
Donald Goldberg
Richard Hayes
Russell W. Horwitz
Thomas D. Janenda
Brian J. Johnson
david t. johnson
Michele .Jolin
James M. Teague
Julia R. Green
David E. Kalbaugh
William R. Kincaid
Angus S. King
Joshua A. King
Nicholas B. Kirkhorn
Catherine T. Kitchen
Jim Kohlenberger @ OVP@EOP
Heidi Kukis @ OVP@EOP
Sara M. Latham
G N. Lattimore
Christopher J. Lavery
Anne H. Lewis
Patricia F. Lewis
Joseph P. Lockhart
Laura D. Schwartz
Michael D. Malone
Laura S. Marcus
Doris o. Matsui
Andrew J. Mayock
Anne E. McGuire
Cheryl D. Mills


Megan C. Moloney
Kevin Moran
Jonathan Murchinson
Elizabeth R. Newman
Peter R. Orszag
Carole A. Parmelee
Sally P. Paxton
Jonathan Prince
Peter O'Keefe
Charles F. Ruff
Virginia N. Rustique
Evan Ryan
G. Timothy Saunders
Stuart Schear
Douglas S. Sheorn
David Shipley
Robert M. Shireman
Jake Siewert
Joshua Silverman
Brian D. Smith
Craig T. Smith
Richard Socarides
Douglas B. Sosnik
Todd Stern
Michael J. Sullivan
Jonathan H. Schnur/OVP @ OVP
Sylvia M. Mathews
Lisa Tamagni
Virginia M. Terzano @ ovp@eop
terri tingen
Barry J. Toiv
Jodie R. Torkelson
Serena C. Torrey
June G. Turner
Dag Vega
Lorraine A. Voles @ ovp@eop
Michael Waldman
Angelina Walker @ ovp@eop
Teresa Wildman
SUNTUM M @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
COGDELL C @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
backup @ wilson.ai.mit.edu@INET@LNGTWY
wh-outbox-distr @ clinton.ai.mit.edu@INET@LNGTWY
BARBUSCHAK K @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
BARTHOLOME M @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
BARTHOLOW T @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
BLINKEN A @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
CAPLAN P @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
CUTLER L @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
FULLER W @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
GILLESPIE C @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
GRAY W @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
GRIBBEN J @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
HAAS L @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
HKlasky @ PANET.US-STATE.GOV@CD@LNGTWY
JOHNSON WC @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
LIZIK_C @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
MOFFETT J @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
NAPLAN_S @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
RILEY R @ Al@CD@LNGTWY


SAMBURG T @ A1@CD@LNGTWY
NAPLAN S @ A1@CD@LNGTWY
SMITH BD @ A1@CD@LNGTWY
STUMPF D @ A1@CD@LNGTWY
WEINER R @ A1@CD@LNGTWY
WOZNIAK N @ A1@CD@LNGTWY
usia01 @ access.digex.com@INET@LNGTWY
1=US@2=WESTERN UNION@3=@5=ATT.COM@*ELN\62955104@MRX@LNGTWY
62955104 @ eln.attmail.com@INET@LNGTWY
73030.21 @ compuserve.com@INET@LNGTWY
INFOMGT @ A1@CD@LNGTWY
karen @ TALKRADIONEWS.COM@CD@LNGTWY
newsdesk @ usnewswire.com@INET@LNGTWY
usnwire @access.digex.com@INET@LNGTWY
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 062 - FOLDER -001


[06/12/1997]


