RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrew J. Mayock ( CN=Andrew J. Mayock/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 12-JUN-1997 11:51:24.00

SUBJECT:   Talking Points and other Materials

TO: Julia R. Green ( CN=Julia R. Green/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Stacey L. Rubin ( CN=Stacey L. Rubin/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ananias Blocker III ( CN=Ananias Blocker III/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joseph P. Lockhart ( CN=Joseph P. Lockhart/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Carolyn Curiel ( CN=Carolyn Curiel/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elisa Millsap ( CN=Elisa Millsap/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Beverly J. Barnes ( CN=Beverly J. Barnes/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lynn G. Cutler ( CN=Lynn G. Cutler/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cheryl D. Mills ( CN=Cheryl D. Mills/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Trooper Sanders ( CN=Trooper Sanders/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thurgood Marshall Jr.   ( CN=Thurgood Marshall Jr./O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Minyon Moore ( CN=Minyon Moore/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Tracey E. Thornton ( CN=Tracey E. Thornton/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Janet Murguia ( CN=Janet Murguia/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bob J. Nash ( CN=Bob J. Nash/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
'.
      .,

     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Kevin s. Moran ( CN=Kevin S. Moran/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Ronda H. Jackson ( CN=Ronda H. Jackson/OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: David S. Beaubaire ( CN=David S. Beaubaire/OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker!OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Katherine Hubbard ( CN=Katherine Hubbard!OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays!OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: James T. Edmonds ( CN=James T. Edmonds!OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Robert B. Johnson ( CN=Robert B. Johnson/OU=WHO!O=EOP     @   EOP [ WHO 1 ).
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Doris o. Matsui ( CN=Doris   o.   Matsui!OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett!OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Ann F. Walker ( CN=Ann F. Walker!OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Ellen M. Lovell ( CN=Ellen M. Lovell!OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Angelique Pirozzi ( CN=Angelique Pirozzi/OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elisabeth S. Steele ( CN=Elisabeth S. Steele!O=OVp @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Kim B. Widdess ( CN=Kim B. Widdess!OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Robert N. Weiner ( CN=Robert N. Weiner/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Richard L. Hayes ( CN=Richard L. Hayes!OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Laura K. Demeo ( CN=Laura K. Demeo!OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
'.

     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Marjorie Tarmey ( CN=Marjorie Tarmey/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]        )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Dawn M. Chirwa ( CN=Dawn M. Chirwa/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]      )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Susan M. Liss ( CN=Susan M. Liss/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]   )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]        )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Start dialing!

     Please report back to me when you have made key calls. As soon as we have
     covered enough ground, we are going to the briefing room.

     Attached are the materials for your outreach calls.   Please note those
     documents that are for internal use only.

     The Accomplishments Documents, Talking Points on Advisory Board Members
     (not for distribution) documents and Talking Points for Bill Lee (not for
     distribution) will follow soon. The key information is here though, so you
     should be able to get started. Thanks.

     Items for Distribution:
     Talking Points on the Initiative
     Additional Talking Points on Initiative (not for distribution)
     Q&As on Initiative (not for distribution)
     Advisory Board Members' and Consultant's Bios
     Draft Press Release on Bill Lee, Nominee for Assistant Attorney General
     for Civil Rights
     Draft Press Release on Raymond Fischer, Nominee for Associate Attorney
     General
     ExCerpts from Past Speeches by President Clinton (Macomb/Detroit Speeches
     included)

     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D71]MAIL462924266.116 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FFS7S0430A060000010A0201000000020S0000007934000000020000C3680DDB491CE6FOAD863C
     OB9S2A794FODC3224BE820E66CC3BS9680174CD7EFBCIDAS4D3F6AA36FD7F8EC7C746E7A629173
     A962BOCC3CD141C973S2S32CAD83ES89E3B46FE2DE4F06D3F918EIBC22S1604C2SB706A8EDA211
     391E160SA82FEESC889.979F8F4207603E4SAOS84S60CC181BF7262lC46BESEBF7EE8E4A18887Dl
     SF9ASC4D731D27A80EFEODA909AIA332D9296DEEEF84881AIOAFDD9E02EDAAESCD04ADDASF903A
     ES621CA4980C2E27BB3ASCS6B9EAA48E148FEBF62A6FF873CE3C2S8AE8FD8E6DIFE49844314DEB
     S018CBS074ES6AE41B62E9C19SEDESAACCA2DD67DE266C13C48SD7FA3DCS9ADB9C69EB219AA27C
     DFS88C98B99C4SF8470B8B3028S140CS17E2C846F8EE7S72C48BF6EFSBE9CF68F6BOC0222S2C6A
     CD02ESD4E0809924913C73DEEA02DDOS84096D68DB678D84F37EIBCES2BE7BES66F21196BE34C4
     477890A327C3433197EBCCEA6EB4FB97EOCSSS279F46F22387S80S7C0149A1694AD98D7A6S2246
     37EC3E2763BSIEBC014F7DB7492S0ECF7CA9392C9130B7FBC9DAID6F439F2BF97243A03E147BCD
     A3D600FA84AE947BCAOlSC6E0761E083BlEBCE7DB7272S08AS12960AD48380E9CAS913023DADED
     241AD93B306EC3BFD7S0BSS874ASA4DC020870DE8S882SC381FD04S6D347EBOD98B218A3SBlS39
                         THE PRESIDENT'S INITIATIVE ON RACE

        "In the end, more than anything else, our world leadership grows out of the power of our
example here at home, out of our ability to remain strong as one America... We are the world's
most diverse democracy, and the world looks to us to show that it is possible to live and advance
together across those kinds of differences ... Building one America is our most important
mission ... money cannot buy it. Power cannot compel it. Technology cannot create it. It can
only come from the human spirit. "
                                                -- President Clinton, February 4, 1997

                     WHAT IS THE PRESIDENT'S RACE INITIATIVE?

        This initiative is a year-long effort, led by the President, to present to the nation his vision
of a stronger, more just and more united American community, offering opportunity and fairness
for all Americans. The President's initiative will combine constructive dialogue, study, and
action. It will examine the current state of race relations and our common future, look at the
laws and policies that can help to ensure that we remain One America, and enlist individuals,
communities, businesses and government at all levels in an effort to understand our differences
as we appreciate the values that unite us.

                WHY A MAJOR INITIATIVE ON RACE, AND WHY NOW?

        President Clinton's personal, life-long commitment. Growing up in the South, the
President saw for himself the great harm caused by racial discrimination, and the difference that
can be achieved by changing both policies and attitudes. That longstanding, deeply personal
commitment has led him to make this initiative one of his major second-term priorities. He
knows that America can reach its full potential only by enlisting the full energies of all our
people, and giving all our citizens, of every background, the chance to make the most of their
own God-given talents.

         Not a crisis, but an opportunity. This effort builds on the President's record
throughout his first term (defending affirmative action, major speeches on race and
reconciliation, etc.). But unlike previous Presidential efforts in this area, President Clinton's
initiative is the result not of a crisis, but of a unique opportunity:

       America is strong enough to look to the future. Having moved aggressively in the first
       term to get the country back on the right track -- reversing the rising tide of crime,
       welfare, budget deficits, unemployment and income inequality -- the President believes
       that it is time for America to address these issues as we prepare for the 21 st Century.

       Many ''wedge'' issues have been defused. On many of the issues that had been used to
        divide the country -- such as crime and welfare -- the President has begun to change the
       terms of the debate, pointing to solutions instead of pointing fingers, and defusing
       tensions so that an honest dialogue about race can begin.



                                                                         Automate~e~~5~~mdS Mcanage~ent System
                                                                                         p on version
to take responsibility -- for ourselves and our families, for our community and at home with one
another. It is a call to citizenship, because the President believes that being a good citizen
includes recognizing the promise of America -- an America free of destructive bigotry, a nation
that welcomes those who play by the rules, serve their community and reach out to make all
Americans feel at home. This is a great nation, and the true measure of our greatness is in the
human heart.

               WHAT ARE THE INITIATIVE'S GOALS AND METHODS?

       The initiative will have five central goals:

       1) To articulate the President's vision of racial reconciliation and ajust, unified America;
       2) To help educate the nation about the facts surrounding the issue of race;
       3) To promote a constructive dialogue, to confront and work through the difficult and
       controversial issues surrounding race;
       4) To recruit and encourage leadership at all levels to help bridge racial divides;
       5) To find, develop and implement solutions in critical areas such as education, economic
       opportunity, housing, health care, crime and the administration of justice -- for
       individuals, communities, corporations and government at all levels.

       The President hopes to achieve these goals through the following methods:

        Presidential leadership. The President will begin a national examination of race
and reconciliation -- explaining why the goal of One America is so important to preparing
for the 21st Century, addressing the facts about race, encouraging others to discuss
difficult racial issues that we too often avoid and reaching out to Americans of every race to
get them engaged in the process. Unlike previous national efforts, this initiative will be led
directly and personally by the President throughout.

       Dialogue, study and action. Through dialogue, study and action, we will increase
our understanding of race, and propose and promote policies and solutions that can make a
difference.

       Dialogue. Dialogue can help to inform, and to build support for constructive
       solutions to the issues of race. For an entire generation growing up after the civil
       rights movement, there has been little or no public articulation of the values and
       ideals of racial reconciliation. (And too often the rhetoric has been negative,
       helping to confirm derogatory stereotypes.) This initiative will employ the power of
       the Presidency to encourage open, candid debate about difficult issues and to
       highlight actions by individuals, communities, businesses and government that are
       working in this area now.

       Study. The issues to be addressed will include: different perceptions and
       experiences of Americans of different races, confronting harmful stereotypes and
       examining serious problems. While the initiative will be largely forward-looking, it
       is also important to help educate Americans about the past - so that the nation has
       a clear sense of what has come before, recognizing the unique experience of African

                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                2                           Hex텱ump Conversion
       Action. Throughout this effort, attention will go to policies that can make a
       difference and solutions that can be implemented by individuals, community
       groups, state and local governments and the federal government. Examples of
       issues to be addressed include the lack of economic progress among Hispanic
       Americans and the greatly reduced number of black and Hispanic students in California.
       This nation has made real progress, but we know that there is more that must be done.

             An example of dialogue, study and action is the President's 5/16/97 apology to the
              survivors of the Tuskeegee Study, which was combined with concrete actions and
              further study (establishing a bioethics center at Tuskeegee; studying ways to
              involve minority communities in research and health care; new training materials
              for medical researchers on ethics and how to apply them to diverse populations;
              and new postgraduate fellowships in bioethicists for minorities).

                    ELEMENTS OF THE PRESIDENT'S INITIATIVE

       Advisory Board. This small, diverse group will advise the President and assist him
in outreach efforts and consultations with experts. They were chosen based on their
outstanding leadership on this issue and their contributions to America's ongoing dialogue
about race and reconciliation.

        Significant Presidential events/actions throughout the year. Events held
throughout the year will include town hall meetings in different regions of the country,
meetings with the advisory board and other events which will enable the President to carry
out his goals for the initiative.

       Outreach, consultation and leadership recruitment. The effort will include
outreach to community leaders, religious leaders, state and local elected officials, members
of Congress, business leaders and individuals, encouraging them to become involved in
reconciliation and community-building projects.

       The President's Report to the American People. The President will issue a report
next summer, in which he will:
      Present his vision of One America, including an illustration and assessment of the
       growing diversity of our nation and of his consultations with his advisory board;
      Reflect the work that has occurred during the year, including the conversations and
       suggestions made at town hall meetings and other venues;
      Report on how the nation has evolved on the issue of race over the past 30 years,
       including the studies commissioned for the initiative;
      Provide recommendations and solutions that enable individuals, communities, businesses,
        organizations and government to address difficult issues and build on our best
       possibilities.




                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                              3
          (These are additional points to make in outreach calls -- not for distribution)

The charge the President set is to shape an initiative that will use policies and people to respect
each others' differences and yet be a united America.

Scope: Race Broadly Defined
The initiative is directed at race, broadly defined: White, Hispanic, Asian, African American, etc.
 Every American must understand that improving race relations and preparing to enter the 21 st
century as one America is important to him or her and to our children's future. Of course, the
initiative will recognize the unique history of African Americans in this country.

Future Focus
While it will review the current problems that we face as a nation and the history that has brought
us here, the intent of the initiative is forward looking. We will consider where the nation is
going in terms of demographics and the complexity of race issues.

Spending (i(asked)
This initiative is about policy that makes a difference. We will look at policy ideas that call for
reprioritization of our current spending.

Importance of Dialogue
When public officials are not open to discussion of racial issues, or through their silence allow
negative depictions of racial minorities to go unchecked, such postures significantly affect
national attitudes and policy.
       Welfare Queen: Anecdotes about an African-American women literally growing fat from
       taxpayer-funded welfare payments that financed her designer jeans and Cadillacs created
       images that still affect national attitudes and policy today.

Positive changes have followed when presidents have spoken openly about race.
       Civil Rights Movement: The Kennedys outreach to the King family, particularly when
       Martin Luther King Jr. was in jail, helped legitimize Reverend King's use of civil
       disobedience at a time when supporters of segregation were attempting to paint him and
       other civil rights leaders as criminals.
       Tuskegee: President Clinton's public apology to the victims of the "Tuskegee
       Experiment" prompted numerous positive discussions in the media and elsewhere on race
       and health care in America.

Executive Director and Staff
The President will appoint an executive director and a small staff responsible for working closely
with White House staff on policy, outreach, legal and communications efforts; helping advisory
board members to fulfill their duties; surveying individuals and organizations for best practices
and model programs; and analyzing existing studies on matters of race.


June 12, 1997 9:00am
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
The initiative will be a year-long effort. We hope it will stimulate honest dialogue, improved
policy and better relations that will continue to live and grow after the year is over. This issue
has been with us throughout our nation's history. We certainly cannot expect to resolve it in one
year.

Why Now?
The President has consistently said he had three goals in running for the office:
      to keep the American Dream alive for everyone who wanted to work for it;
      to keep America a force in the world for peace and democracy; and
      to keep us one America, a nation coming together instead of coming apart.

The Administration has made real progress on issues of economic opportunity, strengthening
families, reducing crime rates, and foreign policy (the first two goals). While the Administration
has made real progress in this area, the time is right to move forward more aggressively on the
third.                                           '

The President believes that we should take stock of the progress we have made in race relations
and take action to improve the ability of all Americans to succeed in the 21 st century.
      We face a very different America in the next century. For instance, there is a school
       district across the river (in Virginia) where the school children represent over 150 nations
       and speak over 100 different languages -- all in a single district. We should embrace
       such diversity. We should embrace such diversity.
      Unfortunately, there are some new and disturbing examples of going backward: the lack
       of economic progress among Hispanic Americans and the greatly reduced number of
       black and Hispanic students in California and Texas universities.

Personal Conviction and Commitment
The President's experiences with discrimination are rooted in the South's legacy of slavery.
      His grandfather had a grade-school education and ran a grocery store in Hope, Arkansas.
       Most of the customers were poor, black, working people. As a child in that store,
       President Clinton learned to treat people of different races with respect and dignity.
      His grandparents were in the minority -- being poor, Southern whites who were pro-civil
       rights -- and they taught the President a lesson that he has carried with him through life:
       Discrimination is not just morally wrong, it hurts everyone.




June 12, 1997 9:00am                            2                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

THE INITIATIVE

Q:     Is systemic racism and bigotry still a crucial problem for the United States? Is race
       still an impediment to opportunity and progress in America?

A:    America is moving closer to fulfilling its fundamental promise of equality and the
      opportunity of advancement for all. President Clinton has worked to restore the
      American dream by expanding the economy, investing in education and making our
      communities safer. However, more needs to be done. We face new challenges and a
      very different America in the next century.

       For instance, there is a school district across the river (in Virginia) where the school
       children represent over 150 nations and speak over 100 different languages -- all in a
       single district. We should embrace such diversity.

      Unfortunately, there are some disturbing examples of going backward: the lack of
      economic progress among Hispanic Americans; the greatly reduced number of African-
      American and Hispanic students in California and Texas universities; and the young,
      African-American boy in Chicago who was dragged from his bicycle and beaten just
      because of his color.

Q:    How was this initiative developed? Who did the President call on among the White
      House staff?

A:    The President charged Erksine Bowles and Sylvia Mathews with developing the
      parameters of an initiative that would move to fulfill America's promise of opportunity
      and fairness for all Americans and that would promote unity while preserving cultural
      differences.

      Sylvia convened an internal working group of approximately 25 individuals from
      different offices within the White House and from different races. The group met
      regularly starting in March, and daily for the past few weeks. Erskine and other
      members of the senior staff participated periodically in the working group meetings. The
      President received regular updates on the group's direction and progress.

Q:    How can the President ask others to "get their houses in order" on this subject,
      when the White House itself lacks diversity, especially in its upper ranks?

A:    President Clinton is proud of the record diversity of his Administration. He has
      appointed more African Americans, Hispanics and Asian Americans than any other
      President.


June 11, 1997 5:30pm                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
       (Transportation), Jesse Brown (Veterans Affairs) and Frank Raines (OMB)]; 12%
       Hispanic [Bill Richardson (UN), Aida Alvarez (SBA), Federico Pena (Energy)].

       Presidential Appointments: 13% African American (twice as many as any previous
       Administration); 8% Hispanic; 3% Asian American; 1% Native American.

Q:     Isn't this just the President's reactionary position after the Administration has
       neglected to take stronger stances on behalf of minorities?

A:     The President has consistently said he had three goals in running for the office: to keep
       the American Dream alive for everyone who wanted to work for it; to keep America a
       force in the world for peace and democracy; and to keep us "One America," a nation
       coming together instead of coming apart.

      The Administration has made real progress on issues of economic opportunity,
      strengthening families, reducing crime rates, and foreign policy (the first two goals).

      Economic policies that have helped the entire country have also helped minorities.
           The unemployment rate for Hispanic Americans in May was about 7 percent,
            down from 11 percent when President Clinton took office.
           The African-American poverty rate dropped to 29 percent in 1995 -- its lowest
            level since data was collected.
           The Administration has approved more than $2 billion in Small Business
            Administration loans to Asian Americans.

      The time is right to move forward more aggressively on the President's third goal.
      Already the President has taken action in this area with his apology, on behalf of the
      federal government, to the victims of the Tuskegee experiment and his commitment to a
      White House conference on hate crimes. In addition, an interagency group is exploring
      how to address the problem of declining diversity in student bodies.

PRESIDENT'S COMMITMENT

Q:    The President seems to waiver in his commitment to this issue. One day he asks the
      Supreme Court not to hear an affirmative action case and the next day he
      announces an initiative on improving race relations. How serious is he about this
      initiative?

A:    The President is very serious about this initiative. He has been steadfast throughout his
      life and professional career in his pursuit of equality and opportunity for all.



June 11, 1997 5:30pm                            2                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                            HeX-Dump Conversion
             of slavery.
            As a candidate, the President has consistently said one of his main goals in
             running for the office was to keep the American Dream alive for everyone who
             wanted to work for it and to keep us "one America," a nation coming together
             instea~ of coming apart.
            As President, he has been a constant voice in pressing racial healing and unity.
             For instance: speeches in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1993 and Austin, Texas, in
             1995; inaugural and State of the Union addresses this year; and remarks at the
             Jackie Robinson anniversary commemoration.

      President Clinton's personal history and conviction to lead this country in finding
      strength in our diversity make him well-suited to help forge alliances and reconcile
      differences among us. The President will be actively involved in the initiative and will
      help provide its intellectual leadership.

Q:    Does the President really expect this initiative to make a difference or is it just a way
      for him to get more media attention?

A:    The President wants this issue to get more media attention. This initiative will attempt
      to identify and create solutions for improving race relations and the circumstances of
      Americans of all races. Those solutions will be designed for individuals, communities,
      religious congregations, educational and non-profit organizations, businesses, state and
      local governments, and other groups to implement. The Administration will develop
      wholly new policy and refocus existing policy. Some policies will respond to
      information arising as the initiative moves forward. Other policies will attempt to
      address longstanding problems in new and creative ways.

EXPECTATIONS

Q:    Will this initiative address the serious imbalances in opportunity that can be
      attributed to race?

A:    This initiative will study the imbalances in opportunity that can be attributed to race, open
      channels for discussion about those imbalances and create or refocus policy to address
      those imbalances.

      We will strive to identify and create solutions for improving race relations and the
      circumstances of Americans of all races. Those solutions will be designed for
      individuals, communities, religious congregations, educational and non-profit
      organizations, businesses, state and local governments, and other groups to implement.




June 11, 1997 5:30pm                           3                     Automated Records Mam:gement System
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion




     Q:     How can the President hope to improve race relations and the lot of minorities
            without dedicating significant funds to the problems that arise from racism?

     A:    Different times call for different solutions. The choice is not between massive programs
           and nothing. Much can be done within the confines of tighter federal spending that we
           face today and going forward. As they were in the balanced budget agreement, funds can
           be reallocated to provide health coverage to five million uninsured children. And we can
           seek creative ways to generate new funds, not just from federal and state spending.

     Q:    What can we expect to see change as a result of this initiative?

     A:    We will promote a better understanding of and a greater respect for both the similarities
           and differences between people of different races.

           We will challenge leaders and "doers" to step forward, in communities throughout the
           nation, to find and put into practice ideas to improve race relations and stimulate
           opportunity for all.

           We will identify and disseminate proven practices for promoting racial harmony.

           We will analyze critical issues affecting race relations in this country and propose
           government actions and policies to address these issues.

     Q:    How does the President intend to keep this from becoming just a big talk fest?

     A:    The effort will be a balance of study, dialogue and action -- including fact finding and
           policy.

           We will seek to promote honest dialogue on the issues of race and to develop real
           solutions that can be implemented by individuals, communities, religious congregations,
           ~ducational and non-profit organizations, businesses, state and local governments, and
           other groups. We will undertake fact finding (e.g.: what are the stereotypes and what are
           the facts), dialogue and policy/action (e.g.: best practices, positions on minority
           enrollment in higher education) concurrently and through an iterative process.

     Q:    Civil rights groups have expressed dissatisfaction that they have not been consulted
           and dismay at the lack of substance to the initiative. How do you respond?

     A:    In the process of defining this initiative, we sought comments and ideas from numerous
           individuals and organizations. More importantly, we have created plenty of
           opportunities for future consultation. This is only the beginning of an initiative that will
           be a uniquely inclusive and broad-ranging year-long effort. We encourage those willing
           to engage in tough, honest dialogue to join us.


     June 11, 1997 5:30pm                            4
                                                                            Automated Records ManaC'ement Systcn1
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Convorsion


           The President is prepared to design wholly new policy and to refocus existing policy.
           We will look for solutions to implement in areas such as economic opportunity, housing,
           health care, crime and the administration of justice. We have said all along that we will
           not outline a full set of proposals and recommendations at the outset. The
           Administration will unfold policy changes and developments over the course of the year.

     LOGISTICS

     Q:    When will the advisory board hold its first meeting? When will it conclude its
           work?

     A:    The advisory board will meet for the first time in the next six weeks or so. An exact date
           has not yet been determined. At this point, the board will likely disband after the
           President submits his report to the American people.


     Q:    When can we expect to see the first action or policy recommendations from the
           advisory board?

     A:    As a result of this initiative, we expect the President to implement wholly new policies as
           well as to reshape existing policies. The Administration's actions and policy changes
           will take place over the course of the year-long initiative. We cannot say when the first
           announcement will be. It will be several weeks before the advisory board, the initiative
           staff and Administration representatives start working.

     ADVISORY BOARD

     Q:    Why did the President appoint an advisory board rather than an independent
           commission?

     A:    This initiative is designed to use presidential leadership to prepare the American people
           for the next century. President Clinton's personal history and conviction to lead this
           country in recognizing the strength in our diversity make him well-suited to help forge
           new alliances among citizens. The President will be actively involved in the initiative
           and will help provide its intellectual leadership. He will also involve the American
           people in an unprecedented way.

           The board members will serve as partners in the initiative by reaching out to various
           communities, amplifying the President's efforts and recruiting more leaders on this issue.
            The advisory board members were selected based on the concept that they would excel
           in these responsibilities and be respected, if not well known, in what is a
           Presidentially-led effort.


                                                                       Automated Records Mana~emt:nt Syston-
     June 11,1997 5:30pm                            5                          Hex-Dump Conversion


    Q:    Wouldn't you have been better off with individuals with name recognition?

    A:    In identifYing an advisory board, the working group sought individuals who could reach
          out on behalf ofthe President to various communities, provide guidance and analysis on
          topics concerning race and recruit more leaders to implement solutions that will improve
          race relations.


          We also looked for a group of individuals who would provide diversity on a number of
          fronts, be respected in their fields and work well together exemplifYing the relationships
          we hope the whole initiative will engender.

          Many of the advisory board's members are familiar ones, especially in their communities
          or areas of expertise.

    Q:    How much is this initiative going to cost?

    A:    We are working with the appropriators on a Justice Department reprogramming of funds
          for the initiative. The approximate cost of the initiative is $2.9 million.

    Q:    What is the $2.9 million for?

    A:    The funding will enable us to bring the advisory board to the American people and for
          providing staff who will study the issues and reach out to the American people.

    Q:    Why are there no Native Americans on the advisory board?

    A:    The advisory board is small in number. These individuals represent diversity in race,
          age, gender, background and political perspective. There will be many, many
          opportunities (for example: staff appointments, Presidential town hall meetings, advisory
          board outreach) over the course of the initiative for the President and the advisory board
          to work with and hear from individuals whose diversity is not reflected on the board.




    June 11, 1997 5:30pm                           6                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                       INITIATIVE ON RACE

       President Clinton today announced his intent to appoint seven members to the Advisory
Board to the President's Initiative on Race.

        The Advisory Board will provide advice and counsel to the President to improve the
quality of race relations. The Board will advise the President on the means to promote a
national dialogue on race issues; to increase our understanding of the history and future of race
relations; to identify and create plans to calm.racial tension and promote increased opportunity in
education, housing and health care; and to address crime and the administration of justice.
President Clinton is determined ''to improve the ability of all Americans to realize their full
potential so we can, as one country equal and indivisible, move forward into the 21st Century."
Advisory board members will reach out as surrogates for the President to create and implement
solutions to improve race relations.

       JOHN HOPE FRANKLIN, of Durham, North Carolina, is a retired historian and
educator, who most recently served as Professor of Legal History at Duke University Law School
from 1982 to 1992. President Clinton awarded Dr. Franklin the Presidential Medal of Freedom
in 1995. Dr. Franklin's scholarly work has focussed on the Civil War and Reconstruction era,
and includes the 1946 landmark study From Slavery to Freedom. Dr. Franklin received his A.B.
degree from Fisk University in 1935, an M.A. from Harvard University in 1936 and a Ph.D. from
Harvard University in 1941.

       WILLIAM F. WINTER, of Jackson, Mississippi, is the former Democratic Governor
of Mississippi and is currently in private law practice with the law firm of Watkins, Ludlam &
Stennis. Governor Winter serves as Chair of the National Commission on the State and Local
Public Service and the National Issue Forum Institute. While Governor, he fought for education
reform to benefit African-Americans, civil rights and better relations between the races. He
received his B.A. in 1943 and LL.B. in 1949 from the University of Mississippi.

       LINDA CHAVEZ-THOMPSON, of Washington, DC, is an Executive Vice President
with the AFL-CIO. Ms. Chavez-Thompson has twenty-nine years experience in the labor
movement. She joined American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees in 1971
and became the first person of color to be elected to office at the AFL-CIO.

      ROBERT THOMAS, of Coto DeCaza, California, currently serves as President and
CEO of Nissan Motor Corporation, U.S.A. Mr. Thomas recently created a partnership with the
Los Angeles Urban League to increase opportunities for women and minorities in automobile
manufacturing.. Mr. Thomas holds a B.S. in Engineering from the U.S. Air Force Academy in
1967.




                                                                Automated Records Maneremcnt System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Convarsion

            ANGELA E. OH, of Siren as, California, is an attorney with the Los Angeles law finn
     of Beck, De Corso, Daly, Barrera & Oh, specializing in state and federal criminal defense.
     Following the riots in Los Angeles, she served as Special Counsel to the Assembly Special
     Committee on the Los Angeles Crisis. Ms. Oh received a B.A. and M.P .H. in 1981 from the
     University of California and a J.D. in 1986 from the University of California.

             SUZAN D. JOHNSON COOK, of New York, New York, is Senior Pastor of the Bronx
     Christian Fellowship in the Bronx. She is also the first female chaplain of the New York City
     Police Department. In 1983 Dr. Cook became the first African American woman to serve as
     Senior Pastor at Mariners' Temple Baptist Church, the oldest American Baptist Church in New
     York City. From 1993 to 1994, Dr. Cook was a White House Fellow, working for the White
     House Domestic Policy Council. Dr. Cook received a B.S. from Emerson College in 1976, an
     M.A. from Columbia University Teachers College in 1978, an M.Div. From Union Theological
     Seminary in 1983 and aD. Div. from United Theological Seminary in 1990.

            THOMAS H. KEAN, of Madison, New Jersey, is the fonner Republican Governor of
     New Jersey. Governor Kean currently serves as President of Drew University in Madison, New
     Jersey. He also served on the United States Delegation to Women's Rights Conference in
     Beijing in 1995. Governor Kean holds numerous awards from environmental and educational
     organizations, including more than 25 honorary degrees. Governor Kean received a B.A. from
     Princeton University and an M.A. from Columbia University Teachers College.

        ALSO, CONSULTANT TO THE PRESIDENT AND ADVISORY BOARD NAMED

            CHRISTOPHER EDLEY, of Cambridge, Massachusetts, will serve as a consultant to
     the Advisory Board. Mr. Edley has been a Professor at Harvard Law School since 1981 and is
     co-director of The Civil Rights Project, a recently launched think tank based at Harvard
     University. Mr. Edley served as Special Counsel to President Clinton, where he directed a
     review of affinnative action. Mr. Edley received a B.A. from Swarthmore College in 1973 and
     an M.P.P. from the Kennedy School of Government and a J.D. from Harvard Law School in
     1978.




                                                                     Automated Records Manan~m~n! System
                                                                             Hex-Dump COn\'sfsion



     DRAFT                                                                              DRAFT

                                        THE WHITE HOUSE

                                     Office of the Press Secretary

     For immediate release                                                     June 12, 1997



     PRESIDENT NAMES BILL LANN LEE AS ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR
          THE CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION AT THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

            The President today announced his intention to nominate Bill Lann Lee to serve as
     Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division at the Department of Justice.

          Bill Lann Lee of Los Angeles, California, has devoted his career to civil rights law. As a
 litigator, Mr. Lee is known as a pragmatic attorney and a skilled coalition builder. For the past
 twenty three years, he has worked with a wide variety of organizations and citizens in order to
 achieve consensus and obtain justice for victims of discrimination. He has served since 1989 as
 Western Regional Counsel for the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund (LDF). From
 1983-1988, Mr. Lee was Supervising Attorney for Civil Rights Litigation at the Center for Law
 in the Public Interest in Los Angeles. From 1974-1982, Mr. Lee was Assistant Counsel at LDF
 in New York City. Mr. Lee has been active in a wide range of civil rights cases, including
 class-based employment discrimination, school desegregation, health care accessability, police
 brutality, public transportation equity, and federal financial assistance cases. Additionally, he
 has been an Adjunct Professor of Political Science at Fordham University.

         Mr. Lee was raised in New York City as the son of poor Chinese immigrants. His father,
 who volunteered for the American Army and fought in the Pacific theater, endured bigotry upon
 his return and taught his children the value of scholarship and opportunity. He attended public
 schools, won a scholarship to Yale College, graduated with honors, and received a Juris
 Doctorate degree from Columbia Law School.

        The Assistant Attorney General manages the following litigating sections: Coordination
 and Review, Criminal, Disability Rights, Educational Opportunities, Employment Litigation,
 Housing and Civil Enforcement, Office of Special Counsel for Immigration Related Unfair
 Employment Practices, Special Litigation, and Voting. In addition, the Assistant Attorney
 General represents Division policies in the Department, among counterparts in the
 Administration, and to the U.S. Congress.

                                              -30-30-30-


                                                                     Automated Records Manaremcnt System
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion


 DRAFT                                                                                DRAFT




                                       THE WHITE HOUSE

                                   Office of the Press Secretary

 For immediate release                                                        June 12, 1997


     PRESIDENT CLINTON NAMES RAYMOND C. FISHER AS ASSOCIATE ATTORNEY
                   GENERAL AT THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

        The President today announced his intention to nominate Raymond C. Fisher to serve as
 Associate Attorney General at the Department of Justice.

          Raymond C. Fisher of Los Angeles, California, is the founding partner of the Los Angeles
  office of Heller Ehrman White & McAuliffe, a business law firm headquartered in San
  Francisco. He specializes in complex business litigation and alternative dispute resolution, with
  emphasis on securities, antitrust, intellectual property, contract, and constitutional litigation .
 .Prior to Mr. Fisher's joining Heller Ehrman in March 1988, he practiced with the firm of Tuttle
  and Taylor. Additionally, Mr. Fisher currently serves as President of the five member Los
  Angeles Police Commission. He is a fellow of the American College of Trial Lawyers and of
  the American Bar Foundation, and is a member of the American Law Institute and the
  Association of Business Trial Lawyers. He serves on the board of the Brennan Center of Justice
  and was a member of the Board of Directors of the Legal Aid Foundation of Los Angeles from
  1993-1996.

        Mr. Fisher received a B.A. degree from the University of California at Santa Barbara and
 an LL.B. degree from Stanford Law School.

        The Associate Attorney General is the number three position at the Department of Justice,
 and along with the Attorney General and the Deputy Attorney General, manages the 100,000
 person Department.

                                             -30-30-30-



                                                                     Automated Records MaMgcment System
                                                                             Hex텱ump Conversion
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

                     EXCERPTS REGARDING RACE FROM PRESIDENTIAL SPEECHES

          Radio Address of the President to the People of the United States on June 7, 1997

               We stand today in sharp contrast to the racial, ethnic, tribal and religious conflicts which
                continue to claim so many lives all around the world. But we have still not purged
                ourselves of all bigotry .and intolerance. We still have our ugly words and awful violence,
                our bumed churches and bombed buildings.

               In a predominantly white suburb of Atlanta, Georgia last month, an African American
                couple was greeted with racial epithets as they moved into their new home. Just a week
                later, their home was sprayed with gunfire in the middle of the night.

               But, of course, the fight against hatred and intolerance must be waged not just through
                our laws, but in our hearts as well. A newbom child today does not know how to hate or
                stereotype another human being; that behavior must be learned. And intolerance does
                not generally begin with criminal acts. Instead, it begins with quiet acts of indignity: the
                bigoted remark, the African American who is followed around the grocery store by a
                suspicious clerk, the gay or lesbian who is denied a job, the Hispanic or Asian who is
                targeted because of unfair stereotypes.

               To truly move forward as one community, it is just not enough to prevent acts of violence
                to our bodies, we must prevent acts of violence to our spirits.

               America can confront the dark forces of division that still exist. We can shine the bright
                light of justice, humanity and harmony on them. We'll have the frank and open dialogue
                we need to build one America across all difference and diversity. And, together, we will
                move closer to the day when acts of hatred are no longer a stain on our community or
                our conscience; closer to the day when we can redeem for ourselves and show to the
                world the 220-year-old promise of our founders, that we are "One nation under God,
                indivisible, with liberty and justice for aiL"

          Remarks By The President In Apology For Study Done In Tuskegee on May 16,1997

               To our African American citizens, I am sorry that your federal government orchestrated a
                study so clearly racist. That can never be allowed to happen again. It is against
                everything our country stands for and what we must stand against is what it was. So let
                us resolve to hold forever in our hearts and minds the memory of a time not long ago in
                Macon County, Alabama, so that we can always see how adrift we can become when the
                rights of any citizens are neglected, ignored and betrayed. And let us resolve here and
                now to move forward together.

               The legacy of the study at Tuskegee has reached far and deep, in ways that hurt our
                progress and divide our nation. We cannot be one America when a whole segment of
                our nation has no trust in America. An apology is the first step, and we take it with a
                commitment to rebuild that broken trust. We can begin by making sure there is never
                again another episode like this one.

               Today, all we can do is apologize. But you have the power, for only you -- Mr. Shaw, the
                others who are here, the family members who are with us in Tuskegee -- only you have
                the power to forgive. Your presence here shows us that you have chosen a better path
                than your government did so long ago. You have not withheld the power to forgive. I
                hope today and tomorrow every American will remember your lesson and live by it.
                                                                                             Automated Records Ma18ccr1:nt SY5teiT'
                                                                                                     Hex-Dum~ Conve;sion
              1997 State of the Union on February 4, 1997

                    In the end, more than anything else, our world leadership grows out of the power of our example
                     here at home, out of our ability to remain strong as one America. All over the world, people are
                     being tom asunder by racial, ethnic, and religious conflicts that fuel fanaticism and terror. We are
                     the world's most diverse democracy, and the world looks to us to show that it is possible to live
                     and advance together across those kinds of differences.

                    We must never, ever believe that our diversity is a weakness -- it is our greatest strength.
                     Americans speak every language, know every country. People on every continent can look to us
                     and see the reflection of their own great potential -- and they always will, as long as we strive to
                     give all of our citizens, whatever their background, an opportunity to achieve their own greatness.
                    We're not there yet. We still see evidence of abiding bigotry and intolerance, in ugly words and
                     awful violence, in burned churches and bombed buildings. We must fight against this, in our
                     country and in our hearts ... For no matter what our differences -- in our faiths, our backgrounds,
                     our politics -- we must all be repairers of the breach.

                    [The President recognized: 1) Congressman Frank Tejeda, a Mexican-American who fought for
                     his country in Vietnam, and went on to serve Texas and the U.S. House of Representatives; and 2)
                     Gary Locke, the newly elected Governor of Washington State, who is the first Chinese-American
                     governor in U.S. history and the son of Asian-American immigrants.]

              Second Inaugural Address on January 20, 1997

                    Building one America is our most important mission -- "the foundation for many generations," of
                     every other strength we must build for this new century. Money cannot buy it. Power cannot
                     compel it. Technology cannot create it. It can only come from the human spirit.

                    The challenge of our past remains the challenge of our future -- will we be one nation, one
                     people, with one common destiny, or not? Will we all come together, or come apart?

                    The divide of race has been America's constant curse. And each new wave of immigrants gives
                     new targets to old prejudices.

              Affirmative Action Remarks at the National Archives on July 19, 1995

                    Our challenge is twofold: first, to restore the American dream of opportunity and the American
                     value of responsibility; and second, to bring our country together amid all our diversity into a
                     stronger community, so that we can find common ground and move forward as one.

                    To bring our people together we must openly and honestly deal with the issues that divide us.
                     Today I want to discuss one of those issues: affIrmative action.

                    The lesson we learned was a hard one. When we allow people to pit us against one another or
                     spend energy denying opportunity based on our differences, everyone is held back. But when we
                     give all Americans a chance to develop and use their talents, to be full partners in our common
                     enterprise, then everybody is pushed forward.

                 This is the work of our administration to give the people the tools they need to make the most of their


                                                                  2
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

         oWn lives, to give families and communities the tools they need to solve their own problems. But let
         us not forget affirmative action didn't cause these problems. And getting rid of afflrmative action
         certainly won't solve them.

        In our national community we're all different, we're all the same, We want liberty and freedom. We
         want the embrace of family and community. We want to make the most of our own lives and we're
         determined to give our children a better one. Today there are voices of division who would say forget
         all that. Don't you dare. Remember we're still closing the gap between our founders' ideals and our
         reality. But every step along the way has made us richer, stronger and better. And the best is yet to
         come,

Remarks at 86th Annual Holy Convocation of the Church of God in Christ on November 13, 1993 in
Memphis, Tennessee

        So I say to you, we have to make a partnership -- all the government agencies, all business folks -- but
         where there are no families, where there is no order, where there is no hope, where we are reducing
         the size of our armed services because we have won the Cold War -- who will be there to give
         structure, discip line and love to these children? You must do that. And we must help you.

        How would we explain to him [Martin Luther King, Jr.] all these kids getting killed and killing each
         other? How would we justify the things that we permit that no other country in the world would
         permit? How could we explain that we gave people the freedom to succeed and we created
         conditions in which millions abuse that freedom to destroy the things that make life worth living and
         life itself? We cannot.

        [U]nless we deal with the ravages of crime and drugs and violence and unless we recognize that it's
         due to the breakdown of the family, the community and the disappearance of jobs; and unless we say
         some of this cannot be done by government because we have to reach deep inside to the values, the
         spirit, the soul and the truth of human nature, none of the other things we seek to do will ever take us
         where we need to go.

        So in this pulpit, on this day, let me ask all of you in your heart to say we will honor the life and the
         work of Martin Luther King; we will honor the meaning of our church; we will somehow, by God's
         grace, we will tum this around. We will give these children a future. We will take away their guns
         and give them books. We will take away their despair and give them hope. We will rebuild the
         families and the neighborhoods and the communities. We won't make all the work that has gone on
         here benefit just a few. We will do it together by the grace of God.

Annual Meeting of the American Society of Newspaper Editors on April 10, 1997 in Austin, Texas

        I hope people will look back on this period and say that while I was President, we prepared America
         for the 21 st century basically in three ways: that we preserved the American Dream of opportunity
         for everybody who is willing to work for it; number two, that we preserved America's leadership for
         peace and freedom and prosperity in the world, and the world is a better place because of it; and
         number three, that Americans are living in greater harmony with one another as one America because
         we passionately advocated a respect for people's differences and respect for our shared values, and we
         made real progress in overcoming these divides and extremist hatreds that have not only weakened
         our democracy but are virtually destroying countries all around the world.

        This whole issue of how we deal with our racial diversity [is] a very different issue now. It's more


                                                       3
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
      than black Americans and white Americans.

     So this is a big deal. And every issue that we debate, whether it's affirmative action or immigration
      or things that seem only peripherally involved in this, need to be viewed through the prism of how we
      can preserve one America, the American Dream, our shared values, and still accord people real
      respect and appreciation for their independent heritages. It will be a great, great challenge.

     It's a challenge that, by the way, I think the newspapers of the country can do a lot to help promote in
      terms of advancing dialogue, diversifying your own staffs, doing the things that will help America to
      come to grips with what it means not to be a country with a legacy of slavery and the differences
      between blacks and whites, but to have grafted on to that not only the immigration patterns of the
      early 20th century but what is happening to us now.

     It is really potentially a great thing for America that we are becoming so multi-ethnic at the time the
      world is becoming so closely tied together. But it's also potentially a powder keg of problems and
      heartbreak and division and loss. And how we handle it will determine, really -- that single question
      may be the biggest determinant of what we look like 50 years from now and what our position in the
      world is and what the children of that age will have to look forward to.

Remarks at the Pleasant Grove Baptist Church on March 13. 1992

     Race is not the problem .. .this is not a question of race. Our country is adrift. If you
      continue to be divided by race, it will keep you poor and ignorant, it will impoverish your spirit
      and your pocketbook.

     Reach out...Put aside the old hurts and the old injuries.

     I cannot do for you what you will not do for yourself. Today, I come here to challenge you
      to reach out your hands to them -- for we have been divided too long. This is not a
      question of race. Our country is adrift. You have to find shared values and common
      ground.      .

Address at Macomb County Community College on March 12. 1997

     You can't do any of this unless we are prepared to give up some of the prejudices we all
      had in the 80's, or a lot of people did. The problems are not racial in nature. This is a
      crisis of economics, of values. It has nothing to do with race. This is the message, the
      message that I just gave you, that I just gave to the South.

     Over 80% of the black voters voted for me on Super Tuesday. Why? Because most blacks
      work for a living. Most of the working poor who are being ground down in the South are
      black Americans. There are more whites than blacks on welfare. The systems that are
      killing us are not racial in nature. This is a crisis of values, of education, and of
      organization.

     One of the things that the Democrats, I think, have to stand and draw the line on, and one of
      the things that I have to tell you about is that I do not believe we have any hope of doing
      what we have to do in America unless we can come together and cross racial lines again.




                                                   4
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

   One in four of our children is living in poverty under the age of six. One in two minority
    children under the age of six is in poverty. Most of the jobs in the 1990's will be filled by
    women and members of racial minorities. That's just the demographics. You can't repeal
    that. Nobody can change that. That's where the population growth is.

   In Chicago today, I went to a little business, 107 employees: blacks, Puerto Ricans, other
    Hispanics, a guy from Romania fixing to cast his first vote for me, Poles -- all of them
    together. And you know what they said? They work and they went to school at work, at a
    big GED program; and they all talked about how the more education they got, the more
    secure they got in their jobs and the more productive they were. And the more their wages
    went up, the more fun it was to be working with all different kinds of people.

   Its amazing when you work with people who share your values and who are winning, all the
    reservations that you might have kind of fade away.

   I can't change the country unless the American people are willing to be Americans again.
    We've got to say: "We are going up or down together" ... l'm telling you, there is nothing that I
    can do to get out of the fact we have got to come together around values and across racial
    lines. And if we're not prepared to do it we are not going to be filling the jobs of tomorrow,
    they are people whose children are doing bullet drills instead of fire drills in school; who are
    working hard and are still poor; who are living in substandard housing and who need these
    empowerment strategies.




                                              5


