 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUN-1997 11:40:45.00

 SUBJECT:   FYI - from "SALON" magazine on the internet

 TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Jonathan Prince ( CN=Jonathan Prince/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
    How to be a great POTUS

     Bulldog Washington reporter David Corn
   unearths the White House's latest thoughts on
  getting President Clinton into the history books.




 To: Erskine Bowles, White House Chief of Staff
 From: Domestic Policy Council
 Re:The Great Things Project

 in January, POTUS said: "Great presidents don't do
 great things. Great presidents get a lot of other people
 to do great things." As you know, we have adopted
,that as our working motto. (We still stand by our
 suggestion that the phrase "Getting you to do great
 things" be added to the presidential stationery.) The
 volunteerism conference in Philadelphia was a
 success -- despite the almost instant reappearance of
 graffiti on inner city walls -- but we believe we must
 push forward. Consequently, we have come up with
 several "great things" initiatives that we propose
 POTUS act on immediately.

, Apart from the public approbation we feel sure
  POTUS will receive, the strategy minimizes any
  potential political downside: The initiatives cost the
  Treasury nothing. They require no legislation. They
  do not offend any political constituency. Nor do they
  threaten any special interests.

Build Your Own School It is estimated that $500
billion is needed to repair the nation's schools.
POTUS should calIon schoolchildren across the


country to rebuild their own schools. After all, don't
they still teach shop? Principals could even provide
class credit for time spent repairing schools.
(Suggested supplementary reading: "Self Reliance,"
by Henry Thoreau.)

Clothes Do Make the Man At the volunteer
conference, we noticed that many corporations that
support volunteerism provide employees with T-shirts
that bear such slogans as "AT&T Cares." That gave
us an idea. When corporations fire workers, they
should provide them with a new suit of clothes. This
will help those who are dismissed go on job
interviews. Labor Department studies show that
when someone wears new clothes, he or she has an
enhanced sense of confidence. So, by providing
downsized employees with a new suit, corporations
can help them find a new job. Mandatory clothing
retrofitting is unlikely to pass Congress. Instead, the
president should use the bully pulpit to persuade
corporate America to provide job-interview-friendly
clothing to the downsized.

Pro Bono Life Saving While it may not have been
apparent during the debates over health-care reform,
many doctors are civic-minded. POTUS should call
on them to offer one free medical treatment a week
to an individual who could not afford it. A
psychiatrist would provide a free hour of counseling
to a suicidal patient. A kidney transplant specialist
would perform one free operation -- on a child of
course -- who has been waiting for a new organ. In a
related move, POTUS should press drug companies
to donate recently expired drugs to financially
troubled hospitals and moderate-income citizens.
According to FDA records, when most drugs expire,
their potency is still above 95 percent. Our thinking:
Isn't it better to give someone a drug working at 95
percent than nothing at all?

We Can All Get Along POTUS wants to "heal the
breech." Part of the racial problem in this country
(according to Vernon Jordan) is that white people and
black people rarely socialize together. They do not
know one another. To address this, POTUS should
propose a tax credit for inter-racial socializing. If you
go out for dinner, go to the movies or go bowling
with someone of a different race, you can deduct 50
percent of the money spent on the activity. We see
this as a social policy equivalent of High Occupancy
Vehicle "diamond" lanes. OMB estimates the cost,
assuming we exclude spectator sports like basketball,
will be less than a $1.5 billion over five years.

Sharing the Shelter Roughly 10 million Americans
are on welfare. Another 10 million Americans have
more than one home. The math is undeniable.
POTUS should calIon multiple-home owners to open
up their vacation houses to the less well-off on a sort
of time-share basis. This can be promoted as a


cultural exchange between income-variated
Americans. (One proposed name: the "Movin' On
Up" program.)

End Campaign Contribution Dependency As We
Know It We think we have found a way to address
the widespread impression that big companies have a
"special relationship" with candidates based purely on
dollars. POTUS should call for a voluntary system in
which funders can only contribute if they also
volunteer to do mundane campaign work. Give a
$1,000, and you have to stuff 1,000 envelopes. Or
have your employees make 5,000 calls for a $5,000
donation. (We are still developing an appropriate
formula of activity-per-qollar.) Imagine, for example,
Dwayne Andreas going door-to-door with campaign
leaflets! That would lessen the gap between the "little
people" who canvas neighborhoods at all hours of the
day and night and the elite group that achieves
influence only through money. (Suggested slogan:
"Donating to democracy is a privilege. You have to
work for it.")
June 17, 1997

David Corn is Washington editor of the Nation and a frequent
contributor to Salon.


