RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-JUL-1997 11:14:53.00

SUBJECT:   DRAFT Budget Paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is the whole huge thing NEC is circulating around.  It includes
language on immigrants, $3 billion, etc.  It mostly focuses on tax and
health.  I am providing them with comments.  I am about to send them a
beefed up version of the $3 billion bullet, with more of our lingo added.
Let me know if you want to see that before I send it in.

The immigrant stuff looks OK so far.  OMB is reviewing it as well.  I have
already told them to add a bullet on our win on grandfathering Medicaid
for children losing SSI.

---------------------- Forwarded by Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP on 07/29/97
11:12 AM ---------------------------




Russell W. Horwitz
07/28/97 11:49:41 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject:         DRAFT Budget Paper

This will, I hope, be the last e-mail on this draft document.  Please
review as soon as you can.  I think folks will want to get paper out by
late morning.  The first document is the long document; the second is a
I-page talking points.

Thanks for your help.



Message Sent
TO:~----------~--~~-----------------------------------------
Charles R. Marr/OPD/EOP
Jake Siewert/OPD/EOP
Robert M. Shireman/OPD/EOP
Emil E. Parker/OPD/EOP
Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP
Sarah A. Bianchi/OMB/EOP
WEINSTEIN P @ Al @ CD @ LNGTWY
Jill M. Blickstein/OMB/EOP
Jeanne Lambrew/OPD/EOP
      IN A GENERATION AND A MAINSTREAM TAX CUT
DRAFT                        DRAFT                                 DRAFT
     $900 Billion in Net 10 Year Deficit Savings.                               4%-17$~~
     First Balanced Budget since 1969.                                                ~.r:a%~qlJaUt
                                                                                         ~qoC
                                                                                               olJ//81S.~/1J8IJI~
     Single Largest Investment in Health Care for Children Since 1965.                                vOIJ     ~ '/1J

     A $500 Per Child Tax Credit for Approximately 27 Million Families.

     Largest Investment in Higher Education Since the G.I. Bill in 1945:

           $1,500 HOPE Scholarship to Make Two Years of College Universally
            Available
           20% Tuition Tax Credit for College Juniors, Seniors, Graduate Students
            and for Working Americans pursuing Lifelong Learning to upgrade their
            skills

     Critical Long-Term Entitlement Reforms -- Extends Solvency of Medicare
      Trust Fund for at Least a Decade.

     Brownfields and Empowerment Zones Tax Incentives to Revitalize Our
      Nation's Distressed Areas.

     A $ 3 Billion Welfare-to-Work Jobs Initiative Targeted to High Poverty Areas.

     Treats Legal Immigrants Fairly -- Restores Health and Disability Benefits



                       THE FIRST BALANCED BUDGET IN A GENERATION

FIRST BALANCED BUDGET SINCE 1969

       Net savings of over $900 billion over ten years.
       1993 Economic Plan has cut the deficit 77% from $290 billion in 1992 to $67 billion or
      lower in 1996. This agreement finishes the job -- balances the budget in 2002 and puts
       the budget in surplus in each of the second five years of the budget.

SINGLE LARGEST INVESTMENT IN HEALTH CARE FOR CHILDREN SINCE THE
PASSAGE OF MEDICAID IN 1965

         An unprecedented $24 billion for children's health care.
         Guarantee of meaningful health coverage including full range of benefits to as many as 5
         million uninsured children.
         Provisions to ensure that states use this investment to provide health care coverage to children
                                                                           who do not currently have
                                                                           health insurance and that there
                         Automated Records Management System                 so that families are not
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                             burdened with excessive costs.

CRITICAL LONG-TERM ENTITLEMENT REFORMS

          $434 billion in ten-year Medicare savings.
          This extends the life of the Medicare Trust Fund for at least a decade_
          Prepares Medicare for the 21st century -- more choice is provided, competition is injected,
          and payment systems are revamped.
          $4 billion in preventive benefits to fight diseases like breast cancer, diabetes & colon cancer.

MOVES PEOPLE FROM WELFARE TO WORK & TREATS LEGAL IMMIGRANTS FAIRLY

          $3 billion to help states and local communities move people from welfare to work.
          $12 billion to restore both disability and health benefits for legal immigrants who are
          currently receiving assistance or become disabled, ensuring that they will not be turned out of
          their apartments or nursing homes or otherwise left to an uncertain fate.


                                           A MAINSTREAM TAX CUT


 On December J5, J994, President Clinton put forth the Middle Class Bill ofRights which included a $500
 Child Tax Credit, an expanded IRA that allows people to withdraw money tax-free and without penalty
for education and a tax deduction for post-high school education expenses. Each of the President's
proposals are included in this budget:

A CHILD TAX CREDIT FOR APPROXIMATELY 27 MILLION FAMILIES.

         $500 Per-Child Tax Credit for approximately 27 million families with 45 million children
         under 17. The credit begins to phase-out for couples with incomes above $110,000.
         Up to 4.8 million working families will now receive the child tax credit who would not have
         under the Congressional plans. At the President's insistence, more than $10 billion over 5
         years was added to provide a Child Tax Credit for people making under $30,000 like young
         teachers, police officers, farmers, and nurses who work hard and play by the rules.

A VICTORY FOR MIDDLE CLASS PARENTS TRYING TO PAY FOR THEIR CHILDREN'S
COLLEGE AND FOR WORKING PEOPLE TRYING TO UPGRADE THEIR SKILLS.

         $1,500 HOPE Scholarship to make the first two years of college universally available.
         The final agreement includes the President's initiative to advance the goal of making the 13th
         and 14th grades as universal as a high school diploma is today. Students would be provided a
         scholarship of 100% on the first $1,000 of tuition and fees and 50% on the second $1,000.
         20% Tuition Tax Credit for college juniors, seniors, graduate students and for working
         Americans pursuing lifelong learning to upgrade their skills. The 20% credit will be
         applied to the first $5,000 of qualified education expenses through 2002, and to the first
         $10,000 thereafter. A major deficiency of the congressional tax bills has been that they did
         little to help students in their third and fourth year s of college and they were missing a
         commitment to lifelong learning. The President has long understood that the economy is
         changing and that people must have the opportunity to enhance their skills throughout their
         lives. This is why the President insisted on the 20% tuition tax credit that is in the final bill.
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


TAX INCENTIVES TO REVITALIZE OUR NATION'S DISTRESSED URBAN AREAS_

A key component of the President's tax cutting agenda has been to spur economic activity in distressed
areas of our nation's cities. This budget reflects the President's agenda:

          A New Tax Cut Plan Helps to Clean Up and Redevelop Brownfields. The 3-year
          Brownfields tax incentive will reduce the cost of cleaning up thousands of contaminated,
          abandoned sites in economically distressed areas by permitting clean-up costs to be immediately
          deducted for tax purposes, rather than requiring this spending to be written off over time. This
          would, in turn, encourage redevelopment of these areas.

          New Empowerment Zones. The budget includes a second-round ofEZs -- 15 urban and 5
          rural EZs. The new EZs will benefit from a different blend of tax credits than the first-round
          communities. For example, the EZs will be eligible for the Brownfields tax incentive, special
          expensing of business assets, and qualification for private-activity bonds.

HELPING MOVE PEOPLE FROM WELFARE TO WORK

          A Welfare to Work Tax Credit. This provision will give employers an added incentive to
          hire long-term welfare recipients by providing a credit equal to 35% of the first $10,000 in
          annual wages in the first year, and 50% of the first $10,000 in the second year of employment,
          paid to new hires who have received welfare for an extended period. The credit is for two
          years per worker to encourage not only hiring but retention.

          $3 Billion to Help People in Distressed Areas Move from Welfare to Work. Adds $3
          billion to help localities move the most disadvantaged welfare recipients into jobs; the funding
          is targeted to high-poverty areas, including inner cities. These funds can be used for job
          creation, job placement and job retention efforts, including wage subsidies to private employers,
          transportation and other critical post-employment supportive services.
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion


              PRESIDENT CLINTON DELIVERS
  THE LARGEST SINGLE INVESTMENT IN CHILDREN'S HEALTH
       CARE SINCE THE PASSAGE OF MEDICAID IN 1965

The President fought hard to ensure that the Budget Agreement includes $24 billion to provide
meaningful health care coverage to as many as five million of our nation's ten million uninsured children.
 This investment includes a meaningful benefits package, ensures that states use this money to cover
uninsured children and not replace existing public or private spending, and guarantees adequate
cost-sharing protections for families.

        INVESTS UNPRECEDENTED $24 BILLION FOR UNINSURED CHILDREN. The
        President insisted on increasing the investment for children's health from $16 billion to $24
        billion by including revenue from a new tobacco tax. Because of the President's leadership, this
        budget will contain the largest children's health care budget since the enactment of Medicaid in
        1965. Including these additional revenues in the children's health initiative will not only further
        reduce the number of uninsured children, but it will serve as a financial barrier to help prevent our
        children from starting smoking in the first place.

        ENSURES MEANINGFUL HEALTH CARE COVERAGE, WHILE ALLOWING
        STATES TO DESIGN THEIR OWN BENEFITS PACKAGE. The President fought hard to
        ensure that this investment guarantees the full range of benefits -- from checkups to surgery--
        that children need to grow up strong and healthy. The President also worked to ensure that
        prescription drugs, vision, hearing, and mental health coverage now offered at the state level are
        extended to millions of uninsured children.

        GIVES STATES THE FLEXIBILITY TO DESIGN BENEFITS THAT MEET THEIR
        NEEDS. States will be able to choose from any of four benefits packages: (1) the FEHPB
        model; (2) the benefits package of the most popular state HMO; (3) the state employee plan; and
        (4) the actuarial equivalent of any of the three stated benefit plans as long as prescription drugs,
        vision, hearing, and mental health services now offered in these plans are guaranteed to equal at
        least 75 percent of the value ofthese services.

       SUPPLEMENTS NOT SUPPLANTS CURRENT HEALTH CARE COVERAGE. Includes
       provisions to ensure that states provide health care coverage to children who do not currently have
       health insurance. It requires that states maintain their current level of spending to access Federal
       dollars to help make sure that this investment is not used to replace public or private money that
       already covers children.

       ENSURES ADEQUATE COST-SHARING PROTECTIONS. The President fought to
       ensure that families are not forced to shoulder excessive costs for their children. The Agreement
       guarantees that families under 150 percent of poverty will be protected against overly burdensome
       cost sharing.
            FOR APPROXIMATELY 27 MILLION FAMILIES

 MAIN FEATURES OF THE CHILD TAX CREDIT:
                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                Age. Covers childr,en under 17.                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

                Amount per child.      $400 in 1998. $500 thereafter.

                Income limits. Begins to be phased out for couples making over $110,000 and for one
                 parent families making over $75,000 ..

                Stacking. Child tax credit will be calculated or "stacked" before the EITC and will
                 therefore be available for the up to 4.8 million working families who have incomes below
                 $30,000 and who were denied the child tax credit under the congressional bills.

                For families with more than two kids - Refundability to cover out-ol-pocket income
                 and payroll taxes. Because many large families have little income tax liability, but pay
                 significant out of pocket payroll taxes, the child tax credit for these families is partially
                 refundable. These families will receive a child credit for their income taxes plus the
                 extent to which their out-of-pocket (employee share) payroll taxes exceed their EITC.

               Savings Incentive Feature. Taxpayers who are entitled to a child credit would be given
                the opportunity to contribute $500 each year to an education IRA. Earnings would
                accumulate tax-free in the account and no taxes would be due upon withdrawal for an
                approved purpose.

 A CHILD TAX CREDIT FOR FAMILIES WHO WORK HARD AND PAY TAXES.

  Both congressional plans failed a critical test offairness by denying the child tax credit to up to 4.8
. million hard-working families who pay taxes and earn less than $30,000 a year. These are young
  teachers, police officers, farmers, and nurses who work hard and play by the rules.

 President Clinton worked to ensure that under any fmal agreement, these young parents would
 receive a child tax credit to make it easier for them to raise their children.

         Consider a family offour with two small children: the father is a rookie police officer making
         $23,000, and the mother has chosen to stay at home. Both congressional bills would have
         denied this family, and millions of others, the child tax credit. The President said all along that
         this would be wrong and insisted they be included in any final tax cut. Under the final
         agreement, this family will receive a child tax credit of$675.


                               President Clinton's        Agreement        House Bill         Senate Bill
                                     Proposal

   Child Tax Credit for
  family of rookie police               $767                 $675              $0                  $0
  officer making $23,000
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


        PRESIDENT CLINTON DELIVERS EDUCATION TAX CUTS
         TO HELP MIDDLE CLASS FAMILIES PAY FOR COLLEGE

THE PRESIDENT'S HOPE SCHOLARSHIP AND TUITION TAX CREDIT

From the beginning, promoting expanded educational opportunity has been the centerpiece of President
Clinton's budget and his middle class tax cut proposal. Promoting education is the centerpiece of this
final tax cut bill:

        $1,500 HOPE Scholarship to make the first two years of college universally available. The
        final agreement includes the President's program to advance the goal of making the 13th and 14th
        grades as universally available as a high school diploma is today. Students would be provided a
        scholarship of 100% on the first $1,000 of tuition and fees and 50% on the second $1,000.

       20% Tuition Tax Credit for College Juniors, Seniors, Graduate Students and for working
       Americans pursuing lifelong learning to upgrade their skills. The 20% credit will be
       applied to the first $5,000 of qualified education expenses through 2002, and to the first $10,000
       thereafter. A major deficiency of the congressional tax bills was that they did little to help
       students in their third and fourth years of college and they were missing a commitment to lifelong
       learning. The President has long understood that the economy is changing and that people must
       have the opportunity to enhance their skills throughout their lives. This is why the President
       insisted on the 20% tuition tax credit that is in the final bill.

A SUMMARY OF ADDITIONAL EDUCATION TAX CUTS

      Education and Retirement Savings Accounts. Allows penalty-free IRA withdrawals for
       undergraduate, post-secondary vocational, and graduate education expenses. Additionally, taxpayers
       eligible for the child tax credit are given the opportunity to deposit $500 into an education IRA.
       Earnings would accumulate tax-free and no taxes would be due upon withdrawal for an approved
       purpose.

      Employer-Provided Education Benefits. Extends Section 127 of the tax code for three years, which
       allows people to exclude $5,250 of employer-provided undergraduate education benefits from their
       taxable income.

      Student Loan Interest Deduction. Allows a deduction for up to $2,500 per year of interest on
       education loans for expenses of students enrolled at an institution of higher education. This deduction
       would be available even if the taxpayer does not itemize deductions.

      Community Service Loan Forgiveness. In most circumstances, a loan that is forgiven is considered
       income and is therefore taxable. To encourage programs that offer loan forgiveness to borrowers who
       take lower-paying, community-service jobs, loan amounts forgiven through programs run by nonprofit
       tax-exempt charitable or educational institutions, would be excluded from income. Currently, the
       exclusion generally covers only certain forgiveness arrangements between students and government
       entities.

      Repeal Cap on Tax Exempt Bond Issuance by Colleges and Universities. Repeals the $150 million
       bond cap that affects private higher education institutions and certain other charitable institutions.
        expenditures.

            PRESIDENT CLINTON DELIVERS A BUDGET THAT
              STRENGTHENS AND PRESERVES MEDICARE

The Budget Agreement preserves and strengthens the Medicare program, saving $115 billion over five
years and extending the life of the Medicare Trust Fund for at least ten years. It modernizes Medicare by
including new market-oriented reforms that have proved successful in the private sector and $4 billion in
new preventive benefits. As this agreement strengthens and preserves the Medicare program, it also
creates a Medicare Commission to examine the long-term needs of the program so that Medicare will be
prepared for the retirement of the baby boomers.

           SAVES $115 BILLION OVER FIVE YEARS. Includes $115 billion in savings over
           five years and $434 billion over ten years.

           EXTENDS THE LIFE OF THE MEDICARE TRUST FUND FOR AT LEAST TEN
           YEARS. This agreement will keep Medicare solvent until at least 2007.

           IMPLEMENTS UNPRECEDENTED NEW MARKET-ORIENTED REFORMS
           INCLUDING:

                 Empowering the Secretary of Health and Human Services to implement competitive
                 market mechanisms;
           (2)   Opening up new options that have proved effective in the private sector, including
                 allowing Medicare to work with Preferred Provider Organizations (PPOs) and
                 Provider Sponsored Organizations (PSOs);
           (3)   Providing Americans with meaningful choices by reforming annual Medigap
                 enrollment; and
           (4)   Building on the success Medicare has had in controlling hospital costs, restructuring
                 the entire payment system so that rates are set in advance through a prospe<;tive
                 payment system.

           INCLUDES $4 BILLION OVER FIVE YEARS FOR NEW PREVENTIVE
           BENEFITS INCLUDING expanding coverage for mammograms and colorectal screening
           and improving self-management of diseases like diabetes.

           ENSURES NEW PREMIUM PROTECTIONS FOR LOW-INCOME MEDICARE
           BENEFICIARIES. The budget agreement invests $1.5 billion over five years to pay the
           premiums for beneficiaries up to 135 percent of poverty. Beneficiaries over 135 percent of
           poverty to as high as 185 percent of poverty will get assistance as well.

           TAKES STEPS TO ENSURE THAT VULNERABLE HOSPITALS ARE
           PROTECTED. The Agreement reduces the Medicare Disproportionate Share Hospitals
           cut from $2.4 billion in the Senate-passed agreement to $600 million over five years.

           ESTABLISHES A MEDICARE COMMISSION. The agreement creates a 17-member
           Medicare Commission which contains eight Democrats and eight Republicans and an
           additional member that will be selected jointly by the President and the Congressional
           leadership to chair the Commission. The Commission will release a report in 1999 and
           require a 11 of 17 majority to ensure that its recommendations are bipartisan.
      TO CLEANUP AND REVITALIZE URBAN AREAS ...

THE BROWNFIELDS TAX INCENTIVE WILL REDUCE THE COST OF
CLEANING UP THOUSANDS OF CONTAMINATED, ABANDONED SITES IN
ECONOMICALL Y DISTRESSED AREAS by pennitting clean-up costs to be immediately
deducted for tax purposes, rather than requiring this spending to be written off over time.
This would, in tum, encourage redevelopment of these areas. The tax incentive will be
available for three years.
THIS PROPOSAL IS A MAJOR PRIORITY FOR MANY OF AMERICA'S MAYORS.
 Chicago Mayor Richard Daley, writing recently on behalf of the u.s. Conference of Mayors,
urged Ways and Means Chainnan Archer to include the President's Brownfields proposal in
the tax bill: "This is a high priority for communities across the nation." [Letter to Chmn. Archer,
6/11197]

CREATES NEW EMPOWERMENT ZONES. Under the President's 1993 Empowennent
Zones and Enterprise Communities initiative, participating communities develop a strategic
plan to spur economic development, and they receive Federal tax benefits, social service
grants and flexibility in use of Federal funds in order to put these plans into effect. The EZs
and ECs are urban or rural areas with high poverty and unemployment rates.
          A Strong Start since 1994. The 105 communities selected as EZIECs in 1994 amassed
           over $8 billion in public-private commitments. In the six urban Empowerment Zones, the
           private sector has made or pledged $2 billion in new investments.
          A Second Round to Build on Our Successes. In response, the President
           proposed, and the bill includes, a second-round of EZs-- 15 urban and 5 rural EZs.
           The new EZs will benefit from a different blend of tax credits than first-round EZs.
            They will be eligible for the Brownfields tax incentive, special expensing of
           business assets, and qualification for private-activity bonds .


  ...AND TO MOVE PEOPLE FROM WELFARE TO WORK

A WELFARE-TO-WORK TAX CREDIT. This provision will give employers an added
incentive to hire long-tenn welfare recipients by providing a credit equal to 35% of the first
$10,000 in annual wages in the first year, and 50% of the first $10,000 in wages in the second
year of employment, paid to new hires who have received welfare for an extended period.
The credit is for two years per worker to encourage not only hiring but retention.

$3 BILLION TO HELP THE MOST DISADVANT AGED MOVE FROM WELFARE
TO WORK. Adds $3 billion to help localities move the most disadvantaged welfare
recipients into jobs; the funding is targeted to high-poverty areas, including inner cities.
These funds can be used for job creation, job placement and job retention efforts, including
wage subsidies to private employers, transportation and other critical post-employment
supportive services. The Labor Department will provide oversight but the dollars will be
placed in the hands ofthe localities who are on the front lines of the welfare refonn effort.
              ...                PRESIDENT CLINTON FOUGHT TO PROTECT
~.:~\~~~~~~i:\j~                     OUR MOST' VULNERABLE PEOPLE

        Several provisions in last year's welfare reform bill had nothing to do with the goals of welfare reform.
        The President said so at the time and promised to work to correct these provisions. That's why he fought
        to ensure that any agreement protects the most vulnerable in our society. The President fought to better
        protect:

        CHILDREN

                           KEEPING THE GUARANTEE TO MEDICAID. Preserves the Federal guarantee of
                           Medicaid coverage for the vulnerable populations who depend on it and contains additional
                           investments to extend coverage to uninsured children.

        LEGAL IMMIGRANTS
                           CURRENT RECIPIENTS. Restores both SSI and Medicaid benefits for immigrants now
                           receiving assistance, ensuring that they will not be turned out of their apartments or nursing
                           homes or otherwise left to an uncertain fate.

                           CURRENT RESIDENT NONRECIPIENTS. Does not change the rules retroactively.
                           Immigrants in the country as of August 22, 1996 but not receiving benefits at that point who
                           subs~quently become disabled will also be fully eligible for SSI and Medicaid benefits.


                           REFUGEES AND ASYLEES. Extends the SSI and Medicaid eligibility period for
                           refugees and asylees from 5 years after entry (the liI1lit in the welfare bill) to 7 years, in
                           order to give these residents more time to naturalize.

                           The budget legislation also, pursuant to Administration suggestions, treats Cuban and
                           Haitian entrants and Amerasians immigrants as refugees for purposes of SSI, Medicaid and
                           other means-tested benefits, ensuring that they can receive the assistance needed as a result
                           of the extraordinary hardship many have endured.

        POOR ELDERLY AND DISABLED, INCLUDING CITIZENS

                           RECIPIENTS OF STATE SSI SUPPLEMENTS. Does not include the House-passed
                           provision that would have repealed the maintenance of effort requirement applying to State
                           supplementation ofSSI benefits, permitting States to reduce or eliminate benefits toalmost
                           3 million poor blind, elderly and disabled individuals.

        PEOPLE WHO WANT TO WORK BUT CAN'T FIND A JOB
                           CHILDLESS ADULTS. Last year's welfare reform bill restricted food stamps for
                           able-bodied childless adults to only 3 .out of every 36 months, unless they are working.
                           This move ignored the fact that finding a job often takes time. The budget bill provides
                           $1.5 billion to create 235,000 work slots and provide food stamp benefits to those who are
                           willing to work but, through no fault of their own, have not yet found employment.

                           ALLOWS STATES TO EXEMPT UP TO 15 PERCENT OF THE FOOD STAMP
                           RECIPIENTS WHO WOULD OTHERWISE BE DENIED BENEFITS AS A
                           RESULT OF THE "3 IN 36" LIMIT.
                 Building on His Strong RecQrd of Deficit Reduction and Growth

President Clinton has achieved a balanced budget agreement that includes critical investments in education,
health care, and the environment while strengthening and modernizing Medicare and Medicaid -- just as he
promised last year. This achievement finishes the job of balancing the budget, a key priority for the President
since he took office.

ONLY FOUR YEARS AGO. In 1993, the President inherited a budget deficit of $290 billion that was
expected to explode to over one-half trillion dollars in 2002. A decade of large deficits had weakened the
foundation of our economy and sapped our power and prestige abroad. Unemployment was 7.5% in 1992, and
job growth was sluggish.

THE PRESIDENT PASSES HIS 1993 ECONOMIC PLAN. President Clinton addressed this problem of
fiscal instability immediately on a pledge to cut the deficit in half. Working with Democrats in Congress, he
implemented an economic program designed to reduce the deficit and to invest in critical priorities, such as
education and training. The 1993 economic plan has exceeded all expectations: the deficit has fallen by 77%,
droppingfor a likely fifth year in a row to an expected $67 billion in 1997; equipment investment has been the
strongest since Kennedy was President; the economy has produced over 12.5 million new jobs; and the
unemployment rate this year is the lowest in 24 years.

THE PRESIDENT ACHIEVES BIPARTISAN AGREEMENT TO FINISH THE JOB. The President began
his second term determined to fulfill his goal of balancing the budget. As we head into the next century, this
bipartisan agreement protects our priorities, solidifies the nation's economic foundation, restores faith in our
ability to govern ourselves, and bolsters America's preeminent position in the world economy. The balanced
budget agreement includes $900 billion in 10 year net deficit savings and delivers the first balanced budget in a
generation.

                       .,.   .~   r<.,   ~-"     the First'" _..   ->'"    . in a (:.
                                            y                1993 Defici                Current D
                                            19                       $3                        $2
                                            19                       $3                       $2
                                            19                       $3                       ~1

                                            19                       $2                       $1
                                            19                       $3
                                            19                       $3
                                            19                       $_4
                                            20                       $4
                                            20                       $5
                                           20                        $5

    BUDGET STAYS IN BALANCE. In addition to delivering a balanced budget in 2002, the budget
    agreement delivers budget surpluses for each of the second five years ofthe budget window, 2003-2007,
    putting the nation on a solid fiscal path at a critical time as the baby boom generation edges toward retirement.
        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                a Mainstream, Middle Class Tax Cut

How Typical American Families Will Benefit
                                                                Automated Records Management System
Example #1                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

Consider a family offour who makes $75,000 a year. The father is a civil engineer and makes $50,000 and
the mother is a secretary and makes $25,000. They have two kids, a son who is 14 and a freshman in high
school and a daughter enrolled full-time in her first year at a state university. Her tuition is $5,000 a year.

This family benefit from the tax cut in at least two ways. They will receive a child tax credit of $500 for their
son, plus a HOPE Scholarship of $1 ,500 for their daughter. In total, they will receive a $2,000 tax cut.

                                                Tax Cut

   Family offour with two children
   aged 14 and 18 and $75,000 income:

   Child Tax Credit for 14 year old                   $500
   HOPE Scholarship for 18 year old                   $1,500

               Total tax cut:                     $2,000


Example #2
Consider a family of three making $55,000 a year. The father has a degree in accounting and works for a
local business in the accounting department. The mother works part-time at the local library. They have
one daughter aged 7. The father would like to return to school to prepare for his CPA examination. He is
going to attend the local liberal arts college. He has signed up for two courses with total tuition of$4,000.

This family will receive a $500 tax child tax credit for their daughter and a $800 tuition tax credit to help pay
for the father's course work.
                                              Tax Cut

   Family of three with one child
   aged 7 and $55,000 income:

   Child Tax Credit for 7 year old                    $500
   Tuition tax credit                                    $800

               Total tax cut:                     $1,300
 Consider a family of three making $80,000 combined. The mother is a nurse and the father is an architect.
 They have a daughter who is 17 years old and is trying to decide where to go to college. She is leaning
 towards a private liberal arts school and thinks she'll go to law school after that. Her parents are staring at
 tuition payments in excess of $1 0,000 a year for seven school years and wondering how they will pay for it.


 This tax cut will help. Their daughter will be eligible for a $1,500 HOPE Scholarship in each of her first two
 years in college. During her junior and senior years, she will be eligible for a tuition tax credit of$I,OOO.
 Additionally, she will be eligible for a tuition tax credit of $1 ,000 in each of her three years oflaw school
 (because seven school years fall across eight tax years she will be eligible for another $1,000 in the eighth
 year).


                                   Tuition Tax Credits


                1998               $1,500 Hope Scholarship                  Automated Records Management System
                1999               $1,500 Hope Scholarship                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                2000               $1,000 Tuition Tax Credit
                2001               $1,000 Tuition Tax Credit
                2002               $1,000 Tuition Tax Credit
                2003               $2,000 Tuition Tax Credit
                2004               $2,000 Tuition Tax Credit
                2005               $1,000 Tuition Tax Credit

        Cumulative Tax Cut to Help
         Pay for Daughter's Education              $11,000

 Example #4
 A single mother lives with her six year old daughter in California. She's been working as a bank teller for
 several years and her pay is now up to $20,000 a year. Working towards becoming a loan officer, she is
 taking one course a semester towards a bachelor's degree. Her tuition runs about $1,000. This family will
 receive a $500 child tax credit for the daughter and a $200 tuition tax credit.

                                             Tax Cut

    Family of two with one child
    aged 6 and $20,000 income:

    Child Tax Credit for 6 year old                $500

    Tuition Tax Credit                             $200

                Total tax cut:                 $700
        IN A GENERATION AND A MAINSTREAM TAX {jJ1'Convf~~~ntSystem
President Clinton has achieved an historic balanced budget that promotes our values, providing critical
investments for education, health care, and the environment while strengthening and modernizing Medicare
and Medicaid. It also provides middle-class families a tax cut to help raise their kids and send them to
college. We have cut the deficit by 77%,from $290 billion in 1992 to $67 billion or less this year. This
historic budget finishes the job, while meeting our goals.

ONLY FOUR YEARS AGO. In 1993, the President inherited a budget deficit of $290 billion that was
expected to explode to over one-halftrillion dollars in 2002. A decade oflarge deficits had weakened the
foundation of our economy and sapped our power and prestige abroad. Unemployment was 7.5% in 1992,
and job growth was sluggish.

THE PRESIDENT PASSES HIS 1993 ECONOMIC PLAN. President Clinton addressed this problem of
fiscal instability immediately on a pledge to cut the deficit in half. Working with Democrats in Congress, he
implemented an economic program designed to reduce the deficit and to invest in critical priorities, such as
education and training. The 1993 economic plan has exceeded all expectations: the deficit has fallen by
77%, dropping for a likely fifth year in a row to $67 billion or less in 1997; equipment investment has been
the strongest since Kennedy was President; the economy has produced over 12.5 million new jobs; and the
unemployment rate this year is the lowest in 24 years ..

THE PRESIDENT ACHIEVES FIRST BALANCED BUDGET IN A GENERATION TO FINISH
THE JOB. The President began his second term determined to fulfill his goal of balancing the budget. As
we head into the next century, this bipartisan balanced budget protects our priorities, solidifies the nation's
economic foundation, restores faith in our ability to govern ourselves, and bolsters America's preeminent
position in the world economy.

      $900 Billion in Net Ten-Year Savings to keep us on the path of fiscal responsibility and help
       prepare the nation for the retirement of the baby boom generation.

      Single Largest Investment in Health Care for Children Since the Passage of Medicaid in 1965.
       Today, ten million children have no health insurance. The balanced budget takes dramatic
       and concrete steps to right this wrong. Health care coverage will be extended to up to 5
       million children

      Critical Long-Term Entitlement Reforms including $434 billion in ten-year Medicare savings to
       keep the Medicare Trust Fund Solvent for at least a decade. Importantly, these savings are achieved
       in a way that prepares Medicare for the 21 st century -- more choice is provided, competition is
       injected, and payment systems are revamped and preventive benefits are included.

      Largest Increase in Higher Education Funding Since the G.I. Bill of 1945, including $1,500
       HOPE Scholarship to make the first two years of college universally available and a 20% Tuition Tax
       Credit for college juniors, seniors, graduate students and for working Americans pursuing lifelong
       learning to upgrade their skills.

      $500 Per Child Tax Credit to make it easier for approximately 27 million families to raise their
       children.

      Helping Move People from Welfare to Work. The budget adds $3 billion, the full amount
       requested by the President for the Welfare-to-Work Jobs Challenge, to the TANF block grant to fund
       welfare-to-work efforts in high-poverty, high-unemployment areas.

      Protects our Nation's Most Vulnerable People. The budget includes $12 billion to restore both
       disability and health benefits for legal immigrants who are or become disabled, ensuring that they will
       not be turned out of their apartments or nursing homes or otherwise left to an uncertain fate.


