RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-APR-1997 08:17:14.00

SUBJECT:   Draft Education Memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is an edited draft of what I sent last night.

The memo provides a detailed update on the testing initiative and less
detailed, but still substantive updates on charter school·s and teaching.
Its about 4 pages.  I had been planning on doing brief updates at least on
the School Construction and HOPE legislation.  However, as I approach
these sections, I think the President deserves to have some sense of how
we would move these two pieces of legislation forward, in addition to a
reminder that they have been introduced.

 My sense is that will make the memo longer than we want, and it probably
needs to come from Gene.

I think we've got the following options:

1.  Limit the memo to the three issues it contains, and send him another
one next week with 3-4 additional issues.

2. Work with Gene this morning to produce the legislative updates on
school construction and hope.

3. Add safe and drug free schools to this memo-- and try not to
demonstrate that ED doesn't yet have a strategy for fixing the program.

I do not think that Early Learning, job training and skill grants,
technology or America Reads are good candidates for this memo.  They are
each complicated enough to warrant a moderately lengthy treatment.

Let me know what you think.==================== ATTACHMENT      1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:     0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D3]MAIL400403394.016 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504300060000010A02010000000205000000624600000002000004A28E53FB1A2AD595D47D
F70D4F7B231B360395AC39C01E57BF007C65DE29FC9A1CACCC03F6DBF667E03DD5D1F528EB6CA5
BB56EA6C64DAF3BA16672E3D4B1B97559AB07704600EE9C712DACCA1DC67ABE8EB274C1DE6E448
B8C37ABE2D34D3FECA5913542CAB4896C601EF9585ABC3BFD553CEB5A9C93A4A433FD16F64CODD
FC31B30BA6125A18C26AA83E0806E443A43736AFBAAF2A8AB9524B6D597DBEIAC73BF00245EEC6
6642E38F3968D9661050CEA171628CD4F395EA69301CF852E28FF6D3934FB3116E07F40C5BDI03
6EDB6B37D00452C94BCB4454489062C4358ABOA39879D003DC1951376AB87FFE3BDCOBDD2DCD72
00E1C326D71C1231800BF4C44AD21CA810886465179462722FE349B88C06463823A3F5505F5B62
FAE8E09B5E20ED5C751E7189CBOB02E332D154C47CA67952B61A97BAOBBOAEF88A602B6852A305
D4F75FE5129FB8074A424EF0152FCCE2FC48604ED97CCOB03FE24ED76A5383076C6CAF44508FE8
                                                                             Hex·Dump Conversion ·
Draft


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                  BRUCE REED
                       MIKE COHEN

SUBJECT:               UPDATE ON SELECTED EDUCATION INITIATIVES

This memo provides you with a detailed update on your national standards and testing initiative,
and more brief updates on several additional education initiatives.

1. NATIONAL STANDARDS AND TESTS
 Our objective is to have 40+ states participate in the initial 1999 administration of the national
tests. To reach this objective, we are working on several interrelated fronts:

Developing the Tests: By the end of April, the Education Department will release a Request for
Proposals (RFP) for the development of the 4th grade reading and 8th grade math tests. A draft
is already circulating for public comment. Contracts will be awarded by September 1. At this
time, it is not known whether each test will be developed by a separate contractor, or whether one
test developer will successfully bid to develop both. In addition, the Education Deparrnent and
the test developers will establish a number of technical advisory groups and evaluation studies to
assure the technical quality of the tests.

As part of the process of developing the RFP, the Education Department has held a number of
public meetings with testing experts, states testing officials, and test publishers and others in the
education and civil rights communities. (The Education Department has made the transcripts of
these meetings, and other related documents, widely available on the Internet.) These sessions
have raised a number of important issues which will be addressed as the work proceeds. In
particular, virtually all groups have stressed the importance of ensuring the technical quality of
the tests, and that there be adequate attention to helping parents and the public understand the
nature and purposes of the tests. This is particlurly important in light of experiences in a number
of states in which technical problems or public misunderstandings have led to strong controversy
about the testing program. Many urged that the timeline be slowed down if necessary, in order
to accomodate these concerns, although the Education Department continues to believe that the
timeline is realistic and appropriate. We agree, and see no reason now to delay the Spring 1999
date for the initial test administration.

Second, a number of states anticipate a challenge in integrating these new tests into their ongoing
testing programs, especially states that are now well along in developing new tests aligned with
recently developed state standards. Some states would therefore find it easier to "embed" a
small number of additional test items into their existing tests, rather than administer a separate
and additional test. However, this approach has been considered and does not appear to be
technically feasible if we are to have a valid test. Other states have suggested that a 4th grade
                                                                           Hex-Dump Con~ersioil .

reading test would be more valuable to them if it were administered in the Fall rather than the
Spring, since their goal -- like yours -- is for students to read independently by the end of the 3rd
grade. The Education Department is studying this possibility.

Third, many testing experts suggested that the 8th grade math test be based on the NAEP
framework rather than on the TIMSS framework. They argued that the NAEP framework is
more explicit and more widely accepted among the states, and that student scores could then be
reported according to the NAEP achievement levels (basic, proficient and advanced) as will be
the case with the reading test. The Education Department has determined that this would be a
preferable approach. They have also determined that it will still be possible to provide
individual student scores in terms of the TIMSS international scores as well, because of the very
high overlap in the content ofNAEP and TIMSS. Therefore, the final test will still meet your
initial committment of providing students with internationally benchmarked scores.

Creating a Political Buffer -- Ensuring the Tests are National and not Federal:
We are working to determine how best to establish an advisory or governing body that can
provide bipartsian support for this effort, and assurance that the tests measure what they are
supposed to based on the widely accepted NAEP frameworks -- and do not measure some
federally-determined, politically correct knowledge, skills or attitudes. Mike Cohen, Mike
Smith and other Education Department officials have been consulting with Governors of both
parties, Congressional staff and others, with the aim of establishing an advisory mechanism that
will garner strong biparisan support among Governors and in the Congress. Secretary Riley met
last week with Gov. Thompson, and is working to set up a meeting in mid-May with a bipartisan
group of8-10 governors, hopefully including Governors Romer, Hunt, Zell and Bob Miller,
Thompson, Engler and Voinavich. Secretary Riley, Mike Smith and Mike Cohen will also
continue meeting with Members of Congress over the next several weeks. While the additional
consultations we will be undertaking may change our thinking significantly, our current plan is as
follows:
·        Create an interim advisory council as soon as possible, in consultation with governors and
        members of congress on a bipartisan basis. We would probably appoint governors,
        business leaders, and educators currently serving on related groups such as the National
         Education Goals Panel, ACHIEVE (the group established to follow-up last year's
         education summit in Palisades), and the National Assessment Governing Board (NAGB),
         as well as teachers, testing experts and others. The announcement of this council would
        be an opportunity to demonstrate bipartisan Congressional and gubernatorial support for
        the testing initiative.

·      Especially with this council established, we think it may be possible to gain NGA's
       endorsement for the testing initiative at the Summer meeting in Nevada. Both the
       ACHIEVE Board of Directors and the National Education Goals Panel will be meeting in
       conjunction with the NGA meeting. If your schedule permits, it would be possible for
       you to meet with both groups, to demonstrate broad support for your standards initiative,
       and to help reenergize governors and business leaders behind common educational goals.

·      These two steps would create a favorable climate for Congressional consideration of
                                                                         Hex-Dump COilve:sion

       legislation to reauthorize the National Assessment of Education Progress and the National
       Assessment Governing Board, which are scheduled for consideration sometime in this
       Congress. At that time, we can determine ifNAGB should assume policy responsibility
       for the national tests, with Congressional support. (At present, NAGB is prohibited by
       law from overseeing the development of individual-level tests.) These steps would also
       improve our ability to win any legislative battles we may face on this issue, such as
       attempts to prohibit the Education Department from using funds for the continued
       development of the tests.

Please note that we are optimistic but not yet confident that we can carry out this plan. Much
will depend upon how effectively we are able to enlist the cooperation of a core group of
Republican governors.

Building Momentum through state and local endorsements: We are continuing to identify
additional states to sign up for the testing initiative, though do not yet have any additional firm
committments. We believe that the consultation process with governors described above will
yield additional states. We are also working with a number of chief state school officers. At
present, we hope over the next 3-4 weeks to line up a handful of states for a White House event.
We are also working to identify states that would be likely to sign up when you resume your
travel s~hedule.

We are also beginning to develop a strategy for signing up big cities, such as Los Angeles and
Boston, regardless of the respective state participation. The intent here is to further demonstrate
momentum, to underscore that these standards are especially important for the students and
schools for which society typically has low expectations, and to demonstrate that these tests can
in fact be tools to lift people up, by helping to stimulate new and focus existing partnerships and
efforts to improve teaching and learning.

We believe it will be possible, over the next several months, to work with mayors, school
superintendents and school boards, teachers unions, institutions of higher education, as well as
parent, community and business groups in 6-9 cities. We would seek broad partnerships in each
city that would pledge to benchmark their success by using the national tests, and commit to
specific, locally designed efforts in each community to help prepare students to meet these
standards. We will ask the Education Department to develop a plan for working with these
cities, to provide them with information on proven practices, and to hefp the cities learn from
each other. A White House event announcing this partnership should generate considerable
excitement and attention. It will also strengthen support for this testing initiative among
members from big cities.


2. CHARTER SCHOOLS
One of our key goals is to foster the creation of 3,000 charter schools within 5 years, up from the
current level of 500. One challenge is expanding the number of states with charter schools
legislation. Currently 25 states and DC authorize the creation of charter schools; w~ would like
to raise the number of states to 30 by the end of 1997. Over the past couple of months, progress
                                                                        Hex-Dump COilversioil .

in state legislatures has been slow, due in part to an absence of strong centrist leadership at the
state level, partisan differences, and occassional opposition by state and local union affiliates. In
addition, in at least one state (Virginia) the potential racial impact of charter schools emerged as
an issue. Consequently, no state has enacted charter schools legislation yet this session.

However, there are some bright spots. In Washington State this week the governor, schools
superintendent and legislators have tentatively reached agreement on a charter schools bill, with a
vote in the state House scheduled for Friday. Mississippi is also on the verge of passing a
charter law, although the number of schools authorized would be fairly limited. Charter
legislation is also alive in Missouri (as part of a big post-desegregation package), Indiana, and
Nevada.

There are several steps that we believe can help move things forward in some of these states.
Visible Presidential leadership in the near future, in the form of an address to a legislature on
charter schools, a radio address, or other similar event, will lend support to charter schools
advocates.

Second, the Education Department is ready to release two important reports on charter schools.
One is the first year report of a major national charter school study. A key finding is that the
number one obstacle for new charter schools to overcome is lack of access to start-up funding.
A second is a guidebook for school boards and other chartering authorities, which emphasizes the
importance of effective accountablity for charter schools.

In addition, the Education Department will soon announce a new competition for charter schools
funds. It is also planning a national charter schools conference in late Summer or early Fall.
These activities will provide support both to state efforts and to your request for $100 million for
charter schools.



3. TALENTED TEACHERS IN EVERY CLASSROOM
The focus of your efforts to improve teaching has been to promote and support the work of the
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS), especially by requesting $xx in
your balanced budget plan in order to help NBPTS reach the goal of certifying 100,000 teachers
over the next _ years. In addition, last October you directed the Education Department to
identify ways in which federal resources could be used to implement the recommendations of
Gov. Hunt's commission on teaching excellence.

Within the next couple of weeks, the Education Department will be ready to disseminate the first
part of its response to your directive on improving teaching, a user's guide on how the
Department's resources can support state and local efforts to support high-quality teaching. A
second part of its response, a document identifying promising practices in teacher recruitment,
preparation, certification, and retention, as well as for removing incompetent teachers, is
currently being prepared by the Department, and should be completed near the end of the month.
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conile:sioil

Later this month, in conjunction with the Annual Teacher of the Year event on April 18, the
Education Department will host a conference on strategies for improving teacher recruitment and
preparation. The conference will include all the state teachers of the year, university presidents,
and deans of education schools, as well as student teachers. One function of the conference will
be to provide input into the Administration's proposal for strengthening the
teacher-preparation-related provisions in Title V of the Higher Education Act which will be
transmitted to Congress later this year.

You will be hosting the Annual Teacher of the Year event at the White House. In addition to
honoring outstanding teachers, this will provide an important opportunity for you to discuss, for
the first time since the State of the Union Address, your NBPTS proposal. (The teacher who has
been selected as Teacher of the Year is a Board-certified teacher from an urban area. This is not
public information yet.)

We are also working with the Education Department to frame a challenge you can make to states
at this time, calling on them to develop and implement performance-based teacher licensure
standards which would require teachers to demonstrate that they have the subject matter
knowledge and pedagogical expertise to teach students to high academic standards before they
enter the classroom. This will be an especially important issue for states to focus on now,
becuase they will be hiring x.y million new teachers over the next x years. (You may recall that
you set in motion the process to develop such performance-based standards in Act 236 in
Arkansas. However, progress toward this end has been slow in Arkansas and in almost every
other state.)

Still to come (unless you think we've got enough here):
4. SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION
Your school construction legislation was transmitted to the Congress on March xx. It has been
introduced by xxx in the House (with xx cosponsers) and zzz in the Senate with aa cosponsors.
It has been endorsed by .....
5. HOPE SCHOLARSHIP
YourHOPE Scholarship legislation was transmitted to the Congress on March xx. It has been
introduced by xxx in the House (with xx cosponsers) and zzz in the Senate with aa cosponsors.
It has been endorsed by .....


