 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

 CREATOR: Stephen C. Warnath ( WARNATH_S )     (CPC)

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-AUG-1997 11:47:41.55

 SUBJECT: Commission immigration recommendations

 TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED B ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
 READ: NOT READ

 TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
 READ: NOT READ

 TO: Jose Cerda III                            CERDA J ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
 READ: NOT READ

 TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro                     SHlMABUKUR L ) Autoforward to: Remote Add
 READ: NOT READ

 TO: Paul J. Weinstein, Jr                     WEINSTEIN P ) Autoforward to: Remote Addr
 READ: NOT READ

 TEXT:

 FYI -- The Commission on Immigration Reform includes other options that it
 presents favorably in its draft report that you may not be aware of:
 1) Establish a new Cabinet Level Department or Independent Agency -- One option
 is creation of a new Department or independent agency "simiilar to the
 Environmental Protection Agency" to provide leadership on immigration issues.
 2)  "Strengthening the Domestic Policy Council" -- The Commission believes that
 it would be a good idea to establish a new policy development and coordination
 mechanism at the Domestic Policy Council -- an "Office for Immigration Policy".
 It cites as a possible model the NSC's Office of Democracy, Human Rights and
 Humanitarian Affairs.
 3)  Creating New Offices at the Departmental Level to Coordinate Immigration
 Matters. This would entail consolidating all immigration matters into a single
 office at each department.  For example, at DOL, there would be a new Assistant
 Secretary for Immigration Affairs.
 4) "Establishing a Standing Body Responsible for Immigration Policy."  Perhaps
 something along the lies of the civil Rights Commission or the FCC that would be
 responsible for policy development but not policy implementation.

 So these are some of the ideas the Commission is advancing as options to improve
 immigration policy and operations.

 I have discussed with Jose s.ome of merits of the severing DOJ/INS
 responsibilities and spreading them across the Administration.
 A couple of more thoughts:   The immigration debate remains highly political and
 highly-charged and the Commission's views must be interpreted in that context.
 This remains a minefield and these "good government" proposals are not
 necessarily as neutral as they appear on their face.
 There are reasons why Harold Ezell -- the father of Prop. 187 -- supports
 breaking up the INS.  There are reasons why Lamar Smith and Pete Wilson like the
 idea while taking every opportunity to criticize the President on immigration.
 Many of these attacks of the Administration's immigration efforts are not
 designed to improve anything, they are simply a means of politically attacking
 the Administration and also immigrants.   I understand, for example, that the
 fees for immigration services might have to be raised beyond the ability of
 many to pay if immigration activities are split across the Administration.    The


Commission does not address this concern.
It is worth noting that the Commission's report acknowledges that the other
agencies that would take on new immigration responsibilities have their own
operational problems, but the Commission makes no attempt to assess whether
they could overcome those problems to improve upon DOJ's work in immigration.
In addition, as has always been the case, the Commission makes recommendations
without considering cost.  That has always been part of their problem    they
make recommendations without any consideration for cost effectiveness or total
costs for implementation.
Obviously, none of this means that substantial reform to improve immigration
enforcement and services is not appropriate -- obviously it is crucial -- but
that is not necessarily what is going on here.

There are some who believe strongly that one of the reasons that the Commission
wanted to review INS management (which is NOT part of their statutory charter)
is because when the Commission goes out of business after its final report this
Fall, a few members of the Commission and some of its staff would like to be put
in charge of any new Department or independent agency or office that might be
created. Who knows.

Anyway, I hope that some part of this is helpful to you.

Thanks.


