 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Tracey E. Thornton ( CN=Tracey E. Thornton/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-APR-1997 16:08:02.00

 SUBJECT:   Draft Late-term

 TO: John L. Hilley ( CN=John L. Hilley/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Charles F. Ruff ( CN=Charles F. Ruff/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Peter G. Jacoby ( CN=Peter G. Jacoby/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: John Podesta ( CN=John Podesta/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: William P. Marshall ( CN=William P. Marshall/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Barbara D. Woolley ( CN=Barbara D. Woolley/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Sylvia M. Mathews ( CN=Sylvia M. Mathews/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Elisa Millsap ( CN=Elisa Millsap/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 Tracey E. Thornton ( CN=Tracey E. Thornton/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 This is a very preliminary draft and the Senate names are just our best
 guesstimate for now. When can obvioulsy firm these up better when they
 return.   Daschle has some new language that we will get late monday or
 tuesday so if we can put this off until early next week we can update
 this.   Elena is adding more to her section.  ==================== ATTACHMENT     1
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D801MAIL453220494.016 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043CC040000010A020100000002050000000447000000020000C733647E430E92ACCDC1FB
                                                                                       Hex-Dilmp Conversion
DRAFT               DRAFT                                      DRAFT
ALTERNATIVES TO THIS PROCEDURE

You have asked whether the so-called partial-birth procedure is ever necessary to save the life of
a woman or avert serious harm to her health. Considerable medical uncertainty surrounds this
question. The doctors of the women present during your veto believed the procedure was
necessary for this reason, and other doctors agree that the procedure, in certain circumstances, is
the safest one to use. Still other doctors dispute that health considerations ever demand use of
the procedure.

Perhaps the most reliable opinion is from the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (ACOG), which issued a statement in January addressing the procedure, which it
calls intact dilatation and extraction (intact D&X). According to the statement, "A select panel
convened by ACOG could identify no circumstances under which this procedure would be the
only option to save the life or preserve the health of the woman." (Emphasis in original.) The
statement then went on: "An intact D&X, however, may be the best or most appropriate
procedure in a particular circumstance to save the life or preserve the health of a woman, and
only the doctor, in consultation with the patient, based upon the woman's particular
circumstances can make this decision." In sum, doctors have other options, but those other
options may be more risky or otherwise more undesirable from a medical standpoint.

Other groups of doctors, with a greater stake in the abortion controversy, have taken more
definitive positions. The Society of Physicians for Reproductive Choice and Health issued a
statement last month saying that "in complex obstetrical situations, dilatation and extraction is
the safest procedure to use. It carries the least risk of bleeding, perforation, infection or trauma
to the birth canal." On the other hand, a group of mostly pro-life physicians called PHACT has
written that "there are absolutely no obstetrical situations requiring the destruction of a partially
delivered fetus," and indeed that the procedure involves serious risks of maternal hemorrhage,
uterine rupture, and infection.

A recent article in the New York Times notes that the partial-birth procedure is only one of three
procedures (all of them "pretty gruesome," as one doctor says) that can be used to end
pregnancies after 20 weeks. The article reports that three of the twelve abortion specialists
interviewed for the article generally prefer the procedure on the ground that it poses less risk of
uterine perforation. The article also notes that one doctor who does not usually use the
procedure has done so on occasion because "the woman's anatomy or the fetus's size demanded
it. "

 Given the state of medical evidence on this subject, your longstanding position seems the
appropriate one. That position would leave to doctors themselves the complex decision whether
the procedure is medically necessary in a given set of circumstances. Allowing the medical
community to make clearly medical decisions in this way is the only certain way to protect the
health of women.
                                                             Hex-DiJmp Conversion ·
HOUSE CONSIDERATION

On March 20 the House passed a bill identical to the one you vetoed last year (H.R. 1122) by a
vote of 295-136, five (5) votes more than the two-thirds necessary to override a veto when all
Members are present and voting. Since the September 1996 veto override vote in the House,
only three Members -- all Republicans -- switched their votes from supporting your veto to
supporting the legislation ( Representatives Shays (R-CT), Freylinghausen (R-NJ) and Sue Kelly
(R-NY). They all indicated that an abortion rights advocate's recent statement that he lied about
the number and circumstances of late-term abortions influenced their switch. All 73 Republican
freshmen voted for the bill, and 22 of the 42 freshmen Democrats voted against it.

Two different alternatives were offered during the House debate on the floor. The first was a
Hoyer (D-MD)/Greenwood (R-PA) substitute which would ban all post-viability abortion
procedures with an exception if the woman's life were in jeopardy or ifshe faced "serious
adverse health consequences" without the procedure. The Hoyer/Greenwood substitute was
ruled non-germane by the House parliamentarian and a motion to appeal that ruling failed by a
vote of265-165. A second motion to recommit, offered by Congressman Frank (D-MA),
would have amended the underlying bill to provide a health exception where the procedure is
performed to spare a woman "serious adverse long-term physical health consequences." This
health exception would have applied to both pre- and post-viability abortions using the "partial
birth" method. That motion failed 149-282.

Opponents of these two alternatives argued that both health exceptions were either overly broad,
and therefore would not prevent any procedures, or unnecessary, because there is no instance
where this specific procedure is medically necessary to protect the health of the mother. This
position has been best summarized by Judiciary Committee Chairman Henry Hyde, one of the
leading proponents of the legislation. He has publicly stated that while he will trade "a life for a
life," he will "never trade life for health." Given Mr. Hyde's position, which has broad support
in the Republican caucus, it is extremely unlikely that any late-term abortion measure that
contains even a very narrow health exception will pass the House.


SENATE CONSIDERATION

You will recall that last September the Senate failed by nine (9) votes to override your veto of
this legislation (57-41). Senator Lott has indicated that "partial birth" will be on the floor right
after the recess.

The Senate dynamic is somewhat different from the House. First, in his leadership role, Senator
Daschle has taken a personal interest in trying to find a compromise that will pass and is also
consistent with Roe vs. Wade. Both Senators Daschle and Mikulski recently spoke out strongly
in a Democratic caucus meeting that Members should not make up their minds about this issue
until after they have considered an alternative being crated by Senator Daschle (discussed below).
To date, only one Senator who voted to sustain your veto has publicly announced that he intends
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

to switch his vote to support an override -- Senator Hollings, who is up for reelection in '98 and
whose state of South Carolina recently enacted a "partial birth" abortion ban (March 1997).
Other states that have recently enacted similar bans are listed below.

For his part, Senator Daschle thoroughly understands this area and intends to cast a wide net to
try to capture what he regards as the center here. He has held a number of meetings with his
colleagues on both sides of the aisle and they have encouraged him to continue his efforts. His
aim is to try to construct language that gets the votes to pass the Senate and he is talking to
Senators personally to see what it will take to secure those votes. Senator Daschle also
recognizes, though, that ifhe is unsuccessful in getting a majority vote, he still must get a strong
vote on his alternative in order to keep enough Members voting to sustain the veto.

The Daschle alternative would ban all abortions after fetal viability unless the mother's life or
health is truly endangered. This health exception is being drafted to cover only very rare
situations that arise from complications of the pregnancy itself, such as serious heart damage,
severe hypertension and, as in the cases of some women carrying severely deformed fetuses,
uterine rupture and other injuries; from pre-existing conditions that become very dangerous, such
as complications from diabetes or from newly diagnosed diseases that require treatment that
cannot be given during pregnancy. The alternative would also provide for criminal penalties
where the ban is violated.

Basically, there are six (6) pro-choice Republicans very much in play for Daschle to pick-up on
his compromise: Campbell, Chafee, Collins (ME), Snowe and Specter. Senator Snowe, who
has been working closely with Daschle, has indicated that Roth and Stevens are also possible
pick-ups but they are long-shots. Daschle has asked Snowe to continue to work her Republican
colleagues. With these Republican numbers, Daschle will have to get almost all 45 Democrats
in order for his alternative to pass. During the last Congress, four (4) Democrats currently
serving voted against a Boxer amendment (Hoyer/Greenwood-type language) which would have
applied the ban post-viability only with a health exception: Breaux, Ford, Reid (NV) all three (3)
pro-life and Conrad (mixed voting record on abortion). These 3 pro-life Democrats will be the
most difficult for Daschle to convince to vote for his alternative. In addition, new Senators
Landrieu and Cleland will require some work to get their support. In terms of pro-choice and
mixed-voting-record Democrats who supported overriding your veto -- Biden, Conrad, Dorgan,
Leahy, and Moynihan -- most, if not all, of them will vote for the Daschle alternative. Biden,
Dorgan and Leahy voted for the Boxer amendment and Moynihan was absent the day of the vote.


Much of the outcome here depends on the procedural posture under which this compromise
arises. While we cannot predict what that situation will be when the Senate takes this matter up,
we can be sure that if the Republicans believe that the Daschle alternative has a chance of
actually passing, they will demand at least an up or down vote on the underlying Republican bill
and there would also be an up or down vote on Daschle. If both pass, both would go into
conference with the House-passed bill that you vetoed last year. We cannot predict what the
outcome would be of this conference which would be under the exclusive control of the
Republicans. It is likely that they would simply come back with the bill you previously vetoed
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

since most House Republicans, lead by Messrs. Hyde and Canady, are unlikely to accept any
measure which contains a health exception. Another possibility is that they would keep both
Daschle and the vetoed bill together but further narrow the health exception in the Daschle
alternative. Keep in mind though that the Daschle health exception only goes to abortions
after viability. This means that, if they combine the Daschle alternative with the
Republican bill, the Republican bill would control in cases where the "partial birth"
procedure is performed before viability and therefore, in such instances, there would only
be an exception for the life of the mother but not health.

Procedurally, Daschle's vote count will be higher if Members are able to cast votes on both his
alternative and on the underlying Republican bill -- there will be a lot of folks who would vote
for both. Members like those who voted for the Boxer amendment and also supported an
override would fit into this category. Leahy, Biden, Specter, Campbell and Dorgan are
examples. In addition, both Cleland and Landrieu are candidates for voting for both versions.
Hollings is obviously in this category now as well. A measure which contained both the
Daschle alternative and the underlying Republican bill would probably have the votes to pass the
Senate.

Another component of this mix is the strong, unabashed pro-choice wing which includes
Members like Boxer, Feinstein and Moseley-Braun. Bolstered by the pro-choice lobby, this
group has warned Senator Daschle that they will not support his alternative if the health
exception is too narrowly drawn. While this group is not a large one, the vote situation is so
tenuous that Daschle does not have a vote to spare on his alternative. For now, he is continuing
to canvas other Members and when he has a better idea of what his vote count, he will be able to
determine the best course of action to take with regard to this group. The language in the
alternative is still fairly fluid and changes can be made to accommodate these Members; but in
the end, this group will have to come back into the fold. Of course, there is absolutely no danger
in any Member of this group voting to override a veto.

Mention should also be made of Members who are up for re-election in 1998. Senator Harkin
has painted for a number of these Democrats a very dire description of how his vote to sustain
your veto played in his '96 race -- most notably Senators Murray, Dodd, and Feingold. As for
Dodd and to some degree Lieberman, another issue for these Members is the fact that moderate
House Republican Chris Shays switched and voted to support the measure. The pro-life
community is spending a substantial amount of money running TV ads in certain key states. But
countering the Harkin experience is Senator Durbin's '96 race; he has told a number of Members
that what matters most is how they talk about this issue.

If the Daschle alternative does not pass, the question becomes which supporters of his alternative
will vote for final passage of the Republican bill? As previously pointed out, a strong Daschle
vote just shy of passing will likely help in much the same way the Boxer vote happened last year
-- 47 Senators voted for her amendment and 41 voted to sustain the veto.


Finally, the ultimate success of DaschIe's effort either in passing or getting veto override strength
                                                        Hex-DiJmp Conve:sion

depends a great deal on the rhetorical battle that will become much more intense when they
return. So far, unlike the House, Senate Republican have not been able to publicly unnerve the
Daschle bloc. This is due more than anything to the hard work being put into this effort by
Senator Daschle and his team. The fact that the effort has become a Leadership driven initiative
is also critical. So the proponents' argument that the recent exposure of the "lies" told by the
pro-choice lobby should cause Senators to reevaluate their position is being countered by the
Daschle camp with the fact that, unlike the Daschle alternative, the Republican bill would not
stop a single abortion; it would merely result in abortion by other methods, all of which pose a
greater risk to the woman's health. By contrast, the alternative would outlaw these late-term
abortions entirely no matter what the method and thereby actually reduce the number of abortions
in this country without putting women at unacceptable risk. Finally, the Daschle approach
permits the argument that even if Congress overrides your veto, the Republican bill will never
become law because it will be struck down by the Court as unconstitutional. Enactment of the
Daschle alternative allows Congress to pass a comprehensive, constitutional ban to stop
unnecessary abortions of viable fetuses and is a ban .that you would sign.




STATES THAT HAVE RECENTLY ENACTED PROCEDURE SPECIFIC BANS

Georgia: "Partial-Birth" Ban (March 1997)

Michigan: "Partial-Birth" Ban (June 1997); legal challenge filed

Mississippi: "Partial-Birth" Ban (March 1997)

Ohio: "Dilation and Extraction" Ban (August 1995); enjoined by Federal district court and appeal
filed with 6th circuit

South Carolina: "Partial-Birth" Ban (March 1997)

South Dakota: "Partial-Birth" Ban (March 1997)

Utah: "Partial-Birth" and "Dilation and Extraction" and "Saline Abortion" Bans (March 1996)


