RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Eli G. Attie ( CN;Eli G. Attie/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO]

CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-AUG-1997 15:13:58.00

SUBJECT:   Draft of VP's remarks for Religious Freedom event

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ron Klain ( CN;Ron Klain/O;OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lorraine A. Voles ( CN;Lorraine A. Voles/O;OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]      )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: William P. Marshall ( cN;William P. Marshall/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO]        )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Andrei H. Cherny ( CN;Andrei H. Cherny/O;OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: James T. Edmonds ( CN;James T. Edmonds/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO]         )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Please note that I have checked most of the content of this with Justice,
but I am still waiting to hear back about the EEOC fact ...

draft 8/13/97 3pm

REMARKS BY VICE PRESIDENT ALBERT GORE, JR.
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM IN THE FEDERAL WORKPLACE
THE WHITE HOUSE
Thursday, August 14, 1997

          More than 160 years ago, when Alexis de Tocqueville came to our
shores, he wrote that the very first thing that struck him was our
D&religious atmosphereDS -- the sense of faith and purpose that infused
almost every aspect of American life.     To gain a better understanding of
that phenomenon, de Tocqueville questioned countless people of faith --
especially the clergy themselves. And he reached a simple, unmistakable
conclusion -- and I quote: D&the main reason for the quiet sway of
religion over [this] country was the complete separation of church and
state ... I met nobody, lay or cleric, who did not agree about that.DS

        Of course, AmericaD,s identity is much more than the sum of its
religious traditions.   But those traditions -- Catholic, Protestant,
Jewish, Muslim, Hindu -- have made a profound contribution to the values
we share as Americans, values that guide and inspire us even as we chase
our most secular goals.

        That is the basic challenge for government in addressing issues of
religious freedom.  It is the very separation of church and state -- the
freedom from persecution, the absolute and unassailable choice of how to
worship -- that keeps religion strong.   But it is our religious values
that help keep our nation strong.   That is why we must do more to protect
and advance religious freedom -- to strengthen the human conscience,
without weakening the Constitution.



        ItO,s a commitment President Clinton has held since the day he
took office.   10,11 never forget the day he signed the Religious Freedom
Restoration Act nearly four years ago -- bringing together 68 different
groups who had probably never agreed on anything before -- the ACLU and
the National Association of Evangelicals, the National Islamic Prison
Foundation and BO,Nai Brith. And while we were very disappointed that the
Supreme Court overturned parts of that legislation, the momentum it
created -- and the coalition we formed -- can bring a new respect for
religious freedom to state and local governments allover the country.

        It was under President Clinton that our Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission filed its first-ever class-action lawsuit based on
religion -- against a department store policy that had required employees
to work on Saturdays and Sundays. That case was settled in favor of the
claimants.

        It was under President Clinton that the Justice Department
reversed its longstanding policy, and stepped in to make sure a trustee in
bankruptcy couldnO,t force churches and synagogues to give up past tithes
and offerings to satisfy a congregantO,s creditors.  The administration
then created a special task force, to ensure that religious rights are
taken seriously on these kinds of legal issues.

        It was under President Clinton that we fought to provide remedial
education to disadvantaged students, at religious schools as well as
public schools -- and the Supreme Court upheld our view.

        And it was President Clinton who issued a directive urging every
school district in America to let students pray and express their
religious views, as long as they donO,t infringe on the rights of others.

        In my view, President Clinton has been the best friend religious
freedom has ever had in the White House -- because he knows that while
government must never interfere with the way people worship, government
can make it a lot easier for people to worship. By doing so, we
strengthen not just our private and spiritual lives, but our public life
as well. Now I am proud to introduce President Clinton, as he takes
another critical step for religious liberty.  Mr. President ...


