RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Peter Rundlet ( CN=Peter Rundlet/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-SEP-1997 09:56:50.00

SUBJECT:     Race relations form letter

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Jim Dorskind and Kyle Baker in Correspondence have drafted the following
form letter to respond to the multitude of letters coming in about race
relations in America. Could you please look it over and submit any
comments you have about it to me, so that we can finalize it and put it to
use?

Thank you.

The letter, to be signed by the President, is as follows:


Thank you for sharing your views about race relations in America.

I have worked throughout my life to empower people who historically
have been excluded from political, economic, and educational
opportunities.  There are, of course, real differences in the life
experience and backgrounds of the people who make up America,
but there is also a rich fabric of shared experience -- of
common problems, common hopes and fears, common ground.  It
is of great importance for the future of our nation that we expand
that common ground, focusing more on what unites us than on what
divides us. And in pursuing this path we must engage in a public
dialogue'that is respectful, tolerant; and open.

On June 14, I announced the launch of "One America in
the 21st Century:  The President's Initiative on Race." This
initiative is designed to help us learn to respect
one another's differences while remaining a united nation. Through
dialogue, study, and action, we will work to increase our
understanding of race and promote policies and solutions that can
truly make a difference.  As I made clear in my speech in San Diego,
it is a matter of utmost importance that all citizens, regardless of
race, expand their common ground and focus more on what unites us than
on what divides us. This public discourse and action will help guide
us on the path toward greater unity.

I am confident that the President's Initiative on Race will help build
a stronger, more just, more united American community -- one that
offers opportunity and fairness for all of our citizens.  I urge you
to continue your efforts to advance our national dialogue. As I work
to help promote this dialogue, I urge you to do your part as well to
stand up against racism.

Thanks again for your interest in this critical issue


