RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-SEP-1997 12:35:47.00

SUBJECT:     Draft talking points for McCurry on NYTimes article on service summit

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]     )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Josh Silverman asked me to prepare something in case McCurry needs it on
the slightly negative article in today's Times on the service summit.  I
tried to strike a balance between taking responsibility for what Powell is
doing and distancing ourselves a bit.

Talking Points on PresidentsD, Summit Followup
September 23, 1997

 The President remains committed to the goals of the PresidentsD, Summit
for AmericaD,s Future in April in Philadelphia.  The SummitD,s goals for
children (a caring adult, a safe place, a healthy start, a marketable
skill, and a chance to serve) are key goals for the Administration.

 Administration officials are briefed regularly by officials from
AmericaD,s Promise, the 501(c) (3) non-profit organization chaired by
General Powell that is charged with following up on the summit.
AmericaD,s Promise is working with over 150 cities and states on follow-up
D&mini-summitsD8 around the country and is evaluating a large number of
new commitments from organizations that have been made since the summit
itself.  In addition, we understand that the organization is developing a
tracking system for existing commitments. [Note:    The Administration does
not run AmericaD, s Promise. Since it is a 501 (c) (3), we are prohibited by
law from sitting on its board or influencing its operations-.]

In addition to the important work by the corporate and nonprofit sectors
and individual citizens, the Administration is continuing its focus on
citizen service and children.  The federal government continues to move
forward to reach the summitD,s goals.

 Service and religious organizations have responded positively to the
PresidentD,s summit challenge that we would provide 50,000 new AmeriCorps
scholarships over the next 5 years to organizations that offer young
people the chance to serve. The response has been even stronger than
expected, with 77 organizations answering that challenge by offering to
sponsor 10,000 new AmeriCo"rps members.

 This summer, the Administration awarded National Service Scholarships to
over 1,600 high school students with outstanding records of community
service.  In the first year of this program, a host of leading community
"

organizations stepped forward to raise the local match for scholarships,
including the Kiwanis, Rotary, Lions, Veterans of Foreign Wars, the
American Legion, Elks, and WomenD,s Clubs.  Each high school principal was
invited to nominate a junior or senior for the scholarship. Next year, we
hope that all 20,000 high schools in the nation will participate.

 The Balanced Budget Act included a major investment in children's health
care, which will give many more children the "healthy start" that the
Summit recognized as so important.

 Since May, the Vice President has been leading the Coalition to Sustain
Success, a new partnership of civic .organizations that is working with
state and local government to menter families seeking te leave welfare fer
work.

  The Welfare te Werk Partnership is mebilizing businesses te hire welfare
recipients, se that these parents can meve inte the ecenomic mainstream
and improve their childrenD,s future .
. Federal agencies are fellewing threugh en the mere than 40 cemmitments
they made at the summit, which included mentering and tutering and
launching new partnerships with cerperatiens and nenprefits.   They are
alse centinuing te launch new initiatives and partnerships te reach the
summitD,s goals.

Ameng ether progress, the Cerperatien fer Natienal Service is taking the
lead to meet the SummitD,s goal of engaging an additional 2 million young
peeple in cemmunity service.   In June, HHS Secretary Shalala launched a
new partnership with the Girl Scouts, te teach girls abeut the dangers .of
substance abuse and other risky behaviers, featuring a new patch that Girl
Sceuts can earn by cempleting the pregram.    This menth, the Vice President
and Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman cenvened a Natienal Summit en Feed
Recevery, to develep a natienal strategy te increase gleaning efferts by
one-third by the year 2000.   In May, the Department of Justice cenvened a
new public/private Mentering Alliance to promote the SummitD,s mentoring
goal, disseminate infermatien about best practices, and determine how best
t.o link velunteers with the children wh.o need them.

Since April, the President has continued te speak about the imp.ortance .of
service and v.olunteerism te aUdiences, including the Business R.oundtable,
the C.onference .of Mayers, and the Welfare-te-Werk partnership, and in his
radie address.    He has stressed the impertance .of reaching the geals .of
the Summit in .order te give mere children what they need te grew up te be
preductive citizens.


