RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice    ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-SEP-1997 09:09:49.00

SUBJECT:   Draft revised Murray amendment--you said you want to give to Jack Lew

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here's the Murray information you requested:
1.      A comparison of current law, the Murray amendment, and the draft
proposal;
2.      An outline of the Murray amendment and draft proposal;
3.      A copy of the Murray amendment as passed by the Senate. with
proposed changes;

Note: In addition to the issues we discussed, the draft proposal also
precludes any state, even one with an existing waiver, from providing TANF
assistance for more than five years.

 Question: given this would you prefer to be silent in the Labor-HHS SAP?
Alternatively, OMB has drafted language saying 'This was considered in the
budget. We ended up with a GAO study and we'd rather leave it there."

This quote may explain the "Social Security number" comment:

"Mr. President, this body is about to go to a vote that is not one that is
unknown to this Senate .... that merely allows a woman who is a victim of
domestic violence a temporary waiver from the work requirements if she
needs to get medical care or she needs to change her Social Security
number so that she is not pursued by her abuser, or to put her children in
a safe place .... " Senator Murray, September 10, 1997

And a closing quote:

"It has been passed by the Senate three times. Not one Senator has spoken
against it. Not one Senator has voted against it. But every time it goes
behind closed doors in a conference committee it is pulled out.   That is
what happens to abused women constantly. In the light of day,everyone is
there to say, ' I support you,' but when they go behind closed doors they
are abused .... "   Senator Murray, September 10, 1997
==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Domestic Violence Provisions in Current Law, Senate Labor-HHS Bill, and Draft Proposal



                                       Current Law             Senate Labor-HHS        Draft Proposal
                                                               (Murray Amdmnt)

States can opt to exempt individuals   Yes                     Yes                     Yes
with a history of domestic violence
from work requirements and time
limits.
Exemptions from work                   No                      No (only "findings"     Yes
requirements and time limits must                              say so)
be temporary.
The number of welfare recipients a     No -- no matter how     Yes -- a state that     No, not directly -- ~
state must put to work is lowered by   many family             grants 10,000 family    state can lower its
the number of people granted a         violence waivers are    violence waivers        30,000 work
family violence waiver.                granted, 30,000         need only put 20,000    requirement only
Example: under current law, a state    welfare recipients      welfare recipients to   for those granted
with 100,000 adult welfare             must go to work.        work.                   temporary waivers
recipients has to put 30,000 of them                                                   who are provided
to work.                                                                               services to help
                                                                                       prepare them for
                                                                                       work.
States must provide services to        No                      No                      Yes
those victims of domestic violence
who they don't put to work but want
to count as working.
The number of people a state can       No -- no matter how     Yes -- a state that     No, not directly -- ~
exempt from the five year time limit   many family             grants 10,000 family    state can increase it
is increased by the number of          violence waivers are    violence waivers c~     time limit
people granted a family violence       granted, only 20,000    exempt 30,000           exemptions above
waiver.                                can be exempted         welfare recipients      20,000 only for tho
Example: under current law, a state    from the five year      from the five year      granted temporary
with 100,000 adult welfare             time limit.             time limit.             waivers who are
recipients could exempt 20,000                                                         provided services tc
from the five year time limit.                                                         help prepare them
                                                                                       for work.
States with prior waivers can have     Yes                     Yes                     No
time limits longer than five years.
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                   Outline of Murray Amendment


 (a) Findings -- The intent of Congress in enacting welfare reform was to allow states to grant
 individual, temporary waivers to victims of domestic violence without regard to other limits in
 the legislation.

  (b )Clarifications --
 .(l)(C) States shall not be limited in the number of waivers they grant.
  (l )(D) Individuals receiving waivers shall not be including for the purposes of determining a
  state's work participation rate, its time limit exemptions, or penalties for failure to meet minimum
  participation rates, failure to comply with child support requirements, or failure to comply with
. five year time limit on assistance.
  (2) Provision shall be made effective as if enacted in the welfare reform law.

 (c) Federal Parent Locator -- adds additional safeguards that information from the Federal Parent
 Locator used to locate deadbeat parents will not be disclosed if it could put at risk the health,
 safety, or liberty of a parent or child.


                                  Outline of Proposed Amendment


 (a) Findings -- The intent of Congress in enacting welfare reform was to allow states to grant
 individual, temporary waivers to victims of domestic violence within the context of the goals of
 work and personal responsibility.

 (b) Clarifications --
 (1)(C) States shall not be limited in the number of waivers they grant.
 (l)(D) A state will be eligible for a reasonable good cause exception to the penalites for failing to
 meet the work rates or for exempting more than 20 percent of recipients from the time limit if its
 failure is attributable to its provision of good cause domestic violence waivers.
 (l)(D) A good cause domestic violence waiver is one that is temporary, based on an
 individualized evaluation of need; and includes services designed to ensure safety, promote
 independence, and prepare for employment.
 (2) Provision shall be made effective as if enacted in the welfare reform law.
 (c) Federal Parent Locator -- adds additional safeguards that information from the Federal Parent
 Locator used to locate deadbeat parents will not be disclosed if it could put at risk the health,
 safety, or liberty of a parent or child.

 (d) Precludes any state, even one with an existing waiver, from providing T ANF assistance for
 more than five years.
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

                                    Proposed Amendment
              (Additions to Murray Amendment are underlined; deletions are striken)

SEC .. PROTECTING VICTIMS OF FAMILY VIOLENCE.

(a) Findings.--Congress finds that--

(1) the intent of Congress in amending part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
601 et seq.) in section 103 (a) ofthe Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-193; 110 Stat 2112) was to allow States to take into
account the effects of the epidemic of domestic violence in establishing their welfare programs,
by giving States the flexibility to grant individual, temporary waivers for good cause to victims
of domestic violence who meet the criteria set forth in section 402(a)(7)(B) of the Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C.602(a)(7)(B));

(2) the allowance of waivers under such sections was not intended to be limited by other,
Seflarate, ami insefleedeet flrovisions offlart A of title IV of the Social Secl:lfity Act (42 U.S.C.
601 et seq.) undermine the law's goals of work and personal responsibility;

(3) under section 402(a)(7)(A)(iii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 602(a)(7)(A)(iii)), requirements under
the temporary assistance for needy families program under part A of title IV of such Act may, for
good cause, be waived for so long as necessary; and

(4) good cause waivers granted pursuant to section 402(a)(7)(A)(iii) of such Act (42 U.S.C.
602(a)(7)(A)(iii)) are intended to be temporary and directed only at particular program
requirements when needed on an individual case-by-case basis, and are intended to facilitate the
ability of victims of domestic violence to move forward and meet program requirements when
safe and feasible without interference by domestic violence.

(b) Clarification of Waiver Provisions.--

(1) In general.--Section 402(a)(7) of the Social Security Act (41 U.S.C. 602(a)(7)) is amended by
adding at the end the following:

'(C) No numericallimits.--In implementing this paragraph, a State shall not be subject to any
numerical limitation in the granting of good cause waivers under subparagraph (A)(iii).

'(D) Waivered individuals not included for purposes of certain other provisions of this part. -- A
state will be eligible for a reasonable good cause exception as defined in Section 409(b) if it
demonstrates that its failure to meet the requirements of Section 407(a) or 408(a)(7) are
attributable to its provision of good cause domestic violence waivers. --Any individl:lal to vfRom
a good cal:lse 'Naiver of cOFRflliance with this Act has beee granted in accordance with
S$flaragrHflh (A)(iii) shall not be incll:lded for fll:lFfloses of detefHl:ining a State's cOFRflliance
with the flarticiflation rate reql:lirements set forth in section 407, for fll:lfJloses of Hflfllying the
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

lim.itatios deseribed is seetios 408(a)(7)(C)(ii), or for fH:lfpOSeS ofdetefH!:isisg whether to im.pose
a pesalty 1:IRder paragraph (3), (5), or (9) ofseetios 409(a).'.

(E) Good cause domestic violence waiver defined.      nA good cause domestic violence waiver
means a waiver granted in accordance with subparagraph (A)(iii) that is (i) temporary; (ii) based
on an individualized evaluation of need; and (iii) includes services designed to ensure safety,
promote independence, and prepare for employment.

(2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) takes effect as if it has been included
in the enactment of section 103 (a) of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-193; 110 Stat. 2112).

(c) Federal Parent Locator Service.--

(1) In general.--Section 453 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 653), as amended by section
5534 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 Stat. 627), is amended--

(A) in subsection (b)(2)--

(i) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by inserting 'or that the health, safety, or liberty or a
parent or child would be unreasonably put at risk by the disclosure of such infonnation,' before
'provided that';

(ii) in subparagraph (A), by inserting', that the health, safety, or liberty or a parent or child
would be unreasonably put at risk by the disclosure of such infonnation,' before 'and that
infonnation'; and

(iii) in subparagraph (B)(i), by striking 'be hannful to the parent or the child' and inserting 'place
the health, safety, or liberty of a parent or child unreasonably at risk'; and.

(B) in subsection (c)(2), by inserting', or to serve as the initiating court in an action to seek and
order,' before 'against a noncustodial'.

(2) State plan.--Section 454(26) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 654), as amended by
section 5552 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 Stat. 635), is
amended--

(A) in subparagraph (C), by striking 'result in physical or emotional harm to the party or the
child' and inserting 'place the health, safety, or liberty of a parent or child unreasonably at risk';

(B) in subparagraph (D), by striking 'of domestic violence or child abuse against a party or the
child and that the disclosure of such infonnation could be hannful to the party or the child' and
inserting 'that the health, safety, or liberty of a parent or child would be unreasonably put at risk
by the disclosure of such infonnation'; and
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

(C) in subparagraph (E), by striking 'of domestic violence' and all that follows through the
semicolon and inserting 'that the health, safety, or liberty of a parent or child would be
unreasonably put at risk by the disclosure of such information pursuant to section 453(b )(2), the
court shall determine whether disclosure to any other person or persons of information received
from the Secretary could place the health, safety, or liberty or a parent or child unreasonably at
risk (if the court determines that disclosure to any other person could be harmful, the court and
its agents shall not make any such disclosure);'.

(3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect I day after the
effective date described in section 5557(a) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law
105-33).

(d) Waivers. --
m In general, Section 415(a)(1) is amended:
CA) in subparagraph CA) by inserting "or Cc)" before", if any waiver"
CB) following subparagraph (B) inserting "Cc) Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, a
state shall be subject to the provision of section 408(a)(7). "


