RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 15-0CT-1997 11:59:08.00

SUBJECT:   policy announcements at the WH Conf.

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Following up on our meeting yesterday about policy announcements for the
Child Care Conference, Jen and I want to run an idea by you. As you know,
the two announcements that we discussed address 1) quality (through
focusing on the provider -- scholarships/loan forgiveness and background
checks), and 2) affordability (through creating a Treasury working group
of business executives). This means that we are making a policy
"downpayment" in two of the three areas we want ultimately to address in
the SOTU/budget submission, leaving out after-school care.

We have two options -- one is to keep the announcemnents as they are now,
and talk about after-school care in the President's remarks.  The other is
to make an announcement that addresses the need for after-school care,
thereby having an announcement in each of the three areas.

Here is the proposal:

As you may know, we have been working with "the Corporation for National
Service to explore the nexus between service and child care, specifically
with after-school care. As it turns out, CNS estimates that approximately
two-thirds of its national service programs work to address the needs of
children and youth, often in child care and after-school settings.
Thousands of AmeriCorps members, Learn and Serve America participants, and
Senior Corps participants are working alongside child care providers, educa
tors and community-based professionals, helping to expland and enhance
child care and out-of-school time programming.

CNS has developed, but apparently never formally launched, a new
partnership called the To Learn and Grow (TLG) initiative to coordinate a
network of public and private organizations committed to expanding access
to and improving quality of before and after-school programs by
integrating service and service-learning (it was developed as a result of
a Forum on Explanding Opportunities in Out-of-School Time held last
year).  The partners include CNS, HHS, DOE, National Association of Child
Care Resource and Referral Agencies, the School Age Care Project at
Wellesley (the founder and director of which is on the first panel of the
Conference), Save the Children, the YMCA, and others.  TLG builds on CNS's
exisiting programs by:

--Incorporating national service participants and community volunteers
into child care programs to provide additional hand to support the
delivery of care.

--Engaging children and youth in service-learning programs as one of the
variety of enrichment activities within out-of-school time programs.


The President could formally launch this new effort and/or release a new
"How-To Manual on Integration of Service & School-Age Care," which is a
joint publication between CNS and the Wellesley School Age Care Project
that examines the quality of school time programming, the integration of
service and school-aged care, national service resources, effective
national service programs, and service-learning activities for children
and youth.  It can be ready for our purpose, and we have draft for you to
review, if you'd like. We know you have a strong predisposition for not
releasing reports (with which we generally agree), but you may change your
mind when you see this one, as it provides a compelling overview of why
school-age care opportunities are important, what the research shows
about their positive effects on children in the short and long terms, and
how communities can join service and school-age efforts.

Let us know what you think. and if you'd like to discuss further.
