RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Lyn A. Hogan ( CN;Lyn A. Hogan/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-APR-1997 17:52:44.00

SUBJECT:     Q&A and Press Backgrounder for Cabinet Meeting

TO: Julia R. Green ( CN;Julia R. Green/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sylvia M. Mathews ( CN;Sylvia M. Mathews/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kevin S. Moran ( CN;Kevin S. Moran/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christa Robinson ( CN;Christa Robinson/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Kathryn o. Higgins ( CN;Kathryn o. Higgins/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elaine C. Kamarck ( CN;Elaine C. Kamarck/O;OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Phillip Caplan ( CN;Phillip Caplan/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Barry J. Toiv ( CN;Barry J. Toiv/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Donald A. Baer ( CN=Donald A. Baer/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Anne E. McGuire ( CN=Anne E. McGuire/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Emil E. Parker ( CN;Emil E. Parker/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Eli G. Attie ( CN;Eli G. Attie/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice     ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  NPR is also finalizing a one-page chart breaking down each agency's
hiring commitments which they will send you shortly.;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   o 00:00:00.00
                               The White House, Cabinet Room
                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                      1:30 p.m.-2:30 p.m.                        Hex·DiJmp Conversion
                                         April 10, 1997

Announcement
Today, President Clinton holds the first full cabinet meeting of his second term to receive
responses to his March 8, 1997 directive asking all Federal agencies to develop plans to hire
welfare recipients. All of the Cabinet agencies, as well as over 100 non-Cabinet agencies and
departments, have submitted hiring plans to the President through the Office of the Vice
President. To date, the Cabinet agencies estimate they can directly hire into the Federal
government 8,000 welfare recipients during the first two years of this program. And some
agencies have already committed to hiring at least 2,000 more over the next two years bringing
the initial total to 10,000. Further, most agencies will be encouraging their grantees and
contractors to hire welfare recipients.

The President is also releasing today new data showing that welfare caseloads have declined by
2,755,000 or 20 percent during his first term and he is announcing plans to meet in May with a
large group of corporate CEOs to discuss their specific commitments to make the welfare reform
effort a success.

Background
On March 8, 1997, President Clinton directed each head of a Federal agency or department to use
all available hiring authorities to hire and retain welfare recipients in jobs in the government. The
President called for agencies to prepare individualized plans for hiring and retaining welfare
recipients.

Each head of a Federal agency or department was asked to assess its hiring capacity and to
develop a hiring and job retention plan suited to that particular agency's workforce, resources,
and needs. All Cabinet agencies and over 100 non-Cabinet agencies and departments have
responded.

Since signing the historic welfare reform law, the President has urged businesses, non-profit
organizations, and religious groups across the nation to help make its promise of opportunity real
by offering jobs to welfare recipients. In today holding a special Cabinet meeting to discuss the
hiring plans of all agencies, the President helps to ensure that the federal government, as the
nation's largest employer, does its fair share to move welfare recipients to work.

Making Welfare Reform Work
The Federal government hiring effort is only one piece of President Clinton's larger strategy to
make welfare reform a reality. First, the President is visiting state legislatures to share the
country's best welfare to work practices and to encourage every state to rise to the challenge he
has laid out to them. Second, the President has enlisted key members of the business community
in his effort, soliciting pledges of help form major CEOs and working to build a larger network
of business people who will hire welfare recipients. Third, he continues to reach out to nonprofits
and the faith community, similarly urging them to meet his challenge and offering them
information and expertise on how to do so. Finally, the President has included $3.6 billion in his
FY 1998 budget for several welfare to work initiatives including tax credits and other incentives
for businesses that hire people off welfare; incentives for job placement firms and states to create
more jobs for welfare recipients; and transportation and child care to help people go to work.
                                                                        Automated Records Management System
Federal Government Employees                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

·      There are 1.9 million Federal employees nationwide

·      Federal employees represent 1.5% of this country's workforce

·      Last year, the federal government hired over 190,000 permanent and temporary workers.

·      There are 1,513 employees in the Executive Office of the President -- a number including
       all employees of the Office of Management and Budget, the US Trade Representative, the
       National Security Council, the Domestic Policy Council, the National Economic Council,
       and others

Additional Hiring Power In the U.S.

·      There are 826,000 U.S. businesses with more than 20 employees

·      There are 1.1 million nonprofit organizations (not including congregations).

·      There are 135,119 congregations with more than 200 members and 205,583
       congregations with more than 100 members.

The Welfare Rolls

·      There are 20 percent fewer people on welfare than the day the President took his first
       oath of office -- the largest decline in the history of the welfare system.

·      The welfare case load fell by 2,755,000 from 14,115,000 in January 1993 to 11,360,000 in
       January 1997, decreasing as much in the last four years as it increased in the first 25 years
       of the program.

·      Before the President signed the welfare reform bill, he worked with states to test reform
       strategies, giving 43 states waivers from federal rules to experiment with reforms that
       required work, imposed time limits, and demanded personal responsibility. In 1993, the
       President made work pay better than welfare for 15 million low income families through
       an expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit which he proposed and the Congress
       adopted.




                                                2
                                                                     Hex-Dump Con\le:sion

                                      Q&A
               The Federal Government Plan to Hire Welfare Recipients


Question:   How many welfare recipients is the Federal government comitted to hiring?

Answer:     To date, the Cabinet agencies estimate they can directly hire into the Federal
            government 8,000 welfare recipients during the first two years of this program.
            And some agencies have already committed to hiring at least 2,000 more over the
            next two years bringing the initial total to 10,000. Further, most agencies will be
            encouraging their grantees and contractors to hire welfare recipients.

Question:   Hiring a total of 10,000 welfare recipients over four years seems ambitious. Are
            these figures realistic?

Answer:     This is an ambitious plan and it is a testament to the leadership and creativity of
            this Administration. However, you must remember that these numbers are
            preliminary estimates and may go up or down depending on future budgets as well
            as the success of agency outreach and retention plans, and other factors such as
            the strength of the economy.

Question:   These numbers seem modest given the enormity of the problem. Why are they so
            skimpy?

Answer:     Actually, these numbers represent what is essentially the Federal government's
            fair share of the effort to hire welfare recipients. The Federal government is
            approximately 1.5 percent of the nation's workforce. To meet its portion of the
            President's challenge to move 2 million people off of welfare by the year
            2000--which amounts to moving about 700,000 adults into the workforce -- the
            Federal government ought to hire about 10,000 welfare recipients. As you can see
            on the chart we've handed out, the Federal government has committed to hiring
            close to 8,000 welfare recipients in the first two years, and we fully expect that
            number to grow once agencies complete more surveying and have their programs
            fully operational.

Question:   What sort of hires are included in the 10,000 figure?

Answer:     All agencies have surveyed their existing hiring capacity and have reported
            available entry-level positions through all existing hiring capacities including the
            Worker-Trainee program the President encouraged them to use. The 10,000
            number refers only to those who would be hired directly by the Federal
            government. Additionally, many of the agencies will be encouraging their
            grantees and contractors to hire welfare recipients, thereby further increasing the
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
            number of recipients likely to be hired.
Question:   What are the common elements of each plan?

Answer:     While every agency plan is different, most plans address the following elements:
            Agency hiring capacity and available resources; plans for outreach to potential
            employees both within the Federal government and in the private for-profit and
            nonprofit sectors through government contractors and grantees; job preparation
            including formal training, job readiness and education; and plans to retain
            employees once hired including addressing child care and transportation issues, as
            well as using existing Employee Assistance Programs and creating mentoring or
            buddy programs to address personal issues that may arise.

Question:   How are you going to hire welfare recipients at a time government is downsizing
            and budgets are tough?

Answer:     It is true that the government has been downsizing. Since the President took
            office, he has actually shrunk the Federal government to its smallest size in three
            decades. However, downsizing does not mean that there are no jobs to fill. As in
            any organization, there is a natural amount of turnover injobs at all levels. The
            Federal agencies have surveyed current vacancies and have committed to reaching
            out specifically to the welfare population to fill those positions.

Question:   How many Federal employers are there and what percentage of the workforce
            does that represent?

Answer:     There are 1.9 million Federal employees that account for 1.5% of the nation's
            workforce.

Question:   How much will this effort cost?

Answer:     This effort should not cost anything. All personnel offices conduct recruitment
            and outreach as part of their normal activities and build in these necessary
            activities as part of their normal budgets. Essentially, we are expecting agencies
            to carry this out within their existing budgets.

Question:   Will agencies be hiring only in Washington, D.C.?

Answer:     No. We're talking about jobs all over the country. More than 85 percent of
            federal jobs are located outside the Washington metropolitan area.

Question:   The White House has over 1,500 employees. Why is the White House hiring only
            six recipients?



                                              2
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion   ·

Answer:     While this number might sound small, it is actually comparable to other agency
            hiring targets when compared to the percentage of each agency's workforce. For
            example, the Department of Transportation has committed to hiring 206 welfare
            recipients, the GSA 65 and DoD 1,605--but each is hiring approximately the same
             percent of its total Federal employees.

            Further, the White House is ready to hire six welfare recipients now. Once the
            White House program is in place and the initial six are hired, we expect to
            continue to hire more over the coming years.

Question:   In which departments will the White House place the first six welfare recipients?

Answer:     One of the first welfare recipients will be placed in the Domestic Policy Council,
            the agency primarily responsible for welfare reform. Others will be placed
            through the Executive Office of the President.

Question:   Aren't you favoring welfare recipients over everyone else?

Answer:     We are not creating any preference such as the one that exists for veterans. We
            are encouraging the departments to use an existing hiring authorities, including
            programs that allow departments to cut through red tape and hire entry-level
            workers quickly and easily. We are also encouraging outreach efforts. This is
            the same commitment that the President has asked of the private sector.

Question:   Why are we specifically helping welfare recipients rather than other poor people?

Answer:     We make no·apologies about the fact that we are asking the agencies to hire needy
            single mothers with children. These are the people whom it is most crucial to
            reach and put on the track of work. We want to help these families move from
            dependence on welfare to independence through self-sufficiency.

Question:   Now that the agencies have turned in their plans, what are the next steps?

Answer:     Agencies will begin working right away to fill available jobs by reaching out to
            welfare recipients to notify them of those jobs, and to fully use the existing
            programs to help recipients take and keep the jobs.

Question:   Why did it take the Administration so long to get its hiring program off the
            ground?

Answer:     The Federal hiring process has lots of complex rules and regulations and it took
            some time to figure out the best ways for agencies to hire entry-level people
            quickly and easily. We are thrilled that so many of the agencies presented us with


                                             3
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                    creative and ambitious plans that show their commitment and leadership to the
                    pressing issue of moving welfare recipients permanently into the workforce.

        Question:   Does the President think federal government hiring is the way to reform welfare?

        Answer:     The Federal government's role is an important one, but it is only part of the
                    formula for success. The President wants the Federal government to do exactly
                    what he has asked the private sector to do -- help meet his challenge to move 2
                    million people off the welfare rolls by the year 2000, and to continue to move
                    recipients into work thereafter. The President is extremely pleased that all of his
                    Cabinet Secretaries and other agency and department heads have response so
                    enthusiastically.

        Question:   What can you tell me about the meeting the President is planning with business
                    leaders in May?

        Answer:     As you know, the President has met several times with key business leaders to
                    discuss their role in making welfare reform a success. Most recently, the
                    President met with 14 CEOs of major corporations, each of whom pledged to
                    become involved in this effort. Now, this May, the President will again meet
                    with many of those CEOs as well as 25 additional CEOs to talk about their
                    specific commitments to the welfare to work effort.

        Question:   Nearly half of the total hiring figures you've cited for all Cabinet agencies come.
                    from the Department of Commerce's commitment to hire 4,000 people to help
                    with the Census. Don't these temporary hires artificially inflate your numbers?

        Answer:     We are extremely pleased that the Department of Commerce has committed to
                    hiring so many people over the next four years to do work on the 2000 Census.
                    Most of these jobs will last up to six months while some will last up to one year.
                    There will also be options for some of the individuals to be converted to
                    permanent employment. However, as you know, every job is significant because
                    whether it is short term or long term, ajob offers a welfare recipient valuable
                    work experience and on-the-job training that can help her achieve permanency in
                    the labor market. Further, even without the Census numbers, the Cabinet
                    Secretaries' numbers are extremely significant and only represent a start. Once
                    agency programs are up and running, we will likely see the numbers continue to
                    rise.




                                                     4


