RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna (-CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-0CT-1997 11:30:22.00

SUBJECT:   Service-race link

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here's some interesting stuff, via John Gomperts of the Corporation for
National Service.

1. Apparently Martin Luther King day was designated as a day of service
under a 1994 law pushed by Harris Wofford when he was a Senator -- "a day
on, not a day off." King was pro-service and made a famous service
quote:  "Everybody can be great because everyone can serve." So every
year, the service world (there is one) organizes all kinds of service
events on January 15.   The Martin Luther King Commission is apparently
designated in the law, along with the Corporation, to implement this.
(MLK Commission is apparently somewhat adrift.)

Better yet, the Corporation has $250,000 in demo money'to fund little
$2,000 to $5,000 mini-grants for local groups to organize local days of
service. This is the 2nd year they've done these grants. They got 500
applications, many more than last year.   And they will be ready to
announce the grants in about two weeks.    (I assume they could hold this
if we wanted, although not for too long.) Harris was hoping that the
President would participate in the MLK day of service this January, and
could plug the Corporation's reauthorization then.

2. Harris has been     approached by Dexter King (King's son) and a service
organization called    "Do Something" about something called the Kindness and
Justice Curriculum.     Corp. doesn't know much about it yet, but it might be
service learning of    some sort. They want to make it part of the MLK
holiday celebration.     They are also approaching Tom Kean.

3. Harris & co. are focusing more on AmeriCorps and less on service
learning in their thinking on the race-service link so far.  Two prominent
AmeriCorps programs    CityYear and Public Allies -- focus very
consciously on race as part of the service experience, and could speak at
a town hall. There is a guy named-Alan Khazei at CityYear who is a
thinker/statesman on service. You could have thinkers talk and then young
people from different backgrounds talk about their experience serving
together, the good and the bad.

4. The Corp. will have a new study soon on problems in racial diversity
in AmeriCorps and how to do better. Gomperts says they really wouldn't
want to release this report, but perhaps something could be done as an
offshoot.  I'll try to find out more about it. AmeriCorps is apparently
very diverse, and that can create issues.
    ARMS Email System
     p   ии
                                                                                    Pagel of 5


