         RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

         CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

         CREATION DATE/TIME:24-0CT-1997 20:32:51.00

         SUBJECT:

         TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TEXT:
         EK:

         Language for the weekly on the assaults directive:

         Next week we will recommend that you sign a directive to study and
         potentially ban a new class of modified -- or "sporterized" -- assault
         weapons. Generally, this directive will suspend action on all pending and
         future permits to import these weapons until Treasury re-examines the
         criteria under which firearms are deemed to be sporting and, thus, allowed
         to be imported. While only a limited number of these firearms have come
         into the country over the past few years (10,000 in 1995, 25,000 in 1996,
         and 20,000 to date this year), applications are now pending to import as
         many as 900,000 of these firearms.  This action mirrors the assault pistol
         directive you singed in 1993 when announcing the Crime Bill.

         The one issue we have not resolved is whether or not the Administration
         should take the additional step of temporarily suspending permits that
         have already been granted. Gun control advocates (i.e., Senator Feinstein
         and Handgun Control) argue that we have the authority to do this and
         should. Additionally, they point out that President's Bush's action in
         1989 to temporarily ban assault rifles included current permits -- and was
         ultimately upheld by the courts. Administration lawyers, however, believe
         that there is a substantial litigation risk if we do.  They argue that the
         1989 decision was rejected by the district court and later overturned by
         the appeals court in a split panel decision. More importantly, they are
         concerned that the factual circumstances surrounding the 1989 decision
         were different and are not present now.

         For our part, we have two competing concerns: (1) We are concerned that,
         in addition to the existing permit for 2,600 Galils with which Senator
         Feinstein is concerned none of which have actually entered the country
         yet), there are existing permits for another 300,000 "sporterized"
         firearms, and that a large number of these firearms could be importe~
         during the review period called for in the directive; and (2) we are less
         concerned about the imminent court challenge to Administration action on
         current permits, than we are about tha"t short-term decision negatively
         impacting -- in a variety of ways -- our long-term policy on "sporterized"
         assault weapons once the review is completed.    To address these issues, we
         are working with Treasury, Justice and White House Counsel to make sure we
         have all the facts for the strongest possible case -- as well as
         considering some compromise options. Also, we have met with staff from of
         the offices of Senators Feinstein and Biden, Representatives Schumer and
I-




     McCarthy, and Handgun Control to ensure that they have been consulted on
     this difficult issue.


