      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:31-0CT-1997 17:38:11.00

      SUBJECT:   SSI meeting with Sylvia on Monday

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      Monday at 1pm, Ken Apfel will present his tentative plans for the "30-day
      top-to-bottom review" of SSA's reevaluation of children under the new
      disability standard, which he promised at his confirmation hearing last
      month.   Here is a briefing of what they will say and my comments.

      Overall, it's pretty good but will still disappoint advocates. However,
      it is hard to satisfy them without reopening major issues that shouldn't
      be reopened.

      Ken's report will end up taking more like 6-7 weeks -- it looks like late
      next week or early the next.

      SSA will agree to re-review the cases of 17,000 mentally retarded children
      dropped from the rolls.    Apparently the number of such cases has been
      overstated at 40,000 because SSA coded many cases as MR inappropriately.
      Nevertheless, they are concerned about why they have dropped 17,000, since
      children who meet a clinical diagnosis of MR should remain eligible.
      In response to reports from advocates that staff discourage families from
      appealing, or from exercising their right to continue benefits during an
      appeal,   SSA will send new notices to the 75,000 children denied to date
      whose families did not appeal or did not exercise their right to
      continuing benefits, explaining their rights to them.   SSA will also
      announce it has retrained its workers on this issue.
      In response to charges that the variation in cut-off rates among states
      demonstrates that the new standard is being implemented inconsistently,
      SSA will announce that it has rational explanations for most of the
      variations.   (Nationwide 43% of kids reviewed were cut off, but that
      varies from 18% to 65% depending on the state.)   However, in 6-8 states
      where they aren't uncertain, they will re-review all the cases.
      Advocates charge that some states are cutting off too many kids because of
      "failure to cooperate," when in fact the states are not trying hard enough
      to work with families who may have trouble understanding the notice.     In
      response, SSA will re-review all 10,000 of these cases.
      Generally, SSA has refused to consider changes to the underlying reg as
      part of this 30-day process, because they will have a more elaborate
      process for that, and because they do not want to stir false hopes that
      they will reconsider the underlying standard -- which is what the
      advocates want most.   However, SSA is considering announcing one.minor
      change to the reg as part of the 30-day review.   It has to do with
      splitting cognitive and communication impairments into two separate
      categories, allowing more children to qualify.
'.    -,

     All of these are good actions, and they are reasonably significant.
     However, the advocates will still be disappointed because it doesn't
     change the underlying reg, and also because they were hoping Ken would
     agree to a moratorium on case reviews while all this work is being done.
     SSA is strongly opposed to a moratorium, arguing it will send too hopeful
     a signal and allow a backlog to start to build up, but I am not totally
     convinced on their reasoning.

     On numbers, SSA originally estimated they would cut off 135,000 kids.   The
     actual rate is running somewhat below that. With these changes, SSA
     expects that the number of kids cut off would drop to 100,000.  I'm not
     sure strategically whether to make a big deal of that when this is
     released -- that would please the advocates, but could annoy congressional
     Republicans. On the other hand, the Republicans have been extremely
     supportive of everything we have done so far, so maybe a bit of criticism
     from them wouldn't be awful at this point, especially since these are just
     procedural, not policy changes .

     . I'm pretty sure OMB is fine with this from a money and policy standpoint.

     Finally, you sent me a note from the advocate Jonathan Stein complaining
     that HCFA is implementing the provision to grandfather Medicaid for these
     children that we got in the balanced budget act unfairly: by allowing
     states to require children to reapply.  I haven't quite untangled this,
     but if we can make it better, perhaps it could be part of the report.

     P.S.   I should note that the President said on September 10 in a meeting
     with advocates that he was asking SSA for a report on all this in 30
     days. When Ken said the same thing but with a later start point, we told
     advocates we would fold it all into one report.   So this report would
     presumably go to the President and the world simultaneously.   The
     alternative of sending it first to us and then to the world does not seem
     smart.


