     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Stephen C. Warnath ( CN=Stephen C. Warnath/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:10-APR-1997 19:34:36.00

     SUBJECT:   SSA benefits and Nazi War Criminals

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Here is what I did to try to improve our situation:

     1) I decided that I had to tell OMB not to let the amendment go up
     tomorrow.  The Ways and Means Committee said that technical amendments had
     to be submitted tomorrow, but in talking with DOJ leg types and others, I
     believe that we can submit it after that, if necessary. And if it is that
     good a proposal, I am advised that we can submit it as a stand-alone
     later.  The mark-up is not until the 23rd, I believe.

     2) This will allow time to set up a meeting with DOJ, SSA, and concerned
     organizations and individuals to discuss.  I have asked Public Liaison,
     who brought these concerns to my attention this afternoon, to set it up
     ASAP. It will probably be on Monday. SSA has identified their
     representatives -- DOJ is trying to figure out who their representatives
     should be.

     3) I got back to several individuals that had called with concerns that
     the proposal would not go up tomorrow and that they would be contacted
     shortly to set up a meeting. They are satisfied with this approach.

     SSA's concern is that a big story will break soon that SSA is financing
     the retirement of Nazis.

     I am told that DOJ had enforcement concerns about ending benefits that
     they feel are adequately (although perhaps not completely) addressed in
     the latest proposal draft. When considered in the context of wanting to
     end retirement funding for Nazis, they signed off on the language.   John
     Hogan was involved in those discussions and sign-off.

     Just how cutting off benefits concretely hurts enforcement has not been
     clearly explained so far.  The predominant theory goes something like
     this:  These are generally elderly -- perhaps feeble -- men who come
     before a judge for prosecution which could lead to deportation.  Early
     draft proposals apparently would have terminated benefits early in an
     administrative or judicial process.  If the judge knows that the old
     fellow's income that he needs to live and pay for his defense has been
     terminated, he is more likely to go easy on him, thinking that that is
     enough punishment.

     This sounds speculative and not very compelling, except that the Jewish
     organizations that contacted Public Liaison this afternoon and at least
     one former head of the war crimes prosecution office are adamant that
     while cutting off benefits for these individuals sounds good on its face,
     it would be "catastrophic" and "disastrous" for prosecutions.    The
     present head of DOJ's Office of Special Investigations that handles these
     cases apparently believes that there would be some enforcement
     implications, even with the language that DOJ has signed off on.


    So that is where things stand. If you would like to attend the meeting
    when it is set up, you would be very welcome.   If you do not attend, I
    probably need to discuss with you how we should proceed to resolve this
    in the best possible way if this meeting does not settle things.   Let me
    know.    And thanks for your help earlier.


