RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-NOV-1997 13:59:14.00

SUBJECT:   Elena, please examine reo fingerprinting

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP @.EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
HHS's rewrite after yesterday's meeting contained changes to preamble
language only.   Please examine below the changes to both the rule and the
preamble which I have made to I think better reflect yesterday's
conversation.

Section 271.42 Which reductions count in determining the caseload
reduction factor?

        (a) Each StateD,s estimate must factor out any caseload decreases
due to Federal requirements or State changes since FY 1995 that affect an
individualD,s eligibility for assistance.  These include:

         (1) Changes in eligibility rules that directly affect a familyD,s
eligibility for benefits (e.g., more stringent income and resource
limitations or time limits); and

        (2) Procedural changes that have the effect of significantly delaying or
denying eligibility (e.g., documentation requirements that create
obstacles to the receipt of assistance) .

A State need not factor out documented effects of enforcement mechanisms
which are used to enforce existing eligibility criteria (e.g.,
fingerprinting or other verification techniques) .


Preamble language for Section 271.42

Thus, we propose to give States credit for case load reductions except when
those caseload reductions arise from two kinds of changes in eligibility:
(1) changes in eligibility rules that directly affect a familyD,s
eligibility for benefits (e.g., more stringent income and resource
limitations or time limits); or (2) changes in procedural conditions of
eligiblity that also have a direct and significant effect on caseloads by
delaying or denying eligibility (e.g., documentation requirements that
create extra obstacles or delay receipt of benefits) .

Under this approach, we would not give States credit for case load
reductions due to new procedural requirements where such requirements
served simply as an obstacle that had the effect of keeping eligible
families from seeking or receiving assistance.  We would allow States to
get caseload reduction credit where new procedural requirements (such as
fingerprinting or other verification techniques) resulted in the


identification of families that were ineligible under existing eligibility
rules.  In making this distinction, States could report the actual number
of cases identified as fraudulently seeking benefits or as well as cases
identified through they could use a sample to determine what percentage of
cases which were deterred because they were ineligible (and not accurately
reporting their circumstances). Unless a State provided documented
evidence that cases were diverted from the rolls due to fraud or
misreporting, we would exclude all cases diverted from the rolls by
procedural requirements from the StateD,s caseload reduction credit.D,

Through this policy approach, we are seeking to achieve the balance
identified by Congress: that a State should receive credit for moving
families off welfare, but should not be able to avoid its accountability
for work as a result of any changes that restrict program eligibility.


