RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
                         -
CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-NOV-1997 18:23:58.00

SUBJECT:    Draft

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP   @   EOP [ WHO 1 .)
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I haven't looked at this yet.
---------------------- Forwarded by Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP on 11/07/97
06:22 PM ---------------------------



           Jordan Tamagni
           11/07/97 06:12:45 PM

Record Type: Record

To: Richard Socarides/WHO/EOP, Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP, Thomas L.
Freedman/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject: Draft

Obviously, I'll be cutting for length, reordering, etc.      But here's a
draft.


Draft 11/7/97 6:00pm

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR THE WHITE HOUSE
CONFERENCE ON HATE CRIMES
THE EAST ROOM
November 10, 1997
 Acknowledgments: VP Gore; AG Reno; to all the people around the country
who are joining us by satellite.

 America is the worldD,s most diverse democracy, bound together across all
of our differences by a belief in the basic dignity of every human being
-- and the basic right of every American who lives by our laws and lives
up to his or her responsibilities to share in the full promise of our
great nation.

 Allover the world we see what can happen when racial and ethnic
animosity join forces with lawlessness, and tear countries and peoples
apart. And even in America, we hear too many stories of violence
motivated by hatred. Stories like the 13-year-old African American boy
who was brutalized and nearly beaten to death when he rode his bicycle
through the wrong neighborhood ... the gay American who was murdered as he
walked home from a dinner party with his partner ... the Asian American
business owner who lost her store to a firebomb hurled by a racist.

    ·
 These violent acts are not just despicable examples of bias and bigotry
-- they are crimes.  And more than any other criminal act, they strike at
the heart of what it means to be American, for they are the antithesis of
the values that define us as a nation:  Freedom.  Equality.  Respect for
each other. And respect for the laws that reflect our ideals and preserve
our civil society.

 We are here today to talk about what we can do to fight hate crimes in
our communities -- and to fight the ignorance, prejudice, and fear that
produce them.   To meet this challenge, we must take action -- at every
level of government, in every community, and in every home.

 First, we must do everything we can to make sure our nationO,s laws
protect all of our citizens. Our laws already prohibit and punish crimes
committed against people on the basis of race, religion, and national
origin. But we can go even further.   Today I am proposing to expand the
principal federal hate crimes statute to include sexual orientation,
gender, or disability.  I am especially pleased that Senators Spector and
Kennedy have agreed to introduce legislation to achieve this goal -- and I
will.support and fight to make it the law of the land.

 Second, we must make sure that our civil rights laws are consistently and
vigorously enforced.  Under Attorney General RenoO,s extraordinary
leadership, the Justice Department taken aim at hate crimes -- and the
people who commit them, with more prosecutions and tougher punishments.
Today, I am pleased to announce the creation of a national network of Hate
Crimes Working Groups. This unique network -- which builds on the efforts
of several U.S. Attorneys -- will marshal the resources of federal, state
and local law enforcement, communities, and advocacy groups to develop
enforcement strategies, to share best practices, and to educate the pubiic
about hate crimes.

 I am also pleased to announce that we will assign over 40 FBI agents and
prosecutors to work on hate crimes enforcement. And the Justice
Department will soon make its model hate crimes law enforcement training
curriculum available to police departments and communities around the
country. Finally, the Department of Housing and Urban Development will
launch a new initiative to help victims of hate crimes sue their' attackers.

 When it comes to enforcing civil rights laws, we need strong leadership.
This year, I nominated an exceptionally qualified person to head the Civil
Rights Division of the Department of Justice.  The son of Chinese
immigrants, Bill Lee has seen the damaging force of discrimination, and he
has dedicated his career to fighting it, without regard for ideology or
political party. He is the best person for this vitally important
position, and he deserves to be confirmed.  I urge Congress to act now to
confirm Bill Lee, and to ensure that our nationO,s civil rights laws are
fully enforced.

 Third, we know that for many reasons, too many hate crimes go unreported
-- and an unreported hate crime is an excuse to ignore the problem.   That
is why I am pleased to announce that the National Crime Victimization
Survey, which measures nationwide crime levels, will include questions
about hate crimes, starting in 1998. This small addition will yield large
results, by giving us a better measure of the number of hate crimes, by
increasing what we know about how they occur, and by encouraging hate
crime victims to report those crimes.

 Finally, and perhaps most important, we must teach our children that to
be American means to respect the basic dignity of every human being, and

        r.,'I
to stand up for it wherever and whenever they can.  That is why I am so
pleased that the Department of Education and the Department of Justice are
preparing a manual for educators, to help prevent hate crimes in their
schools, and to develop a comprehensive curriculum to teach tolerance and
mutual respect. And the Department of Justice will soon launch a new webs
ite for elementary school children called O&Hateful Acts Hurt Kids,08 to
teach younger students about prejudice.

 with these steps, we are drawing the line against hate crimes. We are
saying that in America, we will not tolerate hatred and discrimination; in
America, we will never let our differences divide us; in America, we truly
are one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

 And now, IO,m looking forward to hearing from all of you about what more
we can do to get tough on hate crimes.


