RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN;Jose Cerda III/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-NOV-1997 21:02:02.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly Item

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP@ EOP [ WHO 1
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN;Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
EK:

I know I can't master the weekly immigration item like Shima, but here
goes ...


Immigration --Central Americans/Haitians: House and Senate Republicans
essentially concluded their negotiations over the legislative package
intended to provide relief to certain Central Americans. Republicans came
to terms on the 2 remaining issues -- eliminating unskilled worker visas
and providing relief to certain Haitians.  Instead of eliminating the
entire unskilled workers visa category, the Republicans have agreed to cut
them in half (from 10,000 to 5,000) and to reduce diversity visas by 5,000
as well (from 50,000 to 45,000).

with respect to the Haitians, the Republicans have decided not to include
them in the current bill, and this presents us with a new challenge.
Although we worked with the Black Caucus and others this week to try and
have Haitians incorporated into the legislation, the Republicans balked.
As a result -- and as of late Friday night -- Senator Mosley-Braun has put
a hold on the DC appropriations/Centrai Americans bill and is asking the
Administration for a commitment not to deport certain Haitians until she
and others have time to pass additional legislation (or about 4 to 6
months, by her estimate) .

Working,with NSC and Justice, we have already started to discuss what
options the Administration may have to provide relief to certain
Haitians.  But there are important legal and policy issues we need to
consider further, and it seems unlikely that we will be able to give
Senator Mosley-Braun a specific commitment before the Senate reconvenes
Saturday.  For instance, as with the Central Americans, there is an
argument that -- as a matter of foreign policy -- you have the authority
to delay enforcing the deportation of certain Haitians. However, the
foreign policy rationale for invoking this authority seems weaker right
now for the Haitians than it did for all of the Central Americans.   Thus,
NSC would like more time to make a better case for the Administration.

Another possibility is that the Attorney General -- knowing that Congress
may pr'ovide relief to certain Haitians - - can exercise prosecutorial
discretion and not deport those Haitians.    For the Attorney General to
exercise such discretion, however, the Haitian proposal needs to be much
further along. Specific legislation needs to be introduced.     Support from


both parties' leadership needs to clearly articulated. And timing of the
legislation needs to be more definite. Currently, Senator Mosley-Braun
only seems to have loose commitments from Senators Mack and Abraham.
