RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN;Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-NOV-1997 20:03:40.00

SUBJECT:   Haitians

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,

DOJ/INS are willing to go along with prosecutorial discretion (holding
onto DED in our back pocket; maybe more that subtlely) with a couple of
strong cautions: (1) that we will likely revisit this decision in the
Spring -- they don't think that the AG will go along with prosecutorial
discretion past then. We will then have to decide whether to do DED or
resume deportation of Haitians; (2) that DED may be more difficult to
justify after we have pursued legislation.

However, if we decide to recommend that the President do DED, it would
likely have to be for a group larger than the Guantanamos -- it would be
difficult to justify, for foreign policy reasons, deporting some Haitians
and not others.

Rob Weiner agrees that we will likely face this problem again in the
Spring. He believes that we should think about whether we want to do DED
now, and only get politically hit once (though if we attempt to later
introduce leg. for the Guantanamos, we will still be hit twice).   Rob
agrees that the DED class would have to be larger, but believes that we
could carve out something that seems to make sense.   Scott is now
leaning toward DED. He thinks that the AG will be vulnerable to attack by
Rep. Smith if she exercises her discretion. When asked which group of
Haitians he would like to do DED for, he first thought the whole lot
(those in the country before Dec, 31, 1995). That is consistent wtih DED,
but inconsistent with our limited goal of providing relief for the
Guantanamo group.  Scott then said that he thought that DED could be
limited to those with final orders (they would not be deported).· That
makes the numbers tiny, and undermines the foreign policy rationale for
doing DED. OLCs only view is that DED is dangerous, and that they are
unable to make the judgment as to whether the legislation is likely to
move.

We told DOJ/INS that we would have a final decision to them tomorrow
morning. Though they were very vocal with their reservations, they are
willing to go along with prosecutorial discretion if that is what we
decide.  I set up a telephone appt. with Rob and Scott for first thing
tomorrow (S:30) so that we can finalize our recommendation before getting
on the phone again with Justice.  If you can do it, I think you should be
on the call.

Julie


