RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrew J. Mayock ( CN;Andrew J. Mayock/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO]            )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-NOV-1997 13:27:22.00

SUBJECT:   Enda Interview Q&A - Plse Review

TO: Audrey M. Hutchinson ( CN;Audrey M. Hutchinson/OU;PIR/O;EOP @ EOP [ PIR]                )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN;Maria Echaveste/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO]         )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN;Ann F. Lewis/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO]       )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Judith A. Winston ( CN;Judith A. Winston/OU;PIR/O;EOP @ EOP [ PIR ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Peter Rundlet ( CN;Peter   Rundlet/OU~WHO/O;EOP   @ EOP   [ WHO]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Minyon Moore ( CN;Minyon Moore/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO]       )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sylvia M. Mathews ( CN;Sylvia M. Mathews/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO]             )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached find the Q&A for the Enda interview.  Please review asap and send
comments to me.  The briefing needs to be to staff secretary within the
next hour. THANKS!

The areas with brackets are places where people suggested more language
but did not provide it.  Please feel free to add language there.  Also,
please fill in the parenthetical questions if you are responsible for that
area.  Thanks.

;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D33]MAIL44388423L.316 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504390050000010A02010000000205000000276E000000020000D451D74C4F43C214C8C661
C76E2F3018169B020EB50AB6F4F3ABC4034821CB406B2F01F1A197D5DC9DC44DD1F07427CCB4CB
39EE30559D49482A4F8B336E4141D496F93DCAA1E22546CDC7B771F7AFAE7B99490F59FEC09218
C68F2E6E2B0853E398EE6FFC7B8439F10824261722EA92367D588168827C7BOOCAOCC16B4DA963
9FOD9AD5414029350E720BED463405BA6096A4AB8801ECFB86EDAFC73B7FCCE2E379AE65F7CFF5
5FE3508D59CDE65345DC390C478B7134910F6654E2514638BF778D831A95BBEB043F70ECAAA495
941E9C87E606A6717072BFE791B58BF863A09D2157F4B472ACA57F886E459B3E9EOF41DBD41E49
AD782ACC9B5661AA682BB91B8C27857834AA483916CC65FOA4B95AC11A2A49419430FAF62F493B
8F64382ED73A53DA62635517BBEDF5DOD524EB4C8D05AB4C80187EE8C1C75A06571FCAA1DE03FB
DA9A91D693E7C8163209AB7985A4785EFA4EC08F7396BC838F8F85A2ADD80FB1FD79C64213E637
18COOBDD67CD336E39F7C770618AB91482678CD750674CB21844F85992BFB86E27F276434F8A83
                                                                                       Hex-Dump coann.agement SYstem
                                                                                                     verSIOn   ·
                         QUESTIONS PROVIDED BY JODI ENDA

Jodi Enda provided us with the questions in the following areas: Race Initiative Goals,
Affinnative Action, Stereotypes, Education, Civil Rights Enforcement, Discrimination by Police
and Courts, Conservatives. Also provide in this briefing are Q&A on related topics which may
arise during the Enda interview, the Akron Town Meeting or other press interviews you may do
on the day of the Akron Town Meeting.

Race Initiative Goals

What do you hope the race initiative will accomplish by the end of it's year run? Are you
satisfied with your progress thus far?

I hope the initiative will lead all Americans to respect each other's differences and, even more
importantly, to recognize their common values - - values of community, opportunity and
responsibility and thereby building One America. Ifwe do that, we can place the Nation on a
course to enter the next century ever stronger and more united.

I believe that we will be better prepared for the 21st century, because more Americans will
recognize the value of diversity as a source of strength for our nation_ We will respect each
other's differences, and have a greater appreciation for those values that unite us:
opportunity, responsibility, community. Keeping the American dream alive for all who will
take responsibility to work for it; keeping us One America, a ~ation coming together ,not
coming apart. And because of the work of the Initiative, I hope that more people will
understand the importance of this goal, and take action -as leaders in their own
community, in their business, in their everyday lives - people will act to keep us going in
this direction.

With energy and focus, we can make progress on all fronts - fighting separation and
discrimination and reducing the plight of the uilderclass, which has disproportionate
minority representation, and in lessening the racial prejudice that can strike people of any
class and background.

We're on the right track. At the end of the year we hope that more Americans will realize the
importance and strength of diversity and that our nation is going to continue to become more
diverse. There will be greater respect for each other's differences and a greater appreciation for
those things that bring us together as a nation. That race and its problems and solutions will be
consider in the context of those values that unite us. And most important, individuals,
communities, leaders, businesses and those of us in the public sector will act on that
understanding.
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion    · m
How is the Initiative Going to Achieve these Goals?

Policy Actions: We hope that action will occur in the private and public sector. I have already
announced a program to get good teachers into poor districts that are under served, many of
which are high minority districts. We have also announced better enforcement of our laws that
prevent housing discrimination. We plan to announce other policy initiatives in education,
housing, enforcement of existing laws, and health care. In the near future you will also see an
announcement with a private sector action that a particular industry is taking. (Mr. President
this is an announcement that Aida Alvarez is going to make with the Big 3. They have
committed to $3 billion in minority contracting. (Ck»

Recruiting Leaders: In order for our effort to succeed we must have participation from all parts
of the country. By recruiting leaders at the state and local level we hope to give our effort
breadth, depth, and longevity. Based on advice from my advisory board we are focusing
particular effort on education, corporate and religious leaders. After my religious breakfast,
Board member Reverend Cook together with White House and initiative staff met with a smaller
group of religious leaders to discuss the role they will play in the initiative. Today, (Monday) in
Miami, Secretary Slater and Board member Thomas are kicking off our corporate effort. The
Board in attending the ---education meeting received a commitment that they would do x (please
help on this one Judy.).

Promising Practices: In my experience, local communities are the source of some of the
best ideas, as in other fields like law enforcement and economic development. That is
what promising practices is about: helping to highlight examples of communities and
organizations that have ideas that help bring people together as One America. So that
other people can learn about these examples and perhaps bring them to their community,
or adapt parts of them for their use. We have a promising practices section on our Web
Site, we will have a display at the Akron Town Meeting, and Mrs Clinton will visit
Bostonon December 9 to highlight a program there, Team Harmony, that is bringing
together youth of different backgrounds in Boston.

Dialogue: [Detail areas where we are reaching out for diverse opinions.] Through the
initiative we hope to increase the dialogue in the nation. By discussing the things that bring us
together as well as those that are obstacles to coming together as One America, we will make
progress towards that goal. By honestly discussing the stereotypes and the realities that shape
people's views we hope to bring us closer to respecting one another's differences while drawing
together as one nation. Wednesday's dialogue with the community of Akron will stimulate and
build on dialogue throughout the nation. 54 watch parties will be occurring nation wide. The
Advisory Board, my Cabinet and subcabinet will also be leading round table discussions
throughout the country. The Advisory Board and Initiative staff have spoken with over 10,000
people. The issue is one that I discuss with almost every group I speak with in addition to those
events that are specifically focused on our initiative.
                                                                         Hex-DiJmp Conversion

The Board and Consultants (Chris Edley and Laura Harris): I wanted an Advisory Board and
our two Consultants to both give me advice and be my eyes, ears and voice on the issue of race.
The Board has already guided our efforts by helping us focus our policy efforts on education and
economics. They have advised me to focus on young people to create the strong leadership for
the future on this issue. From the can to action to 25,000 young people that I sent out last
Friday, to the PSA that we will announce on Tuesday that is targeted to young people, to the
University setting of this first town meeting I agree with the Board's advice that youth are an
important part of our effort. The Board has spoken to thousands of people already and are
helping us find more promising practices and recruit leaders to make our effort extend deeper
into the nation and carry on after the formal initiative ends.

Report to the Nation: My report to the nation win be a resource book for facts and a can to
action address to an Americans. It win set out my vision of One America where we respect each
others differences while drawing together as one nation. The report win include promising
practices and other actions that will help us move towards One America. It will also speak
frankly to some of the obstacles to getting to that point.

Is the pace too slow? Is the debate too one-sided?

You probably know that after my first meeting with the Board, I asked that the Initiative pick up
its pace, and I'm pleased that they have done so. I urge everyone to judge the intiative over the
long term, rather than in three-month instanments. I'm confident in the direction and the
momentum that are now underway: from the Youth Outreach and Corporate leaders meeting on
Monday, to the policy announcements on recruiting teachers and enforcing housing
discrimination. We had an excellent meeting with religious leaders last week, people who are
among the most respected leaders in their communities.

The Board has met with thousands of people, and they're going to meet with many more
--people with a variety of experience and viewpoints. For example, Angela Oh met with the Los
Angeles County Firefighters .. The American Council on Education (?) has offered to work with
the Initiative on issues about higher education. Jim Sleeper, an author who's written a book very
critical of our approach to affirmative action, was invited in to speak. He's got a different
perspective, as does Abigail Themstrom who win be included in our first Town Meeting.

So, I know that in the course of this year we will have spoken with a wide variety of people, and
that is going to be an important part of the contribution the Intiative will have made.

Are you satisfied?

These issues have been with us for a long time -- they are part of our history. So no, I don't
think we win solve them in one year. But making progress is also part of our history: moving
forward, with energy and focus, to live up to our ideals. Now as we work on making progress, it
helps to keep in mind that there are really two sets of problems around race. The first is a the
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conve:-sion ·
result of past practices, of discrimination and lack of opportunity.

Then there are problems of racial attitudes and stereotyping that impact people across economic
lines. People you and I work with, who face the issues of race every day. I believe we need to
work on both these areas: to increase the access to opportunity, in eduction and economics; and
to confront sterotyping and encourage dialogue. We've talked about each other and across each
other -- it's important that we talk with each other and move this country forward.
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
Affirmative Action

How can you accomplish your goals of diversity in the face of the current backlash against
affirmative action, especiaUy from those in the white community? What do you see as
possible alternatives to affirmative action?

[More Houston]

No one should pretend that achieving diversity and learning to do a better job with difference are
easy challenges -- for individuals or for our nation as a whole. But there is no more important
challenge facing us. We must become One America.

Affirmative action isn't perfect - - it only addresses certain pieces of the opportunity agenda, and
shouldn't conti~ue when it has served its purposes. But it would be a mistake to throwaway a
valuable, proven tool. I still believe what I said: Mend it don't end it.

We have to do affirmative action carefully, and always be looking for alternatives. But the
alternatives can't just sound good. The alternatives must be effective at moving us towards One
America, closing the racial divisions and gaps.

The critics have to be honest. Some are saying, "Forget affirmative action in college; instead
we'll fix k-12 education for everyone." But many of those same people won't support
opportunity programs, like Head Start and high national standards and Pell Standards. And
more importantly, the kind ofK-12 education reform agenda is still a long-term strategy - - by
itself it won't bring about right away.

I am convinced that candid examination of the issues - - of what our history has been, of where
we are now, and what we need to do to become One America with equal opportunity for all- -
will persuade people that there is still a necessary role for narrowly tailored affirmative action I
our society. For example, the people of Houston understood what they were voting on, and
people came together to defeat a sweeping anti-affirmative action measure.

At the same time, we should be taking the kinds of actions and building the kind of society that
will make affirmative action less and less necessary. That is one of my goals for this initiative.
Stereotypes                                                            Hex-DiJmp Conve:-sion -

How can the race initiative help curb destructive racial stereotypes? How can it help to
change attitudes? How can the race initiative help deal with stereotypes promoted by the
media itself?

The best way to confront stereotypes and change attitudes is for people to have honest
exchanges and real life experiences with people who are not just like themselves. That's
why dialogue is such an important part of the Initiative. That's why I'm going to Akron
for our first Town Meeting, so people will see an example of the kind of conversation
we're talking about.

And these meetings can have a ripple effect. When the Town Meeting is broadcast on
CSPAN on Tuesday, there will be more than fifty "watch parties" around the country
where people are going to watch our conversation and then continue with a dialogue of
their own.

We can change stereotypes with facts. That's why the Advisory Board has been charged
with collecting information, and getting that information into public discussion. Because
people need to understand what the facts are --and sometimes the facts about race are
different from the public perception. (Example: percentage of black population.) We
can't get to a better understanding if we don't know what the facts are.

Leadership plays an essential role here. That's why we are asking leaders in every sector
to consider what they can do . They can help encourage dialogue, they can get out better
understanding of the facts, they can set an example of racial understanding that will make
our country stronger.

And the media has a role to play, because they are also leaders. If you look at the history of
race relations in this country, it is clear that the media has played an important role. By
bringing out facts about the Civil Rights struggles of the 60s, the media really helped make
us One America at that time, in ways that made passage of civil rights legislation possible.
 But there are also examples where media coverage has confirmed stereotypes. Look at
what the Akron Beacon Journal did in their series on Race that won the Pulitzer in 1994.
That was the inspiration for the dialogue group that is active in Akron today.

I'm not suggesting that every newspaper should try to follow exactly that example
although it is a good one. The important thing is that leadership can make a difference.
Everyone of us can make a difference. And I hope the media, with their great power to
reach and inform, will also think of what they can do to bring us closer to One America.
Education                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion -

Other than school standards, what can be done to improve diversity in our nation's
elementary schools?

We should place a high value on racial and ethnic diversity at all levels of our education system.
Over the long term, having strong, diverse schools, with high expectations for every student, will
help all our students succeed in an increasingly diverse economy.

The best way to increase diversity in our schools is to improve they offer. We need to help
communities throughout America develop safe, disciplined schools that help all students master
the basics and reach high standards -- schools where students learn to read and to do math, where
they can get extra help if they need it, where they can learn to take advantage of the Internet, and
where they are taught from early on that a college education is within reach if they are willing to
work for it. Good schools with high expectations will attract all kinds of parents and students,
and the result will be a richer learning environment for all.

Forthis to happen we must attract highly qualified teachers to schools serving poor and
disadvantaged kids - - and I started the race initiative by proposing a plan to do just that. We've
also got to harness technology to insure that no matter where they go to school, in the inner city
or in poor rural areas, students have access to the same world of information on the Internet. And
we must begin to address the infrastructure needs facing schools around the country -- students
can't learn in buildings that are literally crumbling around them.

As important, to increase diversity in our nation's schools, we need to enhance public school
choice. Students and their parents should be able to choose from a wide variety of options
within the public school system, not just the school next door. That is one reason why I have
been such a strong supporter of public charter schools, which are open to students of all
backgrounds and stay open as long as they do a good job. Opening charter schools and taking
other steps to expand public school choice can counter the effects of residential segregation in
our school systems and make elementary, junior and high schools more diverse.
                                                                      NSii,Durnp Conversion
Civil Rights Enforcement

What changes or new policies do you hope to see implemented in the near future?

[Pitch for Bill Lann Lee]

Effective enforcement of our nation's civil rights laws is one of the key elements to ensuring that
racial or ethnic discrimination will not be used to deny the American dream to any individual or
class of Americans. We have laws on the books against discrimination that an overwhelming
majority of the American people support, and they need to be enforced vigorously. This is of
particular importance in the areas of housing and employment, where we continue to see
evidence that racial and ethnic discrimination plays a role in denying opportunities. We are
committed to strong civil rights enforcement as an important tool in our quest to become One
America.

We've already taken a number of actions in the course of this initiative to strengthen enforcement
of our civil rights laws. A few months ago, the Department of Housing and Urban Development
announced that it will double the number of civil rights enforcement actions it brings by the year
2000, and that it will focus resources on such practices as predatory lending and exclusionary
zomng.

And just last month, we took another step toward making sure that our nation's laws fully protect
all of its citizens. At the White House Conference on Hate Crimes, held on November 10, we
announced significant law enforcement and prevention initiatives to get tough on hate crimes,
including an amendment that will expand the scope of the law to include sexual orientation,
gender and disability, and make it easier to bring prosecutions. Also, the Department of
Housing and Urban Development and the Justice Department are launching an important new
initiative that will help victims of housing-related hate crimes bring action against their attackers
and get money damages for the harm they suffer.

In the near future, we will announce further plans to improve civil rights enforcement at all
agencies - - and especially at the EEOC. These initiatives will be designed to increase
compliance with the laws on the books and to develop new methods of dispute resolution that
will allow for claims to be resolved more quickly, without compromising fairness.
Discrimination by Police and Courts                                   Hex-Dump Cunve:-sion ·

Do you plan to address discrimination by the police and court system as part of the race
initiative?

If you mean will we enforce our civil rights laws against people in the criminal justice system
who may be guilty of discrimination -- you bet we will. Our overall strategy for civil rights
enforcement must hold public servants -- as well as private entities -- accountable if they break
our laws and discriminate. I want our criminal justice system to be fair and have the support of
all law-abiding Americans.

But there's another problem here. Members of minority groups worry - - indeed they have to
worry more than the rest of us - - about ordinary criminals. We must make sure that the criminal
justice system is meeting the public safety needs of all Americans. Racial and ethnic minorities
are more likely to be victims of crimes than others, and that shouldn't be the case.
Under-protecting minority communities is its own form ofunfaimess, and I will continue to do
everything I can to prevent it.

That's why I'm such a big proponent of our community policing initiative. It is not only helping
to drive down the crime rates, it is also strengthening the bond between community residents and
their police. Done right, community policing is not just improved community relations: it is
police and citizens working together, building trust and realizing that they need each other to
succeed in making their neighborhoods safer. Everywhere I go I hear about the difference our
community police officers are making, and it gives me great hope. So I think, as part of our race
initiative, we should try to build on community policing and look for new ways to make the
criminal justice system more responsive at the local level.
                                                                     Automated Records Management System
     Conservatives                                                           Hex-Dump Cuilve;:;ion

     In his letter to the President, Speaker Newt Gingrich expressed concern that the dialogue
     on race is becoming a monologue. Will the Advisory Board be open to hearing from a
     wide array of opinions or is it true that the Board will only invite people to participate in
     the process that agree with the President and the position of the Board?

     From the very beginning, I have clearly stated that we want to hear different viewpoints on the
     issue of race. In order for this effort to succeed, we need Americans of all races and
     perspectives to work together. In June in San Diego, the President asked all Americans to begin
     this conversation and to talk with and listen to each other. As you know, in many communities
     across the nation, such conversations have been underway for some time and many more have
     been stimulated by the President's call-to-action. These conversations have reflected differing
     views across the spectrum.

     As you may have read in the press, the President is planning a meeting called One America:
     President Clinton's Initiative on Race - The Akron Town Meeting which is being held on
     December 3, 1997. This meeting will be an opportunity for the President to hear from
     individuals who represent diverse opinions on how to achieve One America.


     Will the Advisory Board hear from University of California regent Ward Connerly?

     From its inception, I have been committed to a real dialogue, one with many voices and many
     perspectives. To be constructive, to address the issue of race, this cannot be a monologue. Mr.
     Connerly has been a vocal part of this dialogue and I suspect he will continue to be so. I spoke
     with Mr. Connerly at the kick-off of the initiative in San Diego and we have exchanged letters.

     It has been announced that Abigail Thernstrom will be speaking at the Akron Town
     Meeting. What do we hope that she'U bring to the dialogue?

     As we mentioned earlier, the President wants to hear a full range of viewpoints. Ms.
     Thernstrom is a well-regarded, articulate thinker on these issues and with her participation, we
     hope to advance this constructive dialogue on race.

     Is the Board just acquiescing to the pressures from the conservatives by inviting her to
     speak at the Akron Town Meeting?

     As we mentioned earlier, from the very beginning, the President has clearly stated that we want
     to hear different viewpoints on the issue of race. The decision to invite an individual to the
     Akron Town Meeting, whose views differ from that of the President's and the Advisory Board,
     was made before this criticism was raised. In order for this effort to succeed, we need
     Americans of all races and perspectives to work together.


