RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL           (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrew J. Mayock ( CN=Andrew J. Mayock/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]                     )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-DEC-1997 16:33:13.00

SUBJECT:     Final Q&A

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]                      )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Andrew J. Mayock/WHO/EOP on 12/01/97
04:34 PM ---------------------------




Sylvia M. Mathews
11/29/97 05:49:31 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject:         Final Q&A




Message Sent
To:
Jud~i~t7h~A-.~W71~·n-s~t~o-n~/=P=I=R~/=E~O~P~----------------------------------------

Minyon Moore/WHO/EOP
Beverly J. Barnes/WHO/EOP
Andrew J. Mayock/WHO/EOP
Peter Rundlet/wHO!EOP


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D93]MAIL48621643A.316 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043CB050000010A0201000000020500000097860000000200008F81935FBAA9EF2E0879E8
07EF51ED3D4C8897AE129ABC43E75DB46F28A7D7E19C58B506CA30026BF185086470E212BD2973
93C25CE939D2D83AB5D4A4COE67D1B4B7A503BC03C3264B1E64F1B92DC967F3853C6E8DC80F7F7
906D6F5EC41FFA15998FDA03B6BA06B611B6AFA2585DA6AD861D91A65CD01B8B491FEE19D35D11
3FCFF34B6235C3C03F3B998A3F7B79EE82B40A111BFOA5261C5C1ADEF7D2C980C7740B6853C554
932C53C1A1405DC823EBD81935E8CC3205C2928B8B66AFE6BOF9FO687C6D209D4150726FE0587F
3ABBEBE02DAF2C8C653CAE78F5DF9EE8E4BCBB52D1F9180E864C46408706E20E7239272D753DC4
783B51D5AF2E9B71AEBF10DOB06966549AE494907AC3289537171E4540C101DCAEAB39D35E3329
4EC1D9A5870566CC9FCOA4EF17219154F2DC1ED1B244002E97033A4267B54DB3E19CD8DFA644E1
E88CEA8C8402B9A88D1B3705404D1805DB491ED95AEEOEDA5C8A3E73D139848Bl1716C1A52F975
123D6Cl151CE2FE95DB6F457E80B6B454578CED2B9C8D17C4754E9B3AA22497B2109010EAC7553
                                                                                 neJ(·Dump Conversion
                         OUESTIONS PROVIDED BY JODI ENDA

Jodi Enda provided us with questions in the following areas: Race Initiative Goals, Affinnative
Action, Stereotypes, Education, Civil Rights Enforcement, Discrimination by Police and Courts,
and Conservatives. Also provided in this briefing are Q&As on related topics which may arise
during the Enda interview, the Akron Town Meeting or other press interviews you may do on the
day of the Akron Town Meeting.

Race Initiative Goals

What do you hope the race initiative will accomplish by the end of its year run? Are you
satisfied with your progress thus far?

       I hope the initiative will lead all Americans to respect each other's differences and, even
       more importantly, to recognize their common values - - values of community, opportunity
       and responsibility that will help build One America. Ifwe do that, we can place the
       nation on a course to enter the next century even stronger and more united.

       I believe that we will be better prepared for the 21st century, because more
       Americans will recognize the value of diversity as a source of strength for our
       nation. Those who work hard, play by the rules and take responsibility, should
       have the opportunity to achieve the American dream. And because of the work of
       the Initiative, I hope that more people will understand the importance of this goal,
       and act on these beliefs in their own community, in their business, and in their
       everyday lives.

       With energy and focus, we can make progress on all fronts - fighting separation and
       discrimination and reducing the plight of the underclass, which has
       disproportionate minority representation, and in lessening the racial prejudice that
       can strike people of any class and background.

How is the Initiative Going to Achieve these Goals?

       Policy Actions: We hope that action will occur in the private and public sector. I have
       already announced a program to get good teachers into poor districts that are under
       served, many of which are largely minority districts. We have also announced better
       enforcement of our existing laws that prevent housing discrimination. Throughout the
       next year, we also plan to announce other policy initiatives in education, housing,
       enforcement of existing laws, and health care. We are also working with the private
       sector on actions they may take.
                                                                      Hex·Dump Conversion

Recruiting Leaders: In order for our effort to succeed, we must have participation from
all parts of the country. By recruiting leaders at the state and local level we hope to give
our effort breadth, depth, and longevity. Based on advice from my advisory board, we
are focusing particular effort on education, corporate, youth and religious leaders. After
my religious breakfast two weeks ago, Board member Reverend Cook together with
White House and initiative staff met with a group of religious leaders to discuss the role
they will play in the initiative. Today, (Monday) in Miami, Secretary Slater and Board
member Thomas are kicking off our corporate effort.

Promising Practices: In my experience, local communities are the source of some of
the best ideas, as in other fields like law enforcement and economic development.
That is what our promising practices are about: helping to highlight examples of
communities and organizations that have ideas that help bring people together as
One America - - so that other people can learn about these examples and perhaps
bring them to their community, or adapt parts of them for their use. We have a
promising practices section on our Web Site, and we will have a display at the
Akron Town Meeting. Additionally, Mrs. Clinton will visit Boston on December 9
to highlight a program there, Team Harmony, that is bringing together youth of
different backgrounds.

Dialogue: Through the initiative we hope to increase the dialogue in the nation,
including those with different views. By discussing the things that bring us together as
well as those that are obstacles to coming together as One America, we will make
progress towards that goal. By discussing the stereotypes and the realities that shape
people's views, we hope to educate each other regarding the differing perceptions we
have of one another. Wednesday's dialogue with the community of Akron will build on
dialogue throughout the nation and stimulate more dialogue. At least 65 "watch parties"
will view the Akron town meeting. The Advisory Board, my Cabinet and Sub-Cabinet
appointees will also be leading round table discussions throughout the country. The
Advisory Board and Initiative staff have already spoken with over 10,000 people. The
issue is one that I discuss with almost every group I see.

The Board and Consultants (Chris Edley and Laura Harris): I wanted an Advisory
Board and our two Consultants to both give me advice and be my eyes, ears and voice on
the issue of race. The Board has already guided our efforts by helping us focus our
policy efforts on education and economics. They have advised me to focus on young
people to create the strong leadership for the future on this issue. From the call to action
to 25,000 young people that I sent out last Friday, to the PSA that we will announce on
Tuesday that is targeted to young people, to the University setting of this first town
meeting, I agree with the Board's advice that youth are an important part of our effort.
Additionally, in their last meeting, they suggested that we focus on enforcement of
existing laws, and I have asked my staff to do that. The Board has spoken to thousands



                                         2
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion ·
       of people already and are helping us find more promising practices and recruit leaders to
       make our effort extend deeper into the nation and carry on after the formal initiative ends.
       Report to the Nation: My report to the nation will be a resource book for facts and a
       call to action addressed to all Americans. It will set out my vision of One America,
       where we respect each others differences while drawing together as one nation. The
       report will include promising practices and other actions that will help us move towards
       One America. It will also speak frankly to some of the obstacles that we face as we
       move into the 21 st Century.

Are you satisfied?

       Yes, I am now confident in the direction and the speed ofthe effort (e.g., two policy
       announcements and ongoing policy development, round table discussions led by the
       Cabinet, a PSA, call to action letter to youth, promising practices like Tom Manatos
       - the football captain who is building bridges across racial divides, religious leaders
       engaging, corporate leaders engaging, involvement of people with other points of
       view like Thernstrom, Board members and initiative staff talked to over 10,000,
       your own personal discussions with different groups etc.).

      I don't think that one can overemphasize the difficulty of the task at hand.
      However, after my first meeting with the board, I asked the WH staff and the
      initiative staff to pick up the pace and they did. The actions that have taken place
      since that time are moving us towards our goal of taking the nation into the next
      century as One America where our differences are a strength and the values of
      community, opportunity, and responsibility unite us.




                                                 3
Affirmative Action                                                       Hex-Dump Conve:-sion ·

How can you accomplish your goals of diversity in the face of the current backlash against
affirmative action, especially from those in the white community? What do you see as
possible alternatives to affirmative action?

      We should not pretend that achieving diversity has a quick and easy solution for
      individuals or for our nation as a whole. But there is no more important challenge facing
      us. Every American should have the chance to live out the American dream, and I am
      afraid that for many people of color and for women, the barriers still exist to achieving
      that dream.

      Affirmative action isn't a perfect solution - - it only addresses certain aspects of the
      opportunity agenda, and shouldn't continue when it has served its purposes. In my San
      Diego speech, I asked for those with alternatives to come forward. However,
      alternatives must be effective at addressing the very real problems that exist today.

      We have to approach affirmative action carefully, and always look for alternatives to
      making sure every American has an equal opportunity. But the alternatives cannot just
      sound good. The alternatives must be effective at moving us towards One America,
      closing the racial divisions and gaps.

      At the same time, we should be taking the kinds of actions and building the kind of
      society that will make affirmative action less and less necessary. That is one of my goals
      for this ini tiati ve.

      I believe that focusing on strengthening K-12 education and higher education is vital to
      addressing the problems of race, as well as keeping our nation strong economically, but
      that alone is not enough in the short term.

      I am convinced that when the American people examine the issues - - of what our history
      has been, of where we are now, and what we need to do to become One America with
      equal opportunity for all - - they will agree that there is still a necessary role for
      narrowly-tailored affirmative action in our society. For example, recently the people of
      Houston rallied together to defeat an anti-affirmative action ballot initiative. There was
      clear language on the Houston ballot, and a broad range of interests, including business,
      came together to support Houston's successful efforts at building One America.




                                              4
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion ·
Stereotypes

How can the race initiative help curb destructive racial stereotypes? How can it help to
change attitudes? How can the race initiative help deal with stereotypes promoted by the
media itself?

      The best way to confront stereotypes and change attitudes is for people to have honest
      exchanges and real life experiences with people who are not just like themselves. That's
      why dialogue is such an important part of the Initiative. That's why I'm going to Akron
      for our first Town Meeting, so people will see an example of the kind of conversation
      we're talking about.

      And these meetings can have a ripple effect. When the Town Meeting is broadcast on
      CSP AN on Wednesday, there will be more than fifty "watch parties" around the country
      where people are going to watch our conversation and then continue with a dialogue of
      their own.

      We can change stereotypes with facts. That's why the Advisory Board has been charged
      with collecting information, and getting that information into public discussion. Because
      people need to understand what the facts are --and sometimes the facts about race are
      different from the public perception. We can't get to a better understanding if we don't
      know what the facts are.

      Stereotypes are hard to change without experiences, too. In my radio address I spoke
      about volunteering as a way to build those experiences to help us connect with folks who
      are different from ourselves, strengthening our sense of community.

      The media, like all industries and sectors, I believe has a special responsibility in this.
      That goes aiong with their great power and with that special role they play in our free
      democracy, enshrined in the Bill of Rights. In news and entertainment involving racial
      and ethnic justice, over the years the media have at times often been part of the solution.

      But now, we are asking leaders in every sector -- from business to higher education to the
      religious community -- to consider what they might do to help build one America. I
      think its fair to ask the same of the media.

      Many news organizations, national and local, have already started in one way or another,
      with specials and features. That's good, and I hope they build on it. Look at what the
      Akron Beacon Journal did in their series on Race that won the Pulitzer in 1994. That
      was the inspiration for the dialogue group that is active in Akron today.




                                               5
                                                      Hex-DiJmp Conversion .

I'm not suggesting that every newspaper should try to follow exactly that example
although it is a good one. The important thing is that leadership can make a difference.
Every one of us can make a difference. And I hope the media, with their great power to
reach and inform, will also think of what they can do to bring us closer to One America.
I look forward to working with the media on the efforts that they think are
appropriate.




                                        6
Education                                                                   Hex·Dump Conlle:sion

Other than school standards, what can be done to improve diversity in our nation's
elementary schools?

      We should place a high value on racial and ethnic diversity at allleve1s of our education
      system. Over the long term, having strong, diverse schools, with high expectations for
      every student, will help all our students succeed in an increasingly diverse economy.

      The best way to increase diversity in our schools is to improve what they offer. We need
      to help communities throughout America develop safe, disciplined schools that help all
      students master the basics and reach high standards -- schools where students learn to
      read and to do math, where they can get extra help if they need it, where they can learn to
      take advantage of the Internet, and where they are taught from early on that a college
      education is within reach if they are willing to work for it. Good schools with high
      expectations will attract all kinds of parents and students, and the result will be a richer
      learning environment for all.

      For this to happen we must attract highly qualified teachers to schools serving poor and
      disadvantaged kids, and I started the race initiative by proposing a plan to do just that.
      We also have make technology accessible and affordable to insure that no matter where
      they go to school, in the inner city or in poor rural areas, students have access to the same
      world of information on the Internet. And we must begin to address the infrastructure
      needs facing schools around the country -- students can't learn in buildings that are
      literally crumbling around them.

      Another important step we can take to increase diversity in our nation's schools is to
      enhance public school choice. Students and their parents should be able to choose from
      a wide variety of options within the public school system, not just the school next door.
      That is one reason why I have been such a strong supporter of public charter schools,
      which are open to students of all backgrounds and stay open as long as they do a good
      job. Opening charter schools and taking other steps to expand public school choice can
      counter the effects of residential segregation in our school systems and make elementary,
      junior and high schools more diverse.

      Another thing we can do is to enforce housing laws. Because where people live affects
      where their children go to school and therefore, the quality of education they receive.

Does this include busing?

      I believe that separate but equal can never truly be equal. America must never retreat
      from our goal of a fully integrated society. We may disagree about how to get there, but
      we should continue to stand together in our determination to end segregation. As the


                                                7
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conve(sion '

great Thurgood Marshall said, "Unless our children begin to learn together, there is little
hope that our people will ever learn to live together.

There are many tools other than busing to help integrate such as magnate school
programs, voluntary transfers and redrawing boundary lines. When we are faced with
the constitutional violation of intentional segregation, I believe that we should seek these
other remedies. However, I would not completely rule busing out as an option in a
particular case. We will faithfully enforce the law and seek remedies that constructively
bring people together.




                                         8
                                                                        Hex-DiJir.p Cunvt:i~ion
Civil Rights Enforcement

What changes or new policies do you hope to see implemented in the near future?

      Effective enforcement of our nation's civil rights laws is one of the key elements to
      ensuring that racial or ethnic discrimination will not be used to deny the American dream
      to any individual or class of Americans. We have laws on the books against
      discrimination, and they need to be enforced vigorously. This is of particular importance
      in the areas of housing and employment, where we continue to see evidence that racial
      and ethnic discrimination plays a role in denying opportunities. I am committed to
      strong civil rights enforcement as an important tool in our quest to become One America.

      We have already taken a number of actions in the course of this initiative to strengthen
      enforcement of our civil rights laws. A few months ago, the Department of Housing and
      Urban Development announced that it will double the number of civil rights enforcement
      actions it brings by the year 2000, and that it will focus resources on such practices as
      predatory lending and exclusionary zoning.

      Just last month, we took another step toward making sure that our nation's laws fully
      protect all of its citizens. At the White House Conference on Hate Crimes, held on
      November 10, we announced significant law enforcement and prevention initiatives to get
      tough on hate crimes, including an amendment that will expand the scope of the law to
      include sexual orientation, gender and disability, and make it easier to bring prosecutions.
       Weare also launching an important new initiative that will help victims of
      housing-related hate crimes bring action against their attackers and received monetary
      awards for the harm they may have suffered.

      In the near future, we will announce further plans to improve civil rights enforcement at
      all government agencies - - and especially at the EEOC. These initiatives will be
      designed to increase compliance with the laws on the books ana to develop new methods
      of dispute resolution that will allow for claims to be resolved more quickly, without
      compromising fairness.

      Finally, I am confident that having an Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights, who is
      as qualified and dedicated to equal rights as Bill Lann Lee, will make a big difference in
      civil rights enforcement in the nation.




                                               9
                                                                        Hex-Dulnp Curlv"\:l:sion
Discrimination by Police and Courts

Do you plan to address discrimination by the police and court system as part of the race
initiative?

      We must enforce our civil rights laws against people in the criminal justice system who
      may be guilty of discrimination. Our overall strategy for civil rights enforcement must
      hold public servants -- as well as private entities -- accountable if they break our laws and
      discriminate. I want our criminal justice system to be fair and have the support of all
      law-abiding Americans.

      But there's another problem. We must also make sure that the criminal justice system is
      meeting the public safety needs of all Americans. Racial and ethnic minorities are more
      likely to be victims of crimes. Under-protecting minority communities is its own form
      ofunfaimess, and I will continue to do everything I can to prevent it.

      Our community policing initiative is not only helping to drive down the crime rates, it is
      also strengthening the bond between community residents and their police. Done right,
      community policing is not just improved community relations: it is police and citizens
      working together, building trust and realizing that they need each other to succeed in
      making their neighborhoods safer. Everywhere I go I hear about the difference our
      community police officers are making, and it gives me great hope. As part of our race
      initiative, we should try to build on community policing and look for new ways to make
      the criminal justice system more responsive at the local level.




                                               10
                                                                   .l.utomaled Records Management Svstem
    Conservatives                                                            Hex-Dump C(1I1v~;~ion .

    In his letter to the you, Speaker Newt Gingrich expressed concern that the dialogue on race
    is becoming a monologue_ Will the Advisory Board be open to hearing from a wide array
    of opinions or is it true that the Board will only invite people to participate in the process
    that agree with you and the position of the Board?

           From its inception, I have been committed to a real dialogue, one with many voices and
           many perspectives. To be constructive, to address the issue of race, this cannot be a
           monologue. In June in San D.iego, I asked all Americans to begin this conversation and
           to talk with and listen to each other. As you know, in many communities across the
           nation, such conversations have been underway for some time and many more have been
           stimulated by my call-to-action.

           I am looking forward to hearing from Mrs. Thernstrom at the town meeting and a group
           of conservatives later in December.

    Will the Advisory Board hear from University of California regent Ward Connerly?

           From its inception, I have been committed to a real dialogue, one with many voices and
           many perspectives. To be constructive, to address the issue of race, this cannot be a
           monologue. Mr. Connerly has been a vocal part of this dialogue and I suspect he will
           continue to be so.

    It has been announced that Abigail Thernstrom will be speaking at the Akron Town
    Meeting. What do we hope that she'll bring to the dialogue?

           After hearing the students experiences, we hope that Ms. Thernstrom will provide her
           insight and expertise to the discussion.

    Is the Board just acquiescing to the pressures from the conservatives by inviting her to
    speak at the Akron Town Meeting?

           No. As we mentioned earlier, from the very beginning, I have clearly stated that we want
           to hear different viewpoints on the issue of race. The decision to invite an individual to
           the Akron Town Meeting, whose views differ from mine was made before this criticism
           was raised. In order for this effort to succeed, we need Americans of all races and
           perspectives to work together.




                                                   11
                                                                        Hex-Dump C;"n"~,:HOi\

               Additional Questions and Answers for the Enda Interview

    Why do you think it is important to have a President's Initiative on Race? Race seems to
    be a part of so many public debates today anyway, do you really think a Presidential
    program can make a significant contribution?

          I believe as President I should lead on issues important to our nation. During my entire
          public career -- actually my entire life -- I have been dedicated to strengthening our nation
          by overcoming the obstacles that divide us. I firmly believe that our nation's growing
          diversity is one of our greatest, but most undervalued, national assets, especially as we go
          into the 21 st Century. We must capitalize on the strengths and benefits that come with
          diversity rather than letting our differences divide us and hold us back. As I have said
          before, we don't have a single person to waste in this country.

          As the face of America continues to change, the goal of my Initiative on Race is to
          strengthen our foundations as Americans, while celebrating our differences. I think we
          can do this only by fostering an atmosphere of trust and mutual respect for one another,
          and the Presidency is one of the best ways to deliver this message.

    How can you possibly hope to address racial disparities in education, economic opportunity
    and the like without a substantial infusion of federal funds?

          For five years, my Administration has focused on promoting educational and economic
          opportunity for all Americans.

          From empowerment zones to CRA to my education agenda, my commitment will
          continue. As we develop other concrete solutions to problems like disparities in
          education, economic opportunity, and housing, we are well aware that we are working
          within very tight budgetary constraints. That means that we have to be creative and
          make sure that existing resources are being used in the most effective ways possible.
          This means that existing programs -- from education to civil rights enforcement -- have to
          work better and have clearly articulated and achievable objectives. This is one of our
          greatest challenges.

          My Administration has already made significant strides in these areas. For example, I
          have proposed an initiative to recruit and prepare quality teachers to serve in high-poverty
          communities, which have a disproportionate number of minority students. We propose
          doing this by offering scholarships to those students preparing to become teachers who
          will commit to teach in those communities for at least three years. This proposal
          responds to the nation's need for a diverse and excellent teaching force. It also includes
          funds to strengthen teacher preparation programs so that those who go into teaching are
          better prepared to teach their students.



                                                   12
                                                                             Hex-DiJrr:p Cunlit:,~ion
           Also, at my direction, Housing and Urban Development Secretary Andrew Cuomo
           recently announced that HUD will double its efforts to fight housing discrimination
           through increased enforcement actions and additional resources allocated to the
           promotion of fair housing programs at the community level.

           I think it is important to remember that the Initiative is also about changing the hearts and
           minds of the American people, something that govemment programs cannot do.

    On the issues of an apology for slavery and reparations, will you or your Advisory Board
    address these issues?

           Slavery has left deep scars on our nation; scars that are very real even today. Together
           we will continue to address these issues, but at this time, I do not believe that an apology
           or a discussion of reparations is the best way to move the country forward on this issue.

           The focus of our work in the Initiative is to find ways in which we can offer real
           opportunities to Americans who work hard, but who continue to face barriers of
           discrimination based on race. We want to highlight successful examples of Americans
           coming together across racial lines to overcome the divisive legacies of our past.

    Do you really believe that you can solve the problem of race relations in this country?

           I believe our initiative will make a difference. This is a complex issue, and it can't be
           solved in a year. I do believe, with all of us committed and working together, that we
           can bridge racial divides.

    Isn't this really a problem of economics and class and not a racial issue?

           The issues of race and economics are clearly closely intertwined in our country.
           Discrimination has affected economic well being. For many Americans however, a
           higher income or better job does not ensure they are free of racial discrimination,
           harassment or other barriers to full participation in the American dream. We know from
           long experience that - wealthy or poor - discrimination continues to affect minorities.

    What is your view of the settlement in the Piscataway case?

           I am gratified that both sides were able to reach a mutually agreeable settlement to the
           Piscataway case. As the Administration has stated before, the unique facts of this case
           made it an inappropriate vehicle for adjudicating the important issue of non-remedial
           affirmative action.




                                                    13


