RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-DEC-1997 16:06:53.00

SUBJECT:   INS/State and Medicaid

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This is in response to a memo that Diana and I received about a week ago
from the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities reo immigrants re-entering
the country or petitioning to adjust status being told that a condition of
re-entry was the repayment of the value of Medicaid benefits previously
recieved. The Center is also concerned that families are being instructed
to dis-enroll family members (including citizen children) before they are
permitted to re-enter or adjust.
---------------------- Forwarded by Julie A. Fernandes/OPD/EOP on 12/07/97
04:08 PM ---------------------------




Julie A. Fernandes
12/05/97 06:40:10 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP
cc:      Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP, Andrea Kane/OPD/EOP
Subject:         INS/State and Medicaid

Diana,

I have been looking into the questions raised by the the memo we received
from the Center of Budget and Policy Priorities.

According to Bob Bach at the INS, they are issuing the following guidance
to the field (should be cleared by Commissioner on Monday) :

1.       INS inspectors should not be asking legal permanent residents
who have been out of the country less than 6 months anything related to a
public charge determination. These folks are not subject to "admission"
(the trigger), but are "returning."

 2.      Though the inspectors can ask those seeking "admission" about
 current or prior use of Medicaid (as part of the totality test for public
 charge), whether they have received these benfits (or if their citizen
 children currently receive) should not be dispositive on the question.
,The INS guidance will remind the inspectors that prior use is not
 dispositive.

3.      That entry or re-adjustment should not be delayed or denied
contingent upon the "repayment" of legal Medicaid benefits received.
However, if the person seeking "admission" has an outstanding debt to an
agency, that is grounds for inadmissibility. But, in order for there to
   ,
be a debt, there must be a claim.  Thus, the inspector should not in any
way require the "repayment" of benefits legally received, or request that
the person seeking admission disenroll children from the Medicaid program
unless there is a claim from the state agency.  If there is a debt, the
inspector can tell the person that if the debt is repaid, the bar to their
admission would be lifted.

4.      On the question of prior or current use of food stamps, the INS
guidance will instruct that unless practice prior to the enactment of
TANF, use of food stamps can now be a factor is the totality determination
of "public charge." However, INS is instructing that prior use of food
stamps cannot be a "public charge" factor, since food stamps were not part
of the calculation prior to the new welfare law. Also, if a use of ,food
stamps by a citizen child can also not be a factor in determining whether
the parent will be a public charge (the theory is that food stamps are
necessarily supplemental, and thus don't predict future reliance on public
benefits) .

All of this guidance, of course, does not address whether State is giving
similar guidance to its consular officers.  State has very little control
over what their consular officers do. There is no judicial review of any
kind (administrative or otherwide).   INS, HHS and State are having a
meeting next week on this to determine if there is a way to get better
control this in the consular offices.

Do you know whether (as was stated in the Center of Budget Priorities
memo) the state Medicaid offices are permitted to disclose information of
the legal use of benefits to the INS?

julie


