RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN;Julie A. Fernandes/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 12-DEC-1997 18:39:49.00

SUBJECT:   Central Americans

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 }
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,

This afternoon, Maria held an advocates meeting to discuss the
implementation of the Central American legislation.  First, the fax that I
sent you earlier was more of an advocacy piece by the EOIR on why we
should not do an administrative remedy (they want to keep it).  DOJ has
since convinced EOIR of their decision to proceed with this administrative
alternative if possible.

At the meeting, the advocates stated that: (1) they want a regulation that
provides for a presumption of extreme hardship for those covered by the
legislation. The advocates maintain that the INS grant rates are actually
much lower for Salvadorans and Guatamalans then INS says they are, in part
because of the wide discretion given to immigration judges that allows for
caprice to sometimes determine outcomes.  Thus, they argue that without a
regulation that provides a presumption of extreme hardship, they will
still have low grant rates; and (2) that they would prefer, with our
without a regulation, to proceed with an administrative adjudication
rather than with EOIR (admin judges) .

We explained to them our concerns about doing a regulation: (1) that we
could not do administratively what the Congress expressly did not do by
legislation -- i.e., provide amnesty for the Guat. and Sal.; and (2) that
we do not want to create by regulation a definition of "extreme hardship"
for this class of aliens for this adjudication that is different from how
we adjudicate extreme hardship in other circumstances.  However, we did
express a willingness to further explore an adminstrative adjudicative pro
cess (within INS), and that we would look into developing training
materials and guidance for the asylum officers who would be adjudicating
these claims that sets out with particularity the standard that should be
used for making these determinations.   It would not be as clean as a
regulation, but it would provide strong guidance to the INS officers on
what factors to look for, and thus somewhat direct their discretion in a
way that looks favorably on the group covered by the legislation.

So, we are pretty much where we were with three remaining concerns: (1) I
would like to better clarify the grant rates for Salvadorans and Guat.
discussed by INS.   They say that the grant rates are much higher than the
groups think is valid (and did not come with the very specific information
that we had asked for last time) and, according to DOJ, there are wildly
disparate grant rates for these groups between offices (92% grant rate in
S.F.; 62% grant rate in LA). Morton from DOJ had no explanation for th
is.   (2) DOJ still owes us a breakdown of how many people covered by the
legislation are in each of the relevant procedural categories; i.e., how
many ABC class members v. non-ABC (rem: ABC class members have an


entitlement to an asylum process anyway, so the admin. option would be
folded into what they would already be doing); how many have already had
an asylum hearing; how many are in some other INS process, etc.; and (3)
according to the legislation, those people with a letter of deportation
(b/c , for example, they were denied asylum but did not qualify for
suspension under the 1996 law) will have to file a motion to re-open
within
240 days of January 14, 1997. According to many present, this is too
short a time period to get a lawyer ($) and file a motion, unless the
filing is pro forma.   INS has to decide how to make this a reasonable
process.

All agree that we have to decide asap whether we are doing this admin.
adjudication and what it will look like. (to allow for notice to
communities, etc.).  I am, as before, in favor of the administrative
option, provided we can get some answers in the next couple of days on the
remaining questions.  Scott and DOJ also favor the admin. adjudication.
Maria, I think, is on board with the admin. adjud. as opposed to the reg.,
as long as the training and guidance are there.

julie


