RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-DEC-1997 20:13:46.00

SUBJECT:   Haitians

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
According to Peter Jacoby, he spoke with you this afternoon about
tomorrow's NYT article reo Haitians and DED.   I also was made aware of
this late this afternoon. My understanding of the sequence of events is:
Peter, John Morton (DOJ) and Scott spoke yesterday reo whether Holder
would be attending the hearing in Miami. Morton said that Holder would
not attend.   Peter then suggested that Holder write a letter to Abraham,
discussing the Department's recommendation reo DED. Abraham's office then
indicated that they did not want a letter (b/c they did nOt want to get in
on the internal debate within the Administration).   Either late yesterday
or this morning, DOJ decided that the AG should write a letter to the
President recommending how he should do DED if he decided to do it. They
thought of this as a vehicle for notifying people of the DOJ
recommendation + where the Administration was leaning.   I'm not sure when
in all this it was decided that the Admin. was leaning toward DED (though
maybe you and Peter discussed this earlier).   Somehow, the NYT got a hold
of the information about the AG's recommendation to do DED and decided to
write a front page story that would include a discussion of the internal
(both WH and DOJ) debate about which way to go.

Scott faxed me a revised copy of the letter from the AG to the President
this afternoon around 5pm. The cover sheet referenced a conference call
at 5:30. After not receiving a call, I called Scott at about 5:40, and
heard all that had been going on.

The upshot of all of this is that the NYT is running an article in the.
morning stating that the President is considering (maybe even leaning
towards) DED for the Guantanamo + long-time asylum seeking Haitians.
According to Scott (who listened to the first five paragraphs over the
phone), there is some discussion of internal stuff, but that it all
sounded deliberative, not negative. Also, the DOJ is finalizing this
"recommendation" letter from the AG to the President that speaks more
generally of DED for long term asylum seekers and "parolees." This group
would include both Guantanamo and a previously undisclosed 7000 "parolees"
who came to this country illegally, were in proceedings, and then were
taken out of proceedings and given an opportunity to apply for relief.
The total number of Haitians in the class is about 41,000 (29,000 asylum
seekers + 22,000 parolees - 10,000 overlap) , though it is unclear how
many would have actually been eligible for deportation within the next
year (thus how many would be effected by a DED) .  Also, NSC is drafting a
memo to the President recommending DED + is drafting some q & as.

I will be in Fairfax tomorrow until about 5pm at the Advisory Board
meeting.  I told Scott I would call mid-day to try to keep on top of this,
and that he could page me if something comes up.


julie


