RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN;Julie A. Fernandes/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-DEC-1997 12:24:45.00

SUBJECT:   MLK Day

TO: Elena Kagan
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
At the Ann Lewis meeting this morning, the following was decided:

1. The President (maybe with the First Lady) will do service on MLK day.
Likely that it will be in D.C. The other details are not yet determined,
though I threw out our ideas about Americorps, CityYear, Black & White
churches, etc. Those of us interested in planning the service event are
going to reconvene sometime on Monday to better nail it all down.  People
seemed very receptive to the idea of tying the President's service into a
national call to service, etc.

Other Principals have been asked to participate in service on that day
also.   It is contemplated that their service will also be linked to
Arnericorps (and the 60 cities). Cabinet Affairs is going to let the
Cabinet members know that they should try to also participate in service
on that day.   The Advisory Board members have also agreed to do service in
their communities on that day. We will try to link them to Americorps as
well.

2.  In addition to the service event, the President will likely do a Town
Hall that evening. The location for this was not determined, but will be
determined, at least in part, on what the press wants to do (Sosnick
mentioned Nightline involvement). John Lewis has asked that the President
do a Town Hall in Atlanta, but other options were discussed (I was
advocating Birmingham (Civil Rights Museum; history) or Jackson,
Mississippi (Black mayor; history).  Part of the reason for doing the Town
Hall at all is that the next availabe time would not be until March, and
the President has indicated wanting to do his next one before then.

Because the President will likely do a Town Hall that night, the Advisory
Board will not do a town hall later that week (they had tentatively
scheduled one for Atlanta) .

3. On the actual birthday (the 15th), they are going to arrange for an
East Room ceremony where the President awards the Congressional Medals of
Freedom. The President can make opening remarks reo MLK day, and the
importance of service (all awardees served their country, in one fashion
or another) . and will thus try to create a bit of a civil rights spin. One
of the likely awardees is Jamer Farmer (CORE).    We are also going to get a
list of all the MLK events going on around the city that day, to see if t
here is something else that the President can acknowledge or tap into in a
lower key way.
  ..
julie


