 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 29-DEC-1997 16:48:58.00

 SUBJECT:   Re: Race/service

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Diana Fortuna { CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Diana and I met last week with Ann Lewis, Jen Palmieri, PIR, someone from
the VP's office and others to discuss the plan for the day.  John Gomperts
from the National Service Corporation was also there.

  The President would like to do service during the day, and hold a town
  hall in the early evening. The communications folks are trying to get
  network sponsorship of the town hall (they have interest from one of the
  networks for a prime time slot or maybe Nightline). Because of the likely
  involvement of a netowrk, they are unable to decide where the town hall
. will take place (though likely not in D.C.). This impacts the service
  event, because we may want to have· the President's service take place in
  the community where the town hall is located. According to Jen, the
  decision about the location for the town hall will not be made until after
  the New Year, so we can't definitively determine the precise service event
  until then either.

The Corporation is sponsoring an America Reads event at the MCI Center;
set for 1-3pm (but with some flexibility for change). At this event, kids
will hook up with Americorps tutors, build a bookshelf, and receive a
backpack with 10 books, at least one that is about MLK.  John said that
they are scheduled to have the participation of some of the Washington
Wizards and would love Presidential involvement. We discussed wanting the
President to do a service event in the community (rather than at a
convention center) that could be better connected to an ongoing effort to
serve that community (like the CityYears effort that we discussed
previously) and the possibility of holding the Presidential service out of
town. We also discussed the involvement of Black, White, and Latino
churches, in an effort to build on the idea of bringing people of
different races together to serve as part of the Race Initiative.  John
seemed to think that all of this made sense, and suggested that the First
Lady could participate in his event.  The VP wants to give a race speech
in Atlanta on that day, and will likely also be involved in service.

All of the specifics of what the President could do won't be able to be
worked out until we know where he will be during the service part of his
day.

All agreed that it would be good to coordinate service events for the
Cabinet members and the Advisory Board members for that day.  Tomorrow
(probably at 3pm) I am meeting with folks from PIR, Cabinet Affairs and
the Corporation to begin to coordinate the day'S activities for them.   The
folks from the Corporation are going to take the lead in locating good


service sites (hopefully linked to Americorps) allover the country for
the various Cabinet and Board members who want to participate.

Also. John has agreed to review the list of cities where there are NCCC
sites (thus Americorps folks that we can direct). to give the Presidential
planners a better sense of where he could go (both inside and outside the
District) .

Diana is putting together an options paper for Jen that outlines our
general ideas related to service (churches; community; maybe related to a
child-care or after-school center and CityYears) and how it would fit into
the President's day.

julie


