RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-JAN-1998 16:24:34.00

SUBJECT:   Today's race meeting

TO: Elena Kagan    CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The objective of this afternoon's race meeting was to decide on the
substantive issues that the Board would discuss between now and the end of
its "term" -- defined as the end of August. There was some discussion of
whether the Board should have a substantive meeting every month, or
whether instead they shouls alternate subject-based meetings with town
hall style meetings. On deck so far is:

January -- Phoenix -- Employment
February -- San Francisco/Oakland (not decided which)   -- Race & Poverty
March -- Denver -- Stereotyping
April -- Chicago (?) --
May -- San Antonio (?) -- Immigration
June -- Birmingham --
July -- Philadelphia    ?
August -- Seattle -- ?

Only what is in bold has been firmly decided.  The rest is open.  It was
suggested that the Board may want to alternate between town hall meetings
and subject-matter meetings. However, there was also a concern that we
cover more subjects -- including race & health, housing, criminal justice,
generational differences in racial attitudes and One America (something
about how we all come together).  Sylvia suggested including Race & Health
into the meeting on Race & Poverty (which, in its present form, also in
cludes the housing discussion).  Each of these subjects is huge and could
hold its own day, but there is countervailing pressure to pack lots of
issues into each day in order to make room for town halls.

My suggestion would be to tie all of the meetings to a subject (the
tighter the better). We are already short of time for coverage of the
subjects, and putting more topics on each day will only further dilute the
discussion and look way too superficial. Having a substantive theme for
each day also gives a sort of focal point to the discussion, yet still
allows community dialogue, etc. to happen in the later part of the day or
in the evening (as we are going to do in Phoenix).

The PIR is putting together an outline of where we are with this, which we
will see a draft of on Thursday.

Also at this meeting, the group set down a list of accomplishment goals
for the Board, in response to the question: What is the Board doing? It
was decided that at the end of the year, the Board will have accomplished
the following:

1.   Produced a set of letters of advice from the Board to the President.


Sylvia would like these letters to be longer, and to reflect actual
recommendations from the Board, whether or not we end up putting forth
policies consistent with these recommendations.

2.   Produced a set of personal reflections from the Board members.

The idea is that each Board member will write an individual report to the
President re: what he or she has been up to during the year.  This will be
more in the form of experiences and personal reflections than
recommendations.

3.   Leadership Recruitment

Board will produce a list of leaders that they have identified -- what
they have done and what they will do to further racial reconciliation.

4.   Promoted dialogue

Through the town meetings and the individual events that the members
participate in.

5.   Promising practices

Assist in the identification and dissemination of promising practices.

6.   Contributed to the "study"

Board, with the help of the PIR staff, will produce summaries of the Board
meetings that will include all that went on, issues debated, etc. This is
in furtherance of the idea of the Board as fact-finders or recorders.

Finally, Sylvia mentioned a "work-plan" meeting next week.  I think that
the purpose there is to nail down (based on the outline produced by PIR
that we will see on Thursday) how the work of the Initiative and the Board
should proceed over the next 6 month.

Julie


