 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:10-JAN-1998 17:28:11.00

 SUBJECT:   paper for Monday's directive

 TO: Karen A. Popp ( CN=Karen A. Popp/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Joshua Silverman ( CN=Joshua Silverman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Charles A. Blanchard ( CN=Charles A. Blanchard/OU=ONDCP/O=EOP @ EOP [ ONDCP ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: June Shih ( CN=June Shih/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Sean P. Maloney ( CN=Sean P. Maloney/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Attached are a draft one-pager and Q&A for Monday's prison drug
 directive.  I've also attached the final directive, which McCaffrey
 approved this morning without changes.

 Please let either Jose' or me know if you have any questions.       Thanks!

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D77]MAIL43703690M.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043CC060000010A02010000000205000000FA2500000002000099EB5EAEED5C5B85518D5D
 925F205ECEDA972149F9ADBCAA3219D0814DE0127290EB70AFOF776F182C2DFAEFOD3E51E386DO
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

    Presidential Directive on Coerced Abstinence in the Criminal Justice System
                                 January 12, 1998

Announcement

       Today, the President directed the Attorney General to take the necessary steps to: (1)
        require states to determine the level of drug use in their prisons and report annually on
        their progress; (2) grant states the flexibility to use their federal prison funds for drug
        detection, offender testing and drug treatment; and (3) work with states to enact stiffer
        penalties for drug trafficking into and within correctional facilities. The President also
        announced that his FY 1999 budget will include nearly $200 million for a series of
        initiatives to promote coerced abstinence and treatment in the criminal justice system.

Towards a National Policy of Coerced Abstinence

       Last week, Columbia University's Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse (CASA)
        released a study confirming the need for coerced abstinence and treatment in the criminal
        justice system. CASA's study found that 1.4 million offenders -- or 80% of the 1.7
        million criminals in prison and jails -- were either high on drugs or alcohol when arrested,
        stole property to buy drugs, or have a history of drug and alcohol abuse. Many other
        studies also confirm that the majority of individuals in the criminal justice system have
        similar drug histories.

       Testing to Measure Progress. Under current law and federal guidelines, states are
        required to submit drug testing and intervention plans for their federal prison grant
        funding. The President's directive calls on the Attorney General to amend the
        guidelines to require states to also include a baseline report of their prison drug
        abuse problem, and to report every year thereafter to chart the progress they are
        making to reduce drug use and availability. The directive also encourages states to
        expand their efforts to include other offenders involved in the criminal justice
        system

       Helping States Get the Job Done. Today's directive asks the Attorney General to draft
        and transmit to the Congress legislation that will grant states the flexibility to use their
        federal prison construction and substance abuse treatment funds to provide the full range
        of drug testing, sanctions and treatment for offenders under criminal justice supervision.
        With this added flexibility, states could tap into the nearly $8 billion in prison funds
        authorized by the 1994 Crime Law (about $2 billion of which already have been
        appropriated to date).

       Keeping Drugs Out of Prisons. Finally, the President's directive calls on the
        Attorney General to work with the states to enhance their penalties for drug
        trafficking into and within correctional facilities. The 1994 Omnibus Crime Bill
        contains tough penalties for similar crimes. The President believes we must have
        "zero tolerance" for drug use and trafficking within our nation's prison system.
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
    A Record of Accomplishment

        President Clinton has consistently promoted a policy of drug testing, sanctions and
         treatment for offenders. Specifically, he has:

                Pushed for Drug Testing and Intervention in the 50 States.    The President fought
                for and signed the legislation requiring states to drug test prisoners and parolees as
                a condition for receiving prison grants. States must now submit comprehensive
                drug testing and intervention plans for prisoners and parolees by March 1998 and
                implement them by September 1998. Today's actions directly build on this effort.

                Doubled the Number of Federal Arrestees Tested. President Clinton directed
                the Attorney General to create a program to drug test federal criminal defendants.
                Operation Drug TEST (Testing, Effective Sanctions and Treatment) was
                established and funded a pilot program to immediately test defendants upon their
                arrest. In FY 1997, data from 24 judicial districts indicated that 56% of
                defendants (9,308) were tested -- a dramatic increase over the 28% (4,929) of
                defendants tested in the previous year. There was also a 190% increase in drug
                treatment for defendants over the same period.

                Expanded Testing and Treatment in Federal Prisons. Through his budgets
                and the 1994 Crime Act, the President has promoted coerced abstinence in the
                federal prison system. In 1997 federal prisoners were subjected to nearly 130,000
                drug tests. Additionally, the number of inmates required to receive treatment
                increased by 3-fold (from 5,450 in FY 1993 to 17,943 in FY 1997).

                Multiplied the Number of Drug Courts.     As part of the 1994 Crime Act, the
                President fought to launch a $1 billion initiative to spread Drug Courts across the
                country. Drug Courts use drug testing, sanctions and -- when necessary --
                treatment to cut crime and addiction. Drug Courts have increased from a mere
                handful in 1993 to more than 200 that are operational today.

                Increased Resources in FY 1999 Budget. The President's FY 1999 Budget will
                continue the Administration's policy of drug testing, sanctions and treatment. In
                particular, the budget includes $192 million for the following programs:

                       -- $85 million for a new Drug Testing Initiative
                       -- $30 million to add more Drug Courts
                       -- $4.7 million for Operation Drug Test
                       -- $5 million for demonstration to combat teenage drug use
                       -- $72 million for treatment in state prisons
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                  "Zero Tolerance"Initiative for Drugs in Prison
                             Questions and Answers
                               January 12, 1998


Q.   What is the President announcing today?

A.   Today, the President signed a directive to the Attorney General calling on her to take the
     necessary steps to:

     (1) Require states to detennine the level of drug use in their prisons and report annually
     on their progress. Under current law and federal guidelines, states are required to
     submit drug testing and intervention plans for their federal prison grant funding.
     The President's directive calls on the Attorney General to amend the guidelines to
     require states to also include a baseline report of their prison drug abuse problem,
     and to report every year thereafter to chart the progress they are making to reduce
     drug use and availability.

     (2) Give states the flexibility to use their federal prison funds for drug detection, offender
     testing, and drug treatment. The Attorney General will draft and transmit to the
     Congress legislation to give states the flexibility to use their federal prison construction
     and substance abuse treatment funds for the full range of drug testing, sanctions, and
     treatment for offenders under criminal justice supervision. This will allow states to tap
     into the nearly $8 billion in prison funds authorized by the 1994 Crime Law (about $2
     billion of which already have been appropriated to date).

     (3) Work with states to enact stiffer penalties for drug trafficking into and within
     correctional facilities. Finally, the President's directive calls on the Attorney
     General to consult with the states to enhance their penalties for drug trafficking into
     and within correctional facilities. The 1994 Omnibus Crime Bill contains tough
     penalties for similar crimes. The President believes we must have "zero tolerance"
     for drug use and trafficking within our nation's prison system.

     The President also announced that his FY 99 budget will include $197 million for a series
     of initiatives to promote coerced abstinence and treatment in the criminal justice system--
     including $85 million for a new drug testing and sanctions program for states and
     localities.

Q.   How bad is the problem? Is this directive really needed?

A.   While crime rates continue to drop and overall drug use is down, illegal drugs remain an
     enonnous factor behind the level of crime and violence in America. Drug addicts are
     involved in approximately 3 to 5 times the number of criminal incidents as arrestees who
     do not use drugs. Last week, Columbia University'S Center on Addiction and Substance
     Abuse (CASA) released a study continning the need for coerced abstinence and treatment
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
     in the criminal justice system. CASA's study found that 1.4 million offenders -- or 80%
     of the 1.7 million criminals in prison and jails -- were either high on drugs or alcohol
     when arrested, stole property to buy drugs, or have a history of drug and alcohol abuse.

     Drug test results and anecdotal information reveal that even while incarcerated, offenders
     can gain access to drugs. In drug tests conducted last year, approximately 2 percent of
     offenders in federal prison and roughly 9 percent of inmates in state facilities tested
     positive for drugs.

     President Clinton believes that our criminal justice system should reduce drug demand --
     not prolong, enhance, or tolerate it. We know that drug testing and treatment can help to
     break the cycle of drugs and crime. Convicted offenders who undergo drug testing and
     treatment while in prisons and after release are approximately twice as likely to stay
     drug-free and crime-free as those offenders who do not receive drug testing and
     treatment. Today's directive and the resources proposed in the President's budget will
     help us get to zero tolerance for drugs in prison and to helps state to cut crime and
     recidivism linked to drug abuse.


Q.   How is this different from previous actions taken by this Administration to address
     this issue? Is this anything new?

A.   The President's action today builds on his strong record of accomplishment in this area.
     In 1996, the President launched the first comprehensive effort to address the drug
     problem in our state criminal justice systems. President Clinton fought for and signed
     legislation to require states-- whose criminal justice systems house the vast majority of
     drug dependent offenders-- to drug test prisoners and parolees as a condition of receiving
     federal prison grants. Under the President's initiative, states must submit comprehensive
     plans of drug testing and intervention for prisoners and parolees by March 1, 1998 and
     implement them by September 1, 1998.

     Today's directive complements the President's earlier initiative by helping us to chart the
     states' efforts to reduce drug use and availability in their prisons. The directive also
     makes more resources available to states to help them get the job done

     The President has taken numerous other actions to combat the problem of drug abuse by
     offenders involved in the criminal justice system including: doubling the number of
     federal arrestees drug tested in 24 judicial districts; fighting to launch a $1 billion
     initiative to spread Drug Courts across the country; and expanding drug testing,
     intervention and treatment in Federal prisons through his budgets and the 1994 Crime
     Act.


Q.   Is the federal government tracking the problem of drug use in its own prisons?
     What are you doing about the drug problem in federal prisons?
                                                   Hex-Ownp Conversion
A.   Under the leadership of Attorney General Reno, the federal Bureau of Prisons is carrying
     out model programs in drug testing, drug treatment, and drug detection.

     Drug Testing. In 1997, federal inmates were subject to 127,460 drug tests. Two percent
     of tests were positive, as compared to the 9 percent average for state correctional systems.
      Prisoners testing positive for drugs are appropriately punished and follow up tests are
     scheduled regularly to ensure they stay clean. Drug testing of correctional officers, and
     other selected employees is also an established policy in the Federal Bureau of Prisons.

     Drug Treatment. In compliance with the 1994 Crime Law, drug treatment is provided
     to 100 percent of eligible inmates prior to their release from Bureau custody. In FY 97,
     nearly 31,000 inmates participated in Bureau treatment programs. The number of
     institutions offering residential treatment has grown from 32 to 42 since FY 1994.

     Drug Detection. Innovative drug detection technology is being piloted at Bureau
     institutions. The Office of National Drug Control Policy is working with the Bureau to
     provide the states with information on the best ways to keep drugs out of prisons.


Q.   Is this new reporting requirement for states on their prison drug problem
     tantamount to an unfunded mandate on states?

A.   No. By law, states must develop and implement plans for drug testing and intervention
     as a condition of receiving federal prison construction grants. Today's action means that
     as part of those plans, states will need to add information on their existing prison drug use
     problem, and update that information annually. All 50 state correctional systems
     conducted some form of drug testing on their inmates last year; yet no comprehensive
     data exists on the prevalence on drug use in state prisons. Anecdotal reports have shown
     that certain systems, such as the District of Columbia's corrections department, have had
     difficulty keeping drugs out of prisons. The baseline information they provide will help
     us to chart states' progress to reduce drug use and availability in their prisons.

     In order to provide additional resources for states to promote coerced abstinence and zero
     tolerance for drugs, the directive calls on the Attorney General to develop legislation to
     allow states to use their federal prison construction and treatment funds to carry out all of
     these activities.

     In addition, the President is proposing $197 million in FY 99 for a series of initiatives to
     help states promote coerced abstinence and treatment: 1) $85 million for a new drug
     testing, sanctions, and intervention program for states and local criminal justice systems;
     2) $30 million for Drug Courts; 3) $4.7 million for the federal Operation Drug Test
     program; 4) $5 million for a juvenile justice demonstration program to combat teen drug
     use; and 5) $72 million to continue the Residential Substance Abuse Treatment in State
     Prisons program.
     their penalties for smuggling drugs into prisons. Are there tough penalties for
     trafficking drugs into federal prisons?

A.   Yes. The 1994 Omnibus Crime Act increased penalties for illegal drug use and
     smuggling drugs into Federal prisons. For instance, drug trafficking in Federal prisons
     can now lead to imprisonment for up to 20 years for smuggling narcotics and
     methamphetamine, and up to 5 years for trafficking marijuana.




                                         Automated Records Management System
                                         Hex-Dump Conversion




                                        DRAFT... DRAR ... DRAR           Automated Records Management System
                                           January 12, 1998              Hex.Dump Conversion




    MEMORANDUM FOR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL

    SUBJECT: Zero Tolerance for Drug Use and Availability for Offenders

    Crime rates in this country have dropped significantly for 5 years, and the number of Americans
    who have used drugs is down nearly 50% from its peak 15 years ago. Also, drug-related
    murders have dropped to their lowest point in a decade, and recent drug use surveys indicate that
    -- for the first time in years -- teen drug use is leveling off, and in some instances, modestly
    decreasing. All of this news is encouraging.

    Nonetheless, much more can and needs to be done to continue to bring down drug use and
    increase public safety. With more than half the offenders in our criminal justice system
    estimated to have a substance abuse problem, enforcing coerced abstinence within the criminal
    justice system is critical to breaking the cycle of crime and drugs. My Administration
    consistently has promoted testing offenders and requiring treatment as a means of reducing
    recidivism and drug-related crime. We have worked to expand the number of Drug Courts
    throughout the country, increased the number of federal arrestees and prisoners who are tested
    and treated for drugs, and launched an innovative "Breaking the Cycle" initiative, which is a
    rigorous program of testing, treatment, supervision, and sanctions for offenders at all stages of
    the criminal justice process. And under your leadership, the Federal Bureau of Prisons provides
    models of excellence in drug detection, inmate testing, and drug treatment.

    We can do still more to enforce coerced abstinence among state prisoners, probationers, and
    parolees. When a drug user ends up in a state prison, we have a chance to break his or her
    addiction. Convicted offenders who undergo drug testing and treatment while incarcerated and
    after release are approximately twice as likely to stay drug- and crime-free as those offenders
    who do not receive testing and treatment. But when drug use inside prisons is ignored, the
    demand for drugs runs high. In this environment, correction officials struggle to keep their
    prisons drug-free. Often drugs are smuggled in by visitors; sometimes even by compromised
    correctional staff.

    To maintain order in our prisons, to make effective treatment possible, and to reduce drug-related
    crime, we can not tolerate drug use and trafficking within the nation's prisons. Thus, I direct
    you to:

           (1) Amend the guidelines requiring states receiving federal prison construction grants to
           submit plans for drug testing, intervention, and treatment to include a requirement that
           states also submit a baseline report of their prison drug abuse problem. In every
           subsequent year, states will be required to update and expand this information in order to



    measure the progress they are making towards ridding their correctional facilities of drugs
    and reducing drug use among offenders under criminal justice supervision.

    (2) Draft and transmit to the Congress legislation that will permit states to use their
    federal prison construction and substance abuse treatment funds to provide a full range of
    drug testing, drug treatment, and sanctions for offenders under criminal justice
    supervision.

    (3) In consultation with states, draft and transmit to the Congress legislation that moves
             towards enacting stiffer penalties for drug trafficking into and within correctional
    facilities.




                                       Automated Records Management System
                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


