RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-JAN-1998 17:42:21.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly for this week 01/16

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D73)MAIL430756114.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043CCOE0000010A020100000002050000009D87000000020000A7ACEBC8C32139DFDEB20C


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report




        Immigration -- Skills ofImmigrants: The attached U.S. News article discusses the
issue of whether we should change our legal immigration system to strengthen preferences for
skiIIed and welI-educated prospective immigrants over those that are poorly educated and
unskilled. The current immigration system is set up to favor keeping families intact. Thus, the
vast number of legal immigrants are brought to this country through family-based visas, which do
not take into account education or skill level. The article cites a Rand study proposal to create a
point system of immigration which continues to give weight to immediate family reunification
but would also give points for education, language skills, and work experience. The final report
of the Commission on Immigration Reform also recommends a shift in priority toward higher
skilled immigrants. Instead creating a point system, the Commission recommends revising
skill-based admissions (approximately 100,000 visas) to favor highly-skilled and educated
immigrants and eliminating altogether the category of unskilled workers. Though we think that
these ideas are welI worth exploring, it is unlikely that Congress will want to consider an
overhaul of legal immigration this year. Efforts to reduce legal immigration levels were
defeated during consideration of the 1996 illegal immigration law.

        Education -- Single Sex Schools in New York City: DPC has been meeting with the
White House Counsel's office, the Education and Justice Departments, to address the OCR
response to a complaint against the existence ofthe all girl's Women's Leadership Academy in
New York City. Both you and Secretary Riley are in complete agreement that, as a matter of
policy, school districts should be (encouraged??? free???) to establish single sex schools as part
of the mix of education options. The Office of Civil Rights has placed its investigation of the
compliant on hold, and will take no steps in the foreseeable future to press New York City to
change the status of the school. However, civil rights offices in both Education and Justice
believe that such schools ultimately may be difficult to justify under Title IX or Article (relevant
Constitutional reference), in part because they have discriminatory admissions policies, and
partly because separate schools will inevitably become unequal and to the ultimate disadvantage
argument that they are an appropriate remedy for past discrimination, such as low academic
performance of females in co-educational settings. Neither of the cognizant Civil Rights
offices want to take formal action on this issue, because they believe they will be forced to
oppose single-sex schools.

        Late in December, Secretary Riley and Rudy Crew agreed to appoint small teams of
educators from the Education Department and the NYC Schools to work collaboratively to
develop the strongest case for the Women's Leadership Academy. The teams will begin to plan
their work next week. This process may take some time, and during this period the Education
Department's Office of Civil Rights will not take any further actions on this case.

        Health Care -- Robert Reich's Proposal for Fixed Dollars for Health Care: You
asked for an analysis of Robert Reich's proposal to forgo a new increase in the minimum wage
and instead require that employers require a certain fixed dollar amount for health care. As you
will recall, we did forgo proposing a minimum wage increase when we proposed the Health
Security Act because we did not want to load up the costs to employers. The idea of having a
defined minimum employer contribution certainly has some merit as it would make a significant
contribution to decreasing the number of uninsured. Having said that, there are a number of
political and policy issues that have to be seriously considered prior to pursuing such a proposal.
        There are numerous political and administrative complications that would have to be
worked out before moving forward on such an initiative, such as: (I) whether or not we would
be forced to add subsidies for this; (2) whether employers would be accountable if their
employees had coverage from their spouse's employers; or (3) whether certain employers would
be exempt.

         Having said this, if you would like to further pursue this you should be aware that of
some of the disadvantages. We will have to use a great deal of capital with the employer
community as we move forward on our other current health care policies such as health care
quality and the COBRA extension for the "promise breaker" employees who have dropped
retiree health care coverage. Adding this proposal to the mix would no doubt create a great deal
of public animosity from the employer community. Moreover, in a Republican Congress there
is no chance that this would pass and it would likely be characterized as another step to "take
over the health care system." Although liberal Democrats would be comfortable with this
proposal, our centrist Democrats would not support it, primarily because of the opposition from
the small business community.

        Health Care -- Medicare HMOs Dropping Benefits: You asked us to respond to
recent reports that Medicare HMOs were dropping benefits because of changes in Medicare
reimbursement policies. We have asked HHS to review the extent to which this is occurring.
However, it is important to note that many independent policy experts believe that payments to
HMOs still are, on average, excessive given the fact that they continue to attract
disproportionately healthy populations. They believe that any movement towards reducing


                                                 2



    benefits are more attributable to HMO's desire for adequate profit margins for their investors
    rather than adjustments in reimbursement issue. In fact, one corporate executive just informed
    us that Medicare continues to be their number one most profitable player. Having said that, the
    fact that the BBA is starting to reduce Medicare reimbursements to HMOs will clearly contribute
    to lower revenues for these health plans. It is important to note that the added benefits in
    Medicare HMO plans do help encourage beneficiaries to participate in these plans. The
    outstanding question is whether or not we want to allow payment rates to exceed what is
    necessary so as to ensure that these additional benefits are in place. Regardless, any move in
    this direction would be premature until we have better information about the extent to which
    HMOs are reducing benefits and the reasons behind such a trend.




                                                   3


