RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-JAN-1998 20:01:44.00

SUBJECT:     Attached Draft of Chapter 12: Civil Rights Enforcement Funding of Analytic

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=E1ena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI. OMB's draft chapter in Analytical Perspectiveson Civil Rights
Enforcement.
------------------ Forwarded by Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP on 01/13/98
07:58 PM ---------------------------



Susan M. Carr

01/13/98 05:28:31 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
Subject:         Attached Draft of Chapter 12: Civil Rights Enforcement Funding of
Analytical Perspectives

Attached for your review and comment is a draft of Chapter 12:          "Civil
Rights Enforcement Funding" of Analytical Perspectives.

Please return your comments to me on the draft by noon Thursday, January
15th. Please bring me (9201) or fax me (5-6889) marked-up hard copy, or
E-mail the information, whatever is easier.

Thank you.




Message Sent
TO: ________________-------------------------------------------------
John E. Thompson/OMB/EOP
Debra J. Bond/OMB/EOP
Lori Schack/OMB/EOP
Leslie S. Mustain/OMB/EOP
Noah Enge1berg/OMB/EOP
Melany Nakagiri/OMB/EOP
Jonathan C. Ball/OMB/EOP
Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP
Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP


Judith A. Winston/PIR/EOP
Lin Liu/PIR/EOP
Michael Deich/OMB/EOP
Theodore Wartell/OMB/EOP
Patricia E. Rornani/OMB/EOP

Message Copied
To: _____________________________________________________________
David J. Haun/OMB/EOP
Larry R. Matlack/OMB/EOP
Wayne Upshaw/OMB/EOP
Mark A. Weatherly/OMB/EOP
Richard J. Turrnan/OMB/EOP
David E. Tornquist/OMB/EOP
Alan B. Rhinesrnith/OMB/EOP
Francis S. Redburn/OMB/EOP
==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:     0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D68)MAIL44326721I.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750432AOC0000010A020100000002050000005FAD0000000200004ED58DC5CFF6F56C8731D3
7FDF964403EEDOF8AA388D6DB7B215D2A9A9A2308EA1389A4811B929A426BD1B3CC0809FBE4EC2
                                                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
                                  12. CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT FUNDING

Federal civil rights enforcement agencies are responsible for strengthening Federal guarantees of
equal opportunity and enforcing our laws against discrimination. To prevent and eliminate
discrimination, Federal efforts require both a proactive effort to promote equality of opportunity
and an effective mechanism for enforcement. Adequate funding is essential to meaningful
enforcement of legal protections afforded all Americans, and the FY 1999 Budget provides the
resources necessary to support vigorous enforcement of Federal civil rights laws.

The FY 1999 Budget proposes $602 million for civil rights enforcement agencies, $86 million or
14 percent greater than the FY 1998 enacted level of $516 million, as shown in Table 12-1.
Increased funding is provided for agencies to place a new emphasis on prevention and
non-litigation remedies for discrimination while also strengthening their ability to bring
enforcement actions for violations of anti-discrimination law. The budgets proposed for the
civil rights enforcement agencies emphasize the use of tools other than enforcement and
litigation to increase compliance, including the expansion of Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR) programs in [allJ _ _ agencies. Additionally, many civil rights agencies have not
received sufficient increase in resources to make use of technology and improve efficiency,
which includes their ability to improve statistical methods of measurement.

Initiatives for each of the principal enforcement agencies highlighted in the following table are
discussed in more detail below.

                                   Table 12-1. CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT FUNDING
                                            (Budget authority, in millions of dollars) 1/

                                                                                                                                    Estimate
                                                                                                                   1997
                                                                                                                   Actual     1998        1999
  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ..........................................                               240        242          279
  Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, Fair Housing Activities ......                                            30         30          52
  Dept. of Justice, Civil Rights Division ......................................................                    62         65          72

  Dept. Of Labor - Office of Federal Contractor Compliance Efforts ........                                         59         62          68
  Dept. Of Education Office of Civil Rights .................................................                       55         62          68
  Dept of Health and Human Services, OCR                         2/ ииииииииииииииииииииииииииииииииииииииииииии    20         20          21
  Dept. of Agriculture ....................................................................................         10         15          19

  U.S. Commission on Civil Rights ..............................................................                    9           9          11

  Dept. of Transportation, Office of Civil Rights .........................................                         6           6              7

  Dept. of Labor, Office of Civil Rights ........................................................                   5           5              5
           T~.и.Iи                                                                                                 496        516         602
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

       1/ Numbers may not add due to rounding.
       "Includes Medicare Trust Fund transfers.



Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The EEOC is charged with
promoting equal opportunity through administrative and judicial enforcement of Federal civil
rights laws and through education and technical assistance. Established by Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, the EEOC enforces the principal Federal statutes prohibiting employment
discrimination, including: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as amended; the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967 as amended; the Equal Pay Act (EPA) of
1963; Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA); and Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended. Taken as a whole, these laws protect workers from
illegal discrimination based on race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, and disability.

For the past several years, Congress has denied the Administration's full requests for funding the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and has provided marginal or no increases
- from $233 million in FY 1996 to $240 million in FY 1997 and $242 million in FY 1998.
Because 90 percent of the agency's budget is salaries, benefits and overhead, these small
increases have barely provided the funding necessary to maintain current staffing levels (at the
lowest level in 20 years), and have been insufficient to support upgrades to technology and
investment in alternative methods of enforcing the law. Furthermore, increased enforcement
responsibilities resulted in a 47 percent rise in private sector complaints received by the agency
during the first half of the decade, from 62,000 in 1990 to 91,000 in 1994. Consequently, the
backlog of private sector complaints rose from 73,124 charges at the end of FY 1993 (the highest
level of the previous 10 years), to an all-time high of 111,000 in FY 1995.

EEOC has addressed Congressional concerns about the pending backlog and the lack of
alternative dispute resolution methods. Despite relatively flat appropriations and increasing
Congressional mandates, the agency has, in the past three years, made a fundamental shift in its
approach to its business by developing a clear statement of its mission and implementing several
major changes: the elimination of its full investigation and litigation policies; the
implementation of its targeted and prioritized charge processing system for private sector cases;
and the development of its National Enforcement Plan and Local Enforcement Plans. Two years
after implementing the priority charge handling procedures, EEOC has reduced it charge
inventory 35 percent - - from 111,000 pending charges at the end of the third quarter of FY 1995
Uust prior to implementation) to 72,000 pending charges at the end of the third quarter ofFY
1997. However, under EEOC's new charge prioritization system, it is now faced with a
caseload that is approximately 70 percent category "B" charges (those needing further
investigation to determine whether they have merit) and 20 percent "A" charges (those with
potential merit requiring extensive investigation). Without additional resources to continue
procedural reforms, implement greater use of mediation, and invest in technology, the
Commission is unlikely to make further progress toward its goal of reducing the average time it
takes to resolve private sector complaints from over 9.4 months to 6 months by 2001.
The FY 1999 Budget requests $279 million to meet the President's commitment to providing the
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


EEOC with the resources necessary to enforce employment discrimination laws. At $279
million, EEOC would reduce its private sector charge inventory to 6 months by FY 2001 through
a combination of investments in information technology capabilities, increased use of mediation,
and an increase in staffing.

Funding for the Alternative Di~pute Resolution Program. The budget proposes $13 million
for an enhanced mediation program that would double the number of complaints eligible for the
ADR program in FY 1999. Voluntary mediation is an effective method of complaint resolution
that can be used in enforcement efforts. EEOC currently uses some of its trained investigators to
mediate, but this diverts scarce investigative resources from the majority of cases that do not lend
themselves to mediation. While volunteers have also been used since the program's inception in
FY 1996, EEOC will need to use more experienced and credible mediators in the future.
Through the use of contract mediators, EEOC would encourage employer participation by
addressing employers' concerns about bias by EEOC staff, and would encourage claimants to
elect mediation by addressing claimant concerns about the competency of volunteers.

Funding for Information Technology. The FY 1999 request of $1 0 million for information
technology improvements would provide a basic communication infrastructure that would allow
EEOC to complete the development and procurement of new information systems capabilities.
These upgrades will enhance intra- and inter-office communication, eliminate redundant data
entry procedures, and provide for greater operational efficiency through the sharing of
information and enhanced research capabilities for investigators and attorneys.

Department of Housing and Urban Development, Fair Housing Activities. HUD has
overall responsibility for the promotion of fair housing and enforcement of the Fair Housing Act
of 1968, as amended. Reducing racial barriers requires both a proactive effort on behalf of the
Department to take the lead in signaling its commitment to housing choice, and a consistent and
aggressive mechanism for enforcement against discrimination in both the private and public
sectors. HUD's fair housing activities are designed to ensure citizens the freedom and dignity of
choosing where to live.

The Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (FHEO) administers two grant programs: the
Fair Housing Assistance Program (FHAP). which provides financial assistance to supplement
enforcement activities of States and localities which have passed laws substantially equivalent to
Federal fair housing laws; and the Fair Housing Initiatives Program (FHIP). which is a
competitive grant program that provides funding to private fair housing groups to carry out
activities that assist in enforcement and furthering compliance with the Fair Housing Act. The
FY 1999 Budget proposes $52 million to enable HUD to meet its goals of reducing
discrimination and ensuring equal opportunity in housing, and assist the President in his recently
announced Federal crackdown on housing discrimination.

FY 1999 funding for the FHAP program is proposed at $23 million, an $8 million increase over
the FY 1998 level. This increase will support the creation of additional State and local fair
housing organizations to meet the needs of currently underserved populations and will be used
for joint investigations and enforcement activities. It is estimated that the number of new State
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


and local agencies with laws equivalent to the Fair Housing Act will increase from 78 in 1997 to
85 in 1999, and the number of cases processed by these agencies will increase from 3,797 in
1997 to 6,100 in 1999. Increased funding for this program strengthens the Administration's
crackdown on housing discrimination by engaging the States and localities more effectively.

FY 1999 funding for the FHIP program is proposed at $29 million, a $14 million increase over
the FY 1998 level. $10 million is proposed for a targeted, audit-based enforcement initiative
that would raise the Nation's and communities' awareness of the extent of discrimination
through focused and publicly released audit results and subsequent enforcement actions. Paired
testing, in which otherwise identical white and minority testers approach realtors or landlords, is
a particularly effective method of detecting housing discrimination. This initiative provides for
non-profit housing organizations to undertake audit-based fair housing enforcement in 20 areas
nationwide to develop local indices of discrimination, to identify and pursue violations of fair
housing laws, and to promote new community fair housing enforcement initiatives. The
Administration believes that this systematic and focused strategy, replicated across the country,
could substantially aid in detecting and reducing level so housing discrimination.

The FY 1999 budget also includes a $4 million increase in flexible funding for the FHIP
program, to strengthens Secretary Cuomo's "One America" initiative, including his pledge to, in
the second term, double the number of enforcement actions taken by HUD with regard to housing
discrimination complaints (relative to the number for the first term).

Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division. The Civil Rights Division serves as the chief
civil rights enforcement agency of the Federal government. It not only has primary
responsibility for Federal civil rights litigation, but also is charged with coordinating Federal civil
rights policy. The Division enforces a number oflaws providing civil and criminal protections
from discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, disability, age,
familial status, citizenship status, marital status, and source of income, in such areas as
employment, education, public accommodations, housing, lending, and programs receiving
Federal assistance.

The Attorney General has delegated to the Civil Rights Division primary litigation authority for
enforcement of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity
Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act, and a
number of criminal and civil statutes, including laws prohibiting police misconduct. The
Division also enforces Federal constitutional and statutory rights in institutions covered by the
Civil Rights ofInstitutionalized Persons Act. The Division has instituted a successful mediation
program in its Disability Rights Section (the one area where the Division handles initial
complaints, rather than referrals from other government agencies).

The President's 1999 budget provides $71.6 million, more than a 10 percent increase over the
1998 level of $64.7 million. In addition to providing continued funding for the enforcement
efforts described above, the proposed level will allow the Civil Rights Division to significantly
expand investigation and prosecutions of police brutality and misconduct, including pattern and
practice cases, as well as violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act. The Budget
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


includes a $1 million increase to enhance the Division's coordination of Federal civil rights
enforcement, and $1.5 million for improvements in information technology, trial preparation, and
courtroom presentations.

Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs. The Office of Federal Contract
Compliance Programs (OFCCP) is part of the Employment Standards Administration at the U.S.
Department of Labor. OFCCP is responsible for ensuring nondiscrimination in employment
based on race, sex, religion, color, national origin, disability or veteran status by more than
200,000 Federal contractors and subcontractors with a total workforce of approximately 22
million people. It assures that Federal contractors and subcontractors take affirmative action in
hiring and the advancement of minorities and women under the authority of Executive Orders
11246 and 11375. It also enforces the affirmative action and nondiscrimination provisions of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and, as an agent of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990. It ensures that contractors comply
with the provisions ofthe Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 providing
affirmative action by Federal contractors to employ, and advance in employment, special
disabled and Vietnam era veterans.

The FY 1999 Budget includes funds to continue OFCCP's Fair Enforcement Initiative which
began in FY 1998. The Fair Enforcement Initiative includes a streamlined tiered compliance
review process which reduces contractor burden while enabling the agency to target the most
serious violations. The tiered review process also will enable OFCCP to reach more of the
contractor universe, resulting in a 10% increase in FY 1999 in the number of compliance reviews
conducted. In addition, through the completion of various regulatory changes, OFCCP will
reduce contractor burden by at least 30%. OFCCP will modernize its computer systems in order
to streamline internal procedures permitting the agency, for example, to accept electronically
submitted reports from contractors.

OFCCP will continue to provide compliance assistance targeted at helping Federal contractors in
understanding the regulatory requirements for providing equal employment opportunity and
affirmative action. This initiative will strengthen the agency's activities in educating employers
and constituency groups on non-discriminatory employment practices; provide technical
assistance to contractors in the formulation of affirmative action plans and compliance with
regulations, especially for small and emerging contractors unfamiliar with their responsibilities;
publicize and honor best practices in affirmative action and non-discrimination in employment;
and identify and resolve systemic discrimination. In addition, OFCCP staff will provide
grassroots seminars and technical assistance training sessions for contractors, contracting
agencies, and constituency groups.

The Fair Enforcement Initiative, which includes technical compliance assistance, will increase
the effectiveness and efficiency of the agency while addressing the persistent problem of
systemic discrimination in the workplace.

Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights. Education's Office for Civil Rights'
(OCR) mission is to ensure equal access to education and to promote educational excellence
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

throughout the Nation through vigorous enforcement of civil rights laws and regulations. These
laws are: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (prohibiting race, color and national origin
discrimination); Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (prohibiting sex discrimination);
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1972 (prohibiting disability discrimination); Age
Discrimination Act of 1975); and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
(prohibiting disability discrimination in State and local government services). Also, OCR
enforces civil rights provisions in Title V, Part A, of the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act (the Magnet Schools Assistance program), and provides technical assistance to Federal
award recipients and beneficiaries, the public and other organizations in an attempt to obtain
voluntary compliance with civil rights laws.

OCR's purview currently encompasses a range of issues: over-representation of minorities in
special education and remedial courses, under-representation of minorities in math and science
and other advanced placement courses; disability discrimination; access to programs for limited
English proficient (LEP) students; racial and sexual harassment; affirmative action and fairness
in testing/assessment; gender equity in athletics; and higher education and elementary and
secondary school desegregation. Over 50 percent of the complaints OCR receives annually are
for disability. OCR selects compliance reviews based on field assessments of the greatest
problems of unredressed discrimination in the regions. OCR targets areas where no action is
currently being taken to address the discriminatory practices. Currently, the greatest percentage
of compliance reviews are in the area of race discrimination.

The President's FY 1999 Budget request for OCR is $68 million, an increase of $6.5 million over
FY 1998 enacted. OCR is a well-managed organization, having won 3 VP Hammer awards,
and continues to make progress in its enforcement efforts in case resolution and in the number
and type of active compliance reviews initiated. On average, OCR receives and resolves over
5,000 discrimination complaints annually. OCR plans to hire 40 additional attorneys in FY
1998 based on its appropriation level of $62 million, reducing the current attorney/case ratio
from 1/65 to 1/48. The FY 1999 level would allow OCR to maintain this staffing level and fund
ADP improvements to increase productivity and customer service, and complete the Elementary
and Secondary Education School Survey, at a projected cost of $.8 million, which provides data
to numerous Federal and other institutions for a variety of purposes such as identifying trends
and targeting civil rights problems. Hiring the additional staff in FY 1998, and maintaining it in
FY 1999, will enable OCR to continue to invest sufficient resources investigating a complaint it
received about California's current higher education admissions process and in higher education
desegregation reviews such as those ongoing in Texas, Ohio, Florida, and Pennsylvania.

Areas OCR would like to emphasize more are building collaborative relationships with parents,
students, and educators n    focusing on preventing discrimination rather than just remedying it --
and building partnerships with States to address statewide compliance with civil rights laws and
regulations. A key element of its enforcement strategy involves educating the public about its
rights and responsibilities and creating linkages among recipients, beneficiaries, and community
groups for the purpose of achieving the shared goal of civil rights compliance. For example,
OCR has encouraged parental involvement in monitoring voluntary action plans. These
approaches require a significant investment in time and resources to provide the necessary
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
technical assistance.

Department of Health and Human Services. The Department of Health and Human Services'
Office for Civil Rights (OCR) enforces compliance with Civil Rights statutes to ensure that
people have equal access to and do not face discrimination in HHS programs, particularly in the
areas of managed care, inter-ethnic adoption, services to limited English proficient services, and
welfare reform. OCR investigates complaints, undertakes pre- and post-grant reviews, and
provides outreach and technical assistance. The Civil Rights statutes OCR enforces include
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Age
Discrimination Act of 1975, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Title VI and XVI of
the Public Health Service Act, parts of the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1981 related to
non-discrimination within block grant programs, and the Small Business Protection Act of 1996
(inter-ethnic adoption provisions).

Over the past few years, OCR has focused more of its resources on non-complaint activities such
as compliance reviews and outreach and technical assistance to improve compliance with Civil
Rights statutes and help prevent discrimination. OCR has also increased its use of altemative
methods (e.g., alternative dispute resolution) to resolve complaints faster. One of OCR's
performance measures is to decrease the average age of case closures in OCR's priority areas.

The FY 1999 Budget for OCR is $21 million, a $1 million increase over FY 1998 enacted levels.
With the additional funding, OCR can undertake an increased number of compliance reviews to
ensure that discrimination is not occurring within HHS-funded programs and provide more
technical assistance and outreach to prevent discrimination from occurring in the first place.

Department of Agriculture, Civil Rights Enforcement Funding. The mission of the
Department of Agriculture is " ... to enhance the quality of life for the American people by
supporting production agriculture; ensuring a safe, affordable, nutrition and accessible food
supply; caring for agricultural, forest and range lands; supporting sound development of rural;
communities; providing economic opportunities for farm and rural residents; expanding global
markets for agricultural products and services; ans working to reduce hunger in America and
throughout the world." Its programs meet the mission through the following areas: Federal and
cooperative research, commodity marketing and inspection services; payments and lending
programs (direct and guaranteed) for farmers, as well as rural housing, utilities and businesses,
natural resources protection for farmers and national forests, and food assistance to low income
households, and other at risk groups.

The Department's central civil rights enforcement programs are administered through the
Assistant Secretary For Administration and the General Counsel, and has the goal of assuring
that: "all USDA employees and customers are treated fairly and equitable with dignity and
respect." Specific objectives include improving service to minority farmers, modernizing civil
rights systems and processes, implementing specific recommendations made to the Secretary,
establishing outreach programs to undeserved customers, and increasing opportunities for small,
disadvantaged, and women-owned businesses to participate in USDA programs and contracts,
and creating a Civil Rights unit within the Office of the General Counsel.
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

The FY 1999 Budget increases USDA funding for civil rights programs from $15 million to $19
million. Funding above the enacted level has been added to human resources management,
outreach to under-represented customers, increasing the involvement of small and disadvantaged
businesses in USDA programs, conflict resolution activities, and in processing and adjudicating
complaints brought by employees and customers. The Department will use performance
measures related to the number of civil rights complaints, customers satisfaction, and
participation rates by targeted groups.

The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Established in 1957, the U.S. Commission on Civil
Rights has a broad ranging mandate to monitor and report on the status of civil rights' protections
in the United States. As an independent, bipartisan agency of the Federal Government, the
Commission strives to keep the President, the Congress, and the public informed about civil
rights issues that deserve concentrated attention, and to appraise Federal laws and policies with
respect to discrimination or denial of protection of the laws because of race, color, religion, sex,
age, disability, or national origin, or in the administration of justice. In doing so, it continually
reminds all Americans why vigorous civil rights enforcement is in our national interest.

To meet these responsibilities, the agency conducts major investigations, educates the public on
civil rights matters, and operates programs that address both local and national civil rights
interests and concerns. The Commission maintains four key programs: a program to monitor
and evaluate Federal civil rights enforcement; a program to investigate and study allegations of
discrimination and denials of equal protection of the civil rights laws; a network of regional
offices and State Advisory Committees that give the Commission a local presence in
communities across the country; and a program to educate the public about civil rights.

The FY 1999 Budget proposes $11 million for the Commission. The resources being requested
for FY 1999 are justified by the need to engage more fully the agency's unique factfinding
authority in addressing today's critical, and still evolving, civil rights problems. In the past few
years, the Commission has not obtained increased funding from Congress, and this past year, it
has operated without reauthorization. Most recently, the Commission has taken important steps
toward improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its operations. For example, the
Commission has implemented a new management information system to provide improved
information on projects status and costs that can be used by staff and the Commissions in
managing and planning program activities, and it is currently revising and updating agency
regulations and internal administrative instructions to improve accountability and agency
operational efficiency. These improvements will help to ensure that the FY 1999 resources are
more effective in advancing civil rights in the United States.

Department of Transportation, Office of Civil Rights. Start text here.

Department of Labor, Civil Rights Center. The Civil Rights Center (CRC) is responsible
for enforcing the Federal statutes and regulations that prohibit discrimination in all
Department of Labor (DOL) financial assistance programs and within DOL workplaces;
and prohibit discrimination on the basis of disability by certain public entities and in

                                                         Automated Records Management SystelT'
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
    activities conducted by DOL. eRe provides compliance assistance to entities receiving
    DOL funds, investigates and issues decisions on complaints of discrimination filed by DOL
    employees, applicants for employment, and people participating in DOL financed
    programs. eRe conducts reviews of grantees to ensure their compliance with civil rights
    laws and regulations, and evaluates and monitors DOL's Affirmative Employment
    Program.

    To accomplish the President's agenda of strengthening civil rights enforcement, eRe
    employs a proactive approach towards reducing discrimination. eRe promotes voluntary
    compliance with existing non-discrimination laws through education and technical
    assistance to mitigate the number of complaint filings. To further reduce complaint
    workload, eRe plans to expand the number of technical assistance visits made to the
    States to ensure voluntary compliance. The eRe also intends to encourage the States to
    promote the use of alternative dispute resolution in complaint processing programs at the
    state level. Methods of Administration (MOA) agreements which are signed by the states
    as a condition of receiving employment and training funds have also been an effective tool
    in assisting states in addressing discrimination by ensuring that uniform systems are in
    place to enforce applicable nondiscrimination laws. The success of these preventative
    efforts will be evaluated through measuring the reduction in the incidences of
    discrimination.


