 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Stephen C. Warnath ( CN;Stephen C. Warnath/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-APR-1997 13:13:14.00

 SUBJECT:   SSA benefits and Nazi War Criminals

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 I held the meeting yesterday with the DOJ, SSA, Neal Sher, former head of
 DOJ's OSI and representing the American Gathering of Holocaust Survivors,
 and Doug Bloomfield, representing the World Jewish Congress & World Jewish
 Restitution Organization. Counsel's Office (Dawn),   Public Liaison (Jay
 Footlik) and OMB (Melinda Haskins & Richard Green) also attended.

 In summary, Messrs. Sher and Bloomfield presented a passionate argument
 that SSA's proposal will hurt prosecutions of Nazi war criminals. They
 want the status quo left alone and for SSA not to introduce its
 legislative proposal. They presented the argument that I outlined for you
 earlier: They deeply believe that some judges will act more
 sympathetically toward old men who were Nazis if they can argue that not
 only is the government trying to strip them of their citizenship, but the
 government is also impoverishing them while they are trying to defend
 their rights during the judicial process.  They think that a single bad
 outcome in a case could have farreaching implications for other cases.
 They admit that it is impossible to accurately predict what judges may in
 fact do, but they hold the view with absolute conviction that this will
 hurt prosecutions.

 Obviously, everyone in attendance agreed that we shared the objective of
 not wanting to do anything to compromise prosecutions of Nazis.  SSA and
 DOJ explained how they engaged in interagency discussions to reach what
 they jointly view as a proposal that properly balances SSA's concern about
 "subsidizing the retirement of Nazis" with enforcement concerns.  It is
 important to note that DOJ concedes that there remains some possible
 enforcement implications, but again, they believe that this proposal is an
 appropriate balancing of policy objectives.

 In my follow-up with the White House attendees at the meeting, we agree
 that the specific enforcement concern depends on predictions on what
 judges mayor may not do and therefore does not sound fully compelling
 EXCEPT that it is impossible to ignore who is raising the concern.   These
 individuals are representatives of those who are the most concerned about
 and the most effected by this proposal.   It gains us very little to close
 this SSA loophole if taking that action is decried in the strongest
 possible terms by the victims of those war criminals as undermining their
 prosecutions.

 And make no mistake, Messrs. Sher and Bloomfield were absolutely clear
 that they and their organizations would protest vociforously.  They would
 protest in the media, and they would protest in Congress. They would make
 sure that it is known that the President has introduced legislation that
 would compromise the prosecutions of Nazis.

 On the other hand, they said that if SSA is criticized for making such
 payments they would engage in whatever steps were necessary to explain to
 the public, to Members of Congress, and to the media that SSA's policies


 were sound and that anyone promoting an alternative view would be hurting
 prosecutions. There is already at least one critical article that has
 appeared (St. Petersburg Times) and SSA has been contacted by a Tampa CBS
 affiliate for comment.   I think that we can anticipate other critical piec
 es, and it may be picked up by the national press. Congo Bunning (R-Ky),
 chair of the Ways and Means Social Security Subcommittee has requested
 information about the St. Petersburg story.

 Given the foregoing considerations, I  think that this is a very difficult
 issue, but I have to recommend to you that we provide guidance to SSA that
 the proposal should not go forward. Normally, I would give quite a bit
 of deference to Justice and SSA for the product of a solid interagency
 process.  Nobody wants to provide benefits to Nazis, ESPECIALLY when some
 of their victims who are legal immigrants may face benefit cut-offs, but
 we cannot ignore the absolute conviction of those who we heard from who
 represent the victims when they say that the President will hinder the
 prosecutions of Nazis with this proposal.

 Dawn agrees with this recommendation based upon her participation in the
 meeting.  Public Liaison agrees.

 Let me know what you think.

 Thanks Elena.


 BACKGROUND:  The current law is that SSA benefits must be cut off when a
 final order of deprotation is issued agains an individual becuase that
 individual engaged in Nazi persecution or genocide.    The loophole
 exists, for example, for a Nazi who flees the country without an order of
 deportation. Under those circumstances, SSA benefits would continue.

 Of the 31 living Nazi war criminal who were eligible for Social Security
 benefits and who have left the United States, only 10 have lost benefits
 because of the Nazi war criminal provision in current Social Security
 law.  As of March 15, 1997, 18 Nazi war criminals (almost 2/3) were being
 paid Social Security benefits.   SSA found other grounds to cut off
 benefits to two additional Nazi war criminals, but they could return to
 the Social Security roles and the pay status of another one is temporarily
 suspended.


