RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Ernmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-JAN-1998 19:54:30.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly 1/16 as of 8:00 PM

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Missing only new healthcare    and whatever you just told Julie

I asked the staff if entries froom last week need to be updated, but they
say no.==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D24]MAIL48903751L.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043DEOF0000010A0201000000020500000077810000000200008CDCF9B1B04FE4FE73B9D4
3304A4D1802EDA1D3E9CDB042632B6960DA2B85CC5C9754D6EAB257602AF7337E5D16E4FB72441
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion




                                          January 16,1997


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report




        Immigration -- Skills of Immigrants: The attached U.S. News article discusses the
issue of whether we should change our legal immigration system to strengthen preferences for
skilled and well-educated prospective immigrants over those that are poorly educated and
unskilled. The current immigration system is set up to favor keeping families intact. Thus, the
vast number of legal immigrants are brought to this country through family-based visas, which do
not take into account education or skill level. The article cites a Rand study proposal to create a
point system of immigration which continues to give weight to immediate family reunification
but would also give points for education, language skills, and work experience. The final report
of the Commission on Immigration Reform also recommends a shift in priority toward higher
skilled immigrants. Instead of creating a point system, the Commission recommends revising
skill-based admissions (approximately 100,000 visas) to favor highly-skilled and educated
immigrants and eliminating altogether the category of unskilled workers. Though we think that
these ideas are well worth exploring, it is unlikely that Congress will want to consider an
overhaul oflegal immigration this year. Efforts to reduce legal immigration levels were
defeated during consideration of the 1996 illegal immigration law.

        Education -- Single Sex Schools in New York City: DPC has been meeting with the
White House Counsel's office, the Education and Justice Departments, to address the OCR
response to a complaint against the existence of the all girl's Women's Leadership Academy in
New York City. Both you and Secretary Riley are in complete agreement that, as a matter of
policy, school districts should be (encouraged??? free???) to establish single sex schools as part
of the mix of education options. The Office of Civil Rights has placed its investigation of the
compliant on hold, and will take no steps in the foreseeable future to press New York City to
change the status of the school. However, civil rights offices in both Education and Justice
believe that such schools ultimately may be difficult to justify under Title IX or Article (relevant
Constitutional reference), in part because they have discriminatory admissions policies, and
partly because separate schools will inevitably become unequal and to the ultimate disadvantage
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

of females. They believe that the strongest legal case for permitting single sex schools is an
argument that they are an appropriate remedy for past discrimination, such as low academic
performance offemales in co-educational settings. Neither of the cognizant Civil Rights offices
want to take formal action on this issue, because they believe they will be forced to oppose
single-sex schools.

       Late in December, Secretary Riley and Rudy Crew agreed to appoint small teams of
educators from the Education Department and the NYC Schools to work collaboratively to
develop the strongest case for the Women's Leadership Academy. The teams will begin to plan
their work next week. This process may take some time, and during this period the Education
Department's Office of Civil Rights will not take any further actions on this case.

        Health Care -- Robert Reich's Proposal for Fixed Dollars for Health Care: You
asked for an analysis of Robert Reich's proposal to forgo a new increase in the minimum wage
and instead require that employers require a certain fixed dollar amount for health care. As you
will recall, we did forgo proposing a minimum wage increase when we proposed the Health
Security Act because we did not want to load up the costs to employers. The idea of having a
defined minimum employer contribution certainly has some merit as it would make a significant
contribution to decreasing the number of uninsured. Having said that, there are a number of
political and policy issues that have to be seriously considered prior to pursuing such a proposal.
        There are numerous political and administrative complications that would have to be
worked out before moving forward on such an initiative, such as: (1) whether or not we would be
forced to add subsidies for this; (2) whether employers would be accountable if their employees
had coverage from their spouse's employers; or (3) whether certain employers would be exempt.

        Having said this, if you would like to further pursue this you should be aware that of
some of the disadvantages. We will have to use a great deal of capital with the employer
community as we move forward on our other current health care policies such as health care
quality and the COBRA extension for the "promise breaker" employees who have dropped
retiree health care coverage. Adding this proposal to the mix would no doubt create a great deal
of public animosity from the employer community. Moreover, in a Republican Congress there
is no chance that this would pass and it would likely be characterized as another step to "take
over the health care system." Although liberal Democrats would be comfortable with this
proposal, our centrist Democrats would not support it, primarily because of the opposition from
the small business community.

        Health Care -- Medicare HMOs Dropping Benefits: You asked us to respond to
recent reports that Medicare HMOs were dropping benefits because of changes in Medicare
reimbursement policies. We have asked HHS to review the extent to which this is occurring.
However, it is important to note that many independent policy experts believe that payments to
HMOs still are, on average, excessive given the fact that they continue to attract
disproportionately healthy populations. They believe that any movement towards reducing
benefits are more attributable to HMO's desire for adequate profit margins for their investors


                                                2
               
rather t han adJustments In .            .
                         . relmbursement Issue. In "                   \-l"y_numo.Converslon C
                                                   lact, one corporate'E!Xel:UllVe Just InlOrme d
us that Medicare continues to be their number one most profitable player. Having said that, the
fact that the BBA is starting to reduce Medicare reimbursements to HMOs will clearly contribute
to lower revenues for these health plans. It is important to note that the added benefits in
Medicare HMO plans do help encourage beneficiaries to participate in these plans. The
outstanding question is whether or not we want to allow payment rates to exceed what is
necessary so as to ensure that these additional benefits are in place. Regardless, any move in
this direction would be premature until we have better information about the extent to which
HMOs are reducing benefits and the reasons behind such a trend.

        Welfare Reform -- New Caseload Numbers: We have new caseload numbers for you to
announce, showing that the number of Americans on welfare has fallen below 10 million people
for the first time since 1970, a drop of 30 percent, or 4.3 million, since you took office. The new
numbers, from September 1997, show 9.8 million people on welfare, down from 14.1 million in
January 1993 to 12.2 million in August 1996. With these numbers, we've met -- two years
ahead of schedule -- the goal you set in last year's State of the Union to move two million more
Americans off of welfare by the year 2000 (in the speech, you noted that rolls were already down
2.25 million under your Administration, numbers which were from October 1996).

        Welfare Reform -- Why People Leave the Welfare Rolls: You asked why, as The New
York Times reported, only half the people are leaving the rolls for work, and whether that means
the time limits are too strict. The New York Times article refers to the few, state-specific
studies that exist -- from Massachusetts, Idaho, New Mexico, Tennessee, Maryland, Florida (2
counties), and Minnesota -- all which were conducted before any recipients in these states had
reached time limits, so we don't believe time limits are the explanation.

        These state studies which find about half of those leaving the welfare rolls for jobs
generally parallel historical trends of about one-half leaving the rolls due to earned income, about
15 percent leaving for marriage, and between 5 and 10 percent each leaving because their
youngest child turns 18, they move to another state, they join the SSI rolls, or for other reasons.
It is worth noting that while the percent of people leaving welfare for work does not appear much
higher than in the past, the absolute number of people leaving welfare for work is higher since
the total number of people leaving welfare has increased.

        Few of these studies provide complete information about the half of those who are not
working. Most find that families continue to receive food stamps, Medicaid, and other forms of
public support. Generally, families are not relying heavily on community groups, shelters or
churches (5-6% in New Mexico and Idaho). In fact, Indiana found that after leaving TANF
families were slightly less likely to tum to community social service groups. More typically,
people seem to rely on family. To date, there has not been evidence that these families are
entering the child welfare system in greater numbers. There is no direct evidence to date that a
lack of jobs is preventing people from moving off welfare into work or contributing to the
relatively high percentage who have left welfare but are not working.


                                                 3
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion



       While none of these studies include families leaving welfare due to time limits, there is
evidence that a significant number of cases are being closed because people did not comply with
the welfare reform requirements, although some of these cases are later reopened. For example,
the new Delaware study, which we described last week, found half of the cases experienced a
sanction. In New Mexico, 12 percent said they 'were forced off or had their case closed'.

         It is difficult to compare these state-commissioned studies because their methodologies,
time frames, and quality vary widely. We will soon begin receiving quarterly TANF data from
each state on the reason for case closure, i.e., work, marriage, sanction, time limit (states
submitted the first data at the end of 1997 and HHS is currently analyzing them). In addition,
states that wish to compete for part of the $200 million a year high performance bonus will have
to submit more extensive data on job entry, retention, and wage earnings of their current and
former welfare recipients. Thus, we hope to know more in the coming months.

        Welfare -- Wilson and Solow lectures [Note to Elena: I read the James Q. Wilson and
Robert Solow lectures, and I don't see anything new to report. Wilson focuses on his
long-standing thesis that stable families are the foundation of a stable society. As George Will
neatly summarized the lecture in his 12/22 Newsweek column "Wilson's ameliorative ideas for
American families include making adoption easier in order to minimize foster care ... to require
unmarried teenage mothers to live in a home supervised by experienced mothers ... [create] 'the
religious equivalent of the United Fund' to deliver services to the underclass through the
churches .... [and] offer the equivalent of the GI Bill for a parent -- usually a mother -- who will
postpone a career until children reach school age."

Thus, Wilson's conclusions are interesting, but have already been well reported. On the other
hand, there isn't much worth mentioning about Solow's lectures, which Glenn Loury mentioned
only in passing in his New Republic piece. Solow's first lecture essentially concludes that
requiring work from welfare recipients will give them more self-esteem (since society values
work) and will reduce the resentment of taxpayers. His second lecture concludes that welfare
reform is likely to depress wages of other workers, although how much is unclear (he doesn't add
any new evidence, just economic theory), that most welfare programs have had limited success in
putting people to work, and that we may therefore need to recreate the WP A or extend substantial
incentives to the private sector.]

       Crime -- Prisons and Jails: On Sunday, the Justice Department will release a study
showing that as of June 30, 1997, the nation's prisons and jails incarcerated over 1.7 million
inmates-- an increase of 96,000 over the prior year's total. The total 1.7 million inmates
included: 99,175 federal prisoners; 1.05 million state prisoners; and 567,000 local jail inmates.
Between July 1996 and June 1997, the number of federal and state inmates grew by 4.7%
(55,198), less than the average annual increase of7.7% since 1990. Hawaii had the largest
percentage increase in prison population since midyear 1996 (21 %), followed by North Dakota
(15.5%), and Wisconsin (15.4%). The number oflocal jail inmates rose by 9.4% (48,587),


                                                 4
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


nearly double the average annual growth of 4.9 % for this population since 1990. Particularly
notable within the local jail inmate population are the increasing numbers of women and
juveniles. Since 1985, the number of females in local jails has grown by 9.9% annually, and the
number of juveniles has increased nearly six-fold (from 1,629 to 9,105).

        Women's Issues -- Emergency Contraception: You asked that we examine the recent
Judy Mann editorial which focuses on the little-known but effective use of high doses of ordinary
birth control pills as emergency contraception. Mann notes that doctors often do not discuss this
option with their patients and most women do not know to ask about it. In February oflast year,
the Food and Drug Administration took an unusually aggressive step to address this issue by
publishing a notice in the Federal Registry declaring that this use of oral contraception is safe and
effective and requesting that manufactures submit supplemental new drug applications to the
FDA for its approval. The notice includes information about which oral contraceptions can be
used and how to use these drugs safely for this purpose. However, no manufacturer has yet
sought FDA approval for the drugs to be packaged or labeled for the use of emergency
contraception. The FDA believes that because they must regulate these drugs and because
manufacturers, despite our prodding, have not chosen to market the drugs for this use, we have
gone as far as we can.

       The step taken by the FDA last year was significant and builds on your strong record of
support for pregnancy prevention measures and family planning services. The advocacy
community will be pleased to know that your FY 1999 budget includes a $15 million increase in
Title X funding for family planning services, which, as you know, has been drastically expanded
under your leadership. Other accomplishments in this area include: (1) the decline in teen
pregnancy for six straight years, with the implementation of your National Strategy to Prevent
Teen Pregnancy; (2) the transfer of U.S. patent rights for mifepristone (RU-486) from a French
pharmaceutical firm to an American non-profit organization to make it possible for the drug to be
submitted to the FDA for marketing approval; and (3) the elimination of the "Gag Rule," which
has ensured that all women cared for through Federal family planning programs have access to
uncensored information.

        Family -- Family and Medical Leave Expansion: Since we submitted the
memorandum to you on proposed FMLA expansion, Erskine asked us to examine the costs to the
private sector of the options under consideration -- lowering the threshold of covered businesses
to employers of 25 workers and extending the time period of covered leave to six months.
Unfortunately, there are no good data sources in this area. Given this and political
considerations, your advisors have not reached consensus on this issue. We will submit, jointly
with the NEe, a formal decision memorandum next week outlining these views.

       Education -- Single Sex Schools in New York City: DPC has been working with the White
House Counsel's office, the Education Department, and the Justice Department to address the
response by the Education Department's Office of Civil Rights (OCR) to a complaint against the
Women's Leadership Academy, an all-girls school in New York City. Both you and Secretary


                                                 5
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


Riley are in complete agreement that, as a matter of policy, single sex schools are an appropriate
part of the mix of education options that school districts could provide to parents. However,
both OCR and the Civil Rights Division in Justice believe that such schools ultimately may be
difficult to justify on under Title IX and on Constitutional grounds, because they have
discriminatory admissions policies, and because separate schools may inevitably provide unequal
opportunities to females. While it may be possible in principle to argue successfully that single
sex schools are an appropriate remedy for past discrimination, it is not clear if the facts in this
case would support such an argument.

         Past efforts to resolve this matter between OCR and lawyers for NYC have not been
fruitful. OCR has placed its investigation of the compliant on hold, and will take no steps in the
foreseeable future to press New York City to change the status of the school. Secretary Riley
and NYC Chancellor Rudy Crew have recently agreed to appoint a small team of educators from
the Education Department and the NYC Schools to work collaboratively to explore all possible
ways of resolving this dispute so that the Women's Leadership Academy remains open, and in a
fashion that avoids legal action by the Administration if at all possible. Our hope is that direct
conversations between the Secretary and the Chancellor will set a more positive context in which
a solution can be arrived at.

         Education -- National Testing: Bill Goodling has scheduled a Jan. 28 mark-up of a bill
that would codify the provisions of the national testing agreement in last year's appropriations
bill, and prohibit further development or implementation of the tests beyond FY98 without
specific statutory authorization. We believe that if this were voted on, Goodling would carry all
Republicans as well as committee Democrats in the Black and Hispanic Caucuses. DPC and
Education Department staff met with Mr. Clay's staff to begin to develop a strategy for dealing
with the mark-up. Our basic approach is to try to get the mark-up postponed and, if
unsuccessful at that, to at least try to hold Democrats together. Secretary Riley will send
Goodling a letter on Tuesday requesting that he not proceed with this action, on the grounds that
it violates the agreement you and he reached, which called for further Congressional deliberations
to be informed by a series of studies by the National Academy of Sciences, none of which will
be completed until this Spring. In addition, we will make sure that Caucus members on the
committees are fully aware of the investments your budget makes in expanding learning
opportunities for low income and minority students, many of which respond directly to concerns
they have expressed regarding the tests. We will identify additional steps to take early next week.

       Education -- National Testing: The National Assessment Governing Board will meet next
week to determine what changes if any are needed in the contract to develop the national tests.
The NAGB committee spearheading this work has recommended, on technical grounds, that the
contract be modified to make 2001 the target year for the first administration of the tests--2 years
later than you originally proposal, and a year later than the path we have been on since the
Summer. Along with Secretary Riley and Deputy Secretary Smith, we believe this is delay is

                                                 6
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


not necessary for sound test development and is otherwise undesirable. We are working behind
the scenes with our supporters on NAGB to keep to the faster timetable.

         Food Safety -- Budget Increase: The new budget contains a significant new
commitment to improving food safety programs in HHS and USDA. The $101 million increase
will fund a variety of programs that are part of the Presidential Food Safety Initiative you
announced last year, including: implementing our aggressive fresh produce plan to hire FDA
inspectors to improve the safety of our nation's fruits and vegetables, both domestic and
imported; increasing the risk assessment on beef, chicken and pork to better determine the source
of the greatest risk of contamination; developing better tests for federal inspectors and others to
detect food-borne illnesses; improving educational outreach on proper food handling, especially
to the elderly and poor; and expanding the new national early warning system for food-borne
diseases. This increase comes after an increase of more than $40 million last year. We are
looking into ways to highlight this effort in the State of the Union speech. In addition to
mentioning the specific new programs in your speech, you could note that on the day before the
speech, USDA's new science-based system for ensuring meat safety took effect. As you may
recall, this new preventative approach to enforcing our food safety law was recommended by the
Vice-President and came in response to the food borne outbreak that occurred in the Northwest in
1993.

        Urban Initiatives Your soon to be announced FY99 budget includes several urban
initiatives developed by the DPC-NEC interagency working group on community
empowerment. These initiatives complement your Administration's long-term strategy to
increase the flow of private investment to America's inner cities. We believe you should
make a major speech or a series of announcements focused around three broad themes: 1)
Housing Mobility; 2) Homeownership For All Americans; 3) and Spurring Private
Investment In Distressed Communities. Some of the initiatives that could be included:

       Housing Mobility
            50,000 Welfare-To-Work Housing Vouchers. The FY 1999 budget includes
             $283 million for 50,000 new vouchers exclusively for people who need
             housing assistance to make the transition from welfare to employment..
            Additional 50,000 New Vouchers For Priority Populations. The budget also
             includes 50,000 new housing vouchers largely targeted to especially needy
             populations, including homeless persons with disabilities and family
             prevention.

       Homeownership For All Americans
              'PJay-by-the-RuJes" Homeownership Proposal.      The FY 1999 budget for the
               Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation includes $25 million for a new initiative
               that would make homeowners hip more accessible to families who have a good
               rental history but are currently under served by the housing sales market.


                                                7
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

      Homeownership Zones. The FY 1999 budget includes $25 million for
       Homeownership Zones.
       HomeownershiplEmpowerment Voucher Initiative. Under this proposal
       Section 8 certificates and vouchers could be used to purchase, rather than only to
       rent, housing.

Spurring Private Investment In Our Distressed Communities
     Flexible Funding For Second-round Empowerment Zones. The
      Administration's FY 1999 budget provides $150 million for ten years in
      mandatory funding for second-round urban EZs.
     Expansion Of The Economic Development Initiative (ED I). The
      Administration's FY 1999 budget requests $400 million for EDI. HUD
      plans to use EDI and Section 108 guarantees together to stimulate creation of
      a secondary market in development loans.
     COFI Expansion. The Administration is requesting a $45 million increase
      in COFI funding. The increased funding also would be used in part to
      accelerate development of a secondary market for CDFI loans.
     Higher Cap On The Low-income Housing Tax Credit. The Administration's
      budget calls for increasing the cap to $1.75 per capita and indexing it to
      inflation thereafter, at a cost of $1.6 billion over five years.
     Increased Funding For Brownfields. HUD is requesting an additional $50
      million for Brownfields redevelopment to complement EPA's program and
      the new tax incentive.




                                        8


