RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-JAN-1998 18:27:20.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Education -- Single Sex Schools in New York City: DPC has been working
with the White House CounselD,s office, the Education and Justice
Departments,  to address the response by the Education DepartmentD,s
Office of Civil Rights (OCR) to a complaint against the WomenD,s
Leadership Academy, an all-girls school in New York City.  Both you and
Secretary Riley are in complete agreement that, as a matter of policy,
single sex schools are an appropriate part of the mix of education options
that school districts could provide to parents.  However, both OCR and the
Civil Rights Division in Justice believe that such schools ultimately may
be difficult to justify on under Title IX and on Constitutional grounds,
because they have discriminatory admissions policies, and because separate
schools may inevitably provide unequal opportunities to females.  While it
may be possible in principle to argue successfully that single sex schools
are an appropriate remedy for past discrimination, it is not clear if the
facts in this case would support such an argument.

        Past efforts to resolve this matter between OCR and lawyers for
NYC have not been fruitful.    OCR has placed its investigation of the
compliant on hold, and will take no steps in the foreseeable future to
press New York City to change the status of the school.   Secretary Riley
and NYC Chancellor Rudy Crew have recently agreed to appoint a small team
of educators from the Education Department and the NYC Schools to work
collaboratively to explore all possible ways of resolving this dispute so
that the WomenD,s Leadership Academy remains open, and in a fashion that
avoids legal action by the Administration if at all possible. Our hope is
that direct conversations between the Secretary and the Chancellor will
set a more positive context in which a solution can be arrived at.

Education -- National Testing: Bill Goodling has scheduled a Jan. 28
mark-up of a bill that would codify the provisions of the national testing
agreement in last yearD,s appropriations bill, and prohibit further
development or implementation of the tests beyond FY98 without specific sta
tutory authorization. We believe that if this were voted on, Goodling
would carryall Republicans as well as committee Democrats in the Black
and Hispanic Caucuses. DPC and Education Department staff met with Mr.
ClayC,s staff to begin to develop a strategy for dealing with the mark-up.
Our basic approach is to try to get the mark-up postponed and, if
unsuccessful at that, to at least try to hold Democrats together.
Secretary Riley will send Goodling a letter on Tuesday requesting that he
not proceed with this action, on the grounds that it violates the
agreement you and he reached, which called for further Congressional
deliberations to be informed by a series of studies by the National
Academy of Sciences, none of which will be completed until this Spring.
In addition, we will make sure that Caucus members on the committees are
fully aware of the investments your budget makes in expanding learning


opportunities for low income and minority students, many of which respond
directly to concerns they have expressed regarding the tests. We will
identify additional steps to take early next week.

Education -- National Testing: The National Assessment Governing Board
will meet next week to determine what changes if any are needed in the
contract to develop the national tests.  The NAGB committee spearheading
this work has recommended, on technical grounds, that the contract be m
odified to make 2001 the target year for the first administration of the
tests--2 years later than you originally proposal, and a year later than
the path we have been on since the Summer.   Along with Secretary Riley
and Deputy Secretary Smith, we believe this is delay is not necessary for
sound test development and is otherwise undesirable. We are working behind
the scenes with our supporters on NAGB to keep to the faster timetable.
·
