RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-JAN-1998 12:41:36.00

SUBJECT:   New Event Paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Susan M. Carr ( CN=Susan M. Carr/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Facts sheet, Q,A, and one pager.==================== ATTACHMENT       1 ================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D42]MAIL41884081F.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504367070000010A0201000000020500000042220000000200002B89CCEA038E33513A8876
576AC9DA5B5E7498BD2BE1E7B149AD61316D4E6871D0878AA5C88B2EOA41098848927216169BFA
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


                   THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCES
                  NEW CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT INITIATIVES
                             DRAFT, January 19, 1998

        The Vice President today announced a package of civil rights enforcement initiatives that
places new emphasis on prevention and non-litigation remedies for discrimination while
simultaneously strengthening civil rights agencies' ability to enforce anti-discrimination law. The
plan promotes prevention by providing increased resources for compliance reviews and technical
assistance, and offers an alternative to expensive litigation by funding a dramatic expansion of
alternate dispute resolution (ADR) mechanisms. The plan also sets specific performance goals
for the EEOC to speed processing of complaints and reduce case backlog, and provides for
greater coordination across federal agencies and offices. The Clinton Administration's Fiscal
Year 1999 Budget contains $602 million for civil rights enforcement agencies, $86 million or
more than a 16 percent increase over what was enacted in last year's budget.

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
        The centerpiece of the EEOC budget proposal is an expansion of the ADR program that
will double the number of complaints eligible for ADR in 1999 to 16,000 cases, or 20 percent of
incoming cases. The Administration plan seeks to expand ADR over the next three years with the
goal of providing a voluntary option for ADR in all eligible cases for employers and employees
who choose it. The Administration's 1999 Budget also sets specific performance goals for the
EEOC to reduce its backlog. Through a combination of improved information technology,
increased use of mediation, and more investigators, the EEOC will reduce the average time it
takes to resolve private sector complaints from over 9.4 months to 6 months by the year 2000.
The budget also sets aside new funds for information technology to enhance inter-office
communication, eliminate redundant data entry procedures, and provide for greater operational
efficiency through the sharing of information.
         Overall the budget requests $279 million for the EEOC, or 15 percent more than the
enacted 1998 budget. The budget includes $13 million for expanded ADR and $10 million for
improved technology.

Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
        The Administration's budget proposes an increased emphasis on reducing
discrimination and ensuring equal opportunity in housing. The highlight of the HUD budget
proposal is a targeted, audit-based enforcement initiative in 20 areas nationwide that would use
paired testing, in which otherwise identical applicants of different races approach realtors or
landlords, in order to detect and eliminate housing discrimination. The Administration proposal
also seeks $23 million, or an $8 million increase, for the Fair Housing Assistance Program, to
support the creation of additional State and local housing organizations to meet the needs of
currently under served populations and to aid joint investigations and enforcement activities.
        The Administration's budget proposes $52 million, or more than a 70 percent increase
from last year, to enable HUD to meet its goals of ensuring equal opportunity in housing. The
budget contains $29 million, or almost double the FY 1999 budget, for the Fair Housing


                                                 1
                                                                          Hex-Dump ConversIon


Initiatives Program (FHIP), which provides funding to private fair housing groups to assist in
enforcement of the Fair Housing Act. The paired testing program has been allocated $10
million.

Key Aspects of the Budget:

* Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
       The plan increases the use of ADR in the Federal government as a voluntary option
available to parties that seek a non-litigation solution to their cases. Mediation programs are
expanded in almost every agency, most notably in the EEOC where the number of mediations are
expected to double to 16,000 in the upcoming year.

* Expanded Outreach and Compliance Programs
        Technical assistance and outreach is improved and compliance programs are made more
thorough. For example, the Department of Labor, Office of Federal Contract Compliance
Programs (OFCCP) will modernize its computer systems in order to permit the agency to accept
reports submitted electronically from contractors. The Administration's budget will enable
OFCCP to increase by 10 percent the number of compliance reviews it conducts. Burdens on
contractors are expected to be reduced by 30%.

* Strong Enforcement
       The President's budget increases resources for civil rights agencies' budgets by more
than 16% overall. In addition to the 15% increase for the EEOC, the budget expands the
Department of Justice's Civil Rights Division by more than 10% from $64.7 million enacted in
1998 to $71.6 in FY 1999. Programs to help guarantee equal access to housing increase at HUD
increase by 70%.

 * Improved Coordination:
       The budget recognizes the need for improved coordination of Federal civil rights
enforcement policy among agencies and provides funds for this purpose to the DOJ Civil Rights
Division under the direction of Bill Lann Lee.




                                                2
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

                       Q&A for Civil Rights Enforcement Initiative
                                   January 19, 1998


Q:   What did the Clinton Administration announce with regard to civil rights enforcement?

A:   The Clinton Administration announced its Fiscal Year 1999 budget proposal of $602
     million for civil rights enforcement agencies -- this is $86 million or more than 16 percent
     greater than the FY 1998 budget. The President's proposal places new emphasis on
     preventive measures and non-litigation strategies while also strengthening the ability of
     federal agencies to enforce existing civil rights laws. The Administration's budget
     provides for increased use of voluntary Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) so parties
     can have their cases resolved more easily, cheaply and promptly. The highlight of the
     President's proposal is a 15 percent increase in funding for the Equal Employment
     Opportunity Commission. With this infusion of funds, the EEOC will be able to reduce
     the average time it takes to resolve a complaint from over 9 months to 6 months by the
     year 2000.

Q:   Why is the President proposing these actions?

A:   This budget keeps the President's commitment to ensure equal opportunity for all
     Americans: that no one should be denied such essentials as a job, a home or a chance at
     an education because of the color of their skin, a disability, their gender or their religion.
      One of the key observations John Hope Franklin, Chairman of the President's Initiative
     on Race, made in his November 30, 1997 letter to the President was that the budgets of
     civil rights agencies have not kept pace with their increased responsibilities. This budget
     seeks to provide sufficient resources and promote management reforms to allow civil
     rights agencies to do their jobs.

Q.   How does this budget relate to the President's Initiative on Race?

A.   The plan was influenced both by the topics raised by the Iniative such as improved data
     collection, and by specific advice such as comments by John Hope Franklin in his
     November 30, 1997 letter encouraging increased resources for civil rights agencies.

Q.   What other agencies are part of the Civil Rights Enforcement Initiative?

A.   The President's budget encourages the use of ADR, education and improved enforcement
     across the major civil rights agencies and offices. It includes funding for the following
     agencies involved in civil rights enforcement:

                           Civil Rights Enforcement Funding
                         (Budget authority, in millions of dollars)
                                          I                I
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


                                              1997            1998             1999
                                              Actual          Enacted          Request

 Equal Employment Opportunity                 240             242              279
 Commission

 Department of Housing and Urban              30              30               52
 Development, Fair Housing Activities

 Department of Justice, Civil Rights          62              65               72
 Division

 Department of Labor, Office of Federal       59              62               68
 Contractor Compliance Efforts

 Department of Education, Office of Civil     55              62               68
 Rights

 Department of Health and Human               20              20               21
 Services, Office of Civil Rights

 Department of Agriculture                    10              15                19

 U.S. Commission on Civil Rights              9               9                 11

 Department of Transportation, Office of      6               6                7
 Civil Rights

 Department of Labor, Office of Civil         5               5                5
 Rights

Q:     What does the President's budget propose with respect to the Civil Rights Division
       at the Department of Justice?

A:     The Administration's 1999 budget proposes more than a 10 percent increase for the
       Department of Justice for a total of $71.6 million. This funding will permit the
       Department to continue its efforts in enforcing the laws that provide civil and criminal
       protections from discrimination, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing
       Act, and the Americans with Disabilities Act. The budget also includes funds
       specifically to enhance the Civil Rights Division's role in coordinating federal civil rights
       enforcement across agencies.

Q:     What actions is the President taking with respect to appointing a new Chairman of
       the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission?




                                                   2
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

A:   After the departure of Chainnan Gilbert Casellas at the end of last year, the President
     reappointed Paul M. Igasaki to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and
     named him Acting Chainnan. Currently, three of the five positions on the Commission
     are filled, which is enough for a quorum. The fourth member to be appointed is for a
     Republican slot, and Senate Majority Leader Trent LoU (R-Miss.) has already indicated
     his choice for the position. The President is working as expeditiously as possible to
     nominate a fifth member of the Commission.

Q:   What does the President's plan do to improve performance at the EEOC?

A:   This plan creates specific goals and invests in new technology and procedures that will
     significantly improve EEOC perfonnance. The initiative's refonns will reduce the
     average time it takes to process a complaint from over 9 months to 6 months by the end
     of 2000. This reduction will be achieved in part through a $10 million infusion of
     technology improvements, and an investment in Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)--
      more than doubling the number of cases utilizing the more efficient and prompt ADR.

Q:   Is the President's budget simply a way to increase funding for affirmative action
     programs?

A:   No. The President's budget is aimed at preventing and eliminating discrimination through
     emphasizing compliance with and enforcement of the various existing civil rights laws,
     such as the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing Act, and the Americans with
     Disabilities Act. Affinnative action programs are only one tool (and not the most widely
     used tool) of civil rights enforcement.




                                             3
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

            BUDGET FACTS AND FIGURES ON CIVIL RIGHTS AGENCIES
               CLINTON ADMINISTRATION FISCAL 1999 BUDGET
                           DRAFT January 19, 1998

Summary
          The Clinton Administration's Fiscal Year 1999 budget contains $602 million for civil
rights enforcement agencies, $86 million or more than 16 percent than was enacted in last year's
budget.

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
        The Administration's 1999 budget contains $279 million for the EEOC, or 15 percent
more than the enacted 1998 budget. Funds go to reduce the average time it takes to resolve
private sector complaints from over 9.4 months to 6 months by the year 2000 through a
combination of investments in information technology, increased use of mediation, and increased
staffing. The proposal dramatically expands Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR) programs,
doubling the number of complaints eligible for ADR in 1999 to 16,000 cases, or 20 percent of
incoming cases. The Administration seeks $40 million over 3 years for ADR expansion, with
$13 million requested in 1999. The budget also allocates $10 million for new information
technology.

Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
        The Administration's budget proposes $52 million, or an over 70 percent increase from
last year for HUD's efforts to reduce housing discrimination. The budget requests $29 million,
or almost double, for the Fair Housing Initiatives Program (FHIP), which provides funding to
private fair housing groups to assist in enforcement of the Fair Housing Act. The HUD budget
proposal allocates $10 million of FHIP funding for a targeted, audit-based initiative in 20 areas
nationwide that will use paired testing, in which otherwise identical applicants of different races
approach realtors or landlords, in order to detect and eliminate housing discrimination. The
Administration proposal also seeks $23 million, or an $8 million increase, for the Fair Housing
Assistance Program, to support the creation of additional State and local housing organizations to
meet the needs of currently under-served populations and to aid joint investigations and
enforcement activities.

Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division
        The President's 1999 budget provides $7l.6 million, more than a 10 percent increase over
the 1998 level of $64.7 million. One component of the Department of Justice initiative is $1
million to enhance coordination of Federal civil rights enforcement among all the Federal civil
rights agencies. This coordination will lead to more consistent enforcement of civil rights laws,
improved data collection, and allow agencies to compare and improve program effectiveness in
areas such as technical assistance. New funding will also permit the Department of Justice to
significantly expand investigation and prosecutions of police misconduct as well as violations of
the Americans with Disabilities Act.



                                                1
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


Department of Labor, Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP).
        The Administration's request of$68 million for OFCCP includes funds to expand the
Fair Enforcement Initiative. OFCCP programs will increase by 10 percent the number of
compliance reviews conducted in FY 1999. OFCCP will also modernize its computer systems in
order to permit the agency to accept electronically submitted reports from contractors.

Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights
       The President's budget proposal of $68 million provides an increase of $6.5 million over
the 1998 enacted budget to improve data collection and increase productivity. These additional
funds will also enable the Department of Education to continue to invest sufficient resources in
higher education desegregation reviews and to focus on building partnerships with States to
address statewide compliance with civil rights laws.

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Office of Civil Rights
        The Administration is requesting $21 million for HHS's Office of Civil Rights to
continue its focus on preventive activities such as compliance reviews and technical assistance to
ensure that persons do not encounter discrimination in HHS programs, including in the areas of
managed care, inter-ethnic adoption, limited English proficient services, and welfare reform.

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
       The President's budget proposal increases funding for USDA's civil rights programs from
$15 million to $19 million to increase human resources management, outreach to
under-represented customers, involvement of small and disadvantaged businesses in USDA
programs, conflict resolution activities, and processing complaints brought by employees and
customers.

The Department of Labor, Office of Civil Rights
        The President's budget maintains the current $5 million of funding for the Department of
Labor's Office of Civil Rights to enforce the Federal statutes and regulations that prohibit
discrimination in all Labor Department financial assistance programs. With this funding, the
office will promote voluntary compliance with existing non-discrimination laws through
education and technical assistance. The office will also use the resources to encourage States to
promote the use of alternative dispute resolution techniques.

Department of Transportation, Office of Civil Rights
        The Administration budget contains $7 million for Transportation's Office of Civil
Rights to improve its investigation and processing ofEEO complaints. A $1 million increase
will fund additional activities directed to reduce case back-logs and address new complaints.

  U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
       The President's budget includes $11 million for the Commission in order to carry out its
mission in conducting investigations, educating the public on civil rights matters, and operating
programs that address both local and national civil rights interests and concerns.


                                                2
            Hex-Dump Conversion




3
·

