RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Stephen C. Warnath ( CN=Stephen C. Warnath/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-APR-1997 17:20:16.00

SUBJECT:   Re: SSA benefits and Nazi War Criminals

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
There is not a drop-dead deadline to drop a legislative proposal.
However, the urgency of deciding arises because the subcommittee Chairman
& staff who have been asking SSA as recently as yesterday where they are
on solving the problem of Nazi's getting paid.  SSA has been putting them
off saying that they are continuing to work on the issue.  There is a
technical mark-up, but this proposal doesn't have to be a technical (in
fact it may not be eligible to be a technical).  It could be offered later
as a stand-alone (or alternatively a member of Congress could offer a bill
and we could support that if we chose to)  so the 23rd is not magical, but
SSA is feeling pressure to get back to the subcommittee Chair fairly
promptly.

Also pressing is a media inquiry from the Tampa CBS affiliate that SSA has
also been holding off for awhile.   They want SSA to tell them what it's
doing about the problem.  SSA anticipates that this may be the beginnning
of a lot of bad press about how it provides money for the retirement of
Nazis.

This is a no-win situation.   We are either going to be criticized for
paying retirement to Nazis or we will be criticized because at least
several major Jewish organizations will charge us with compromising
enforcement.   There is going to be critical press whatever the decision
is. The straight policy call is probably that we should be able to rely
upon the Department of Justice to determine the appropriate enforcement
assessment and what will or won't damage prosecutions. And DOJ says they
have struck the right balance. However, I don't think that the policy
determination can be completely divorced from an assessment of the
political overlay on this issue.

Let me know how you want to proceed or if I can get you some more
information.  If you think it would be helpful, I could set up a meeting
between these gentlemen and you (and whoever else you think should be
invited) so that you can guage this directly for yourself.


