 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-JAN-1998 14:17:57.00

 SUBJECT:   civil rights q/a

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
may want something on this.==================== ATTACHMENT      1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:     0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D27]MAIL472815816.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504369070000010A020100000002050000001E80000000020000679CF07C7409CB6DD61736
72E39CBOB926EA217C84C2808D1AC7CB7AD844FAF76D9F52438CBO6E6AC15FFD7DOD2EA5BE0380
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    MEMORANDUM

TO:            BRUCE REED, ELENA KAGAN

FROM:          TOM FREEDMAN, MARY L. SMITH

RE:            CIVIL RIGHTS CROSSCUT

DATE:          NOVEMBER 25, 1997

        Below is a list of performance goals that are applicable across agencies and suggestions
as to how they might be implemented at the various civil rights enforcement agencies.

I.     ALTERNATE DISPUTE RESOLUTION

A.     EEOC

      Mediation Program. EEOC proposes to mediate approximately 8,000, or 10 percent of
       the 80,000 new charges expected in FY 1999. ($4,000,000)

B.     HHS-OCR

      Mediation Partnerships: HHS would contract with providers of mediation services in five
       to ten pilot urban and rural areas. OCR would decentralize the use of third party
       mediation services for a subset of complaints assessed through its case triage process.
       ($250,000)

C.     DOL-OCR

      Mediation. 7 FTE will be required to market ADR and to assist states in developing and
       designing ADR programs. In addition, 4 FTE will be needed to provide ADR for those
       complainants who request ADR in the processing of their complaints. ($990,000)

D.     DOL-OFCCP

      Alternate Dispute Resolution. OFCCP is initiating an alternate dispute resolution
       program in order to facilitate the closure of compliance reviews and complaint
       investigations. ADR will be used as an effort to avoid litigation and to reduce the
       number of cases referred to the Solicitor of Labor for enforcement. ($200,000)

E.     EDUCATION

      Alternate Dispute Resolution. In December 1993, OCR issued a new Case Resolution
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion


      Manual (CRM). The CRM streamlined the complaint resolution process so that OCR
      can provide more efficient and effective service to complainants. One element of the
      CRM is an alternative dispute resolution procedure (ADR). Any additional funding over
      OCR's FY 1999 appropriation could be used to provide additional staff training to build
      skills necessary for effective ADR or to hire contract mediators to actually facilitate
      resolution between the parties. ($100,000)

II.   TARGETING FUTURE COMPLIANCE AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
      EFFORTS (through data collection and other means)

A.    EEOC

     Benchmark EEO survey data. EEOC would like to perform a one-time data collection
      from employers to obtain benchmark EEO survey data for the Americans with
      Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. ($250,000)

     Video Outreach and Technical Assistance. Three video productions on subjects such as
      "Information for Small Employers," "Mediation to Resolve Charges," and "Best Practices
      for Employers." ($225,000)

     PSA Campaign. ($100,000)

     Stakeholder Meetings. Stakeholder meetings around the country for 25 offices.
      ($125,000)

     Translation of materials. Translate pamphlets into several languages, including
      production costs. ($280,000)

B.    EDUCATION

     Elementary and Secondary School Civil Rights Compliance Report: OCR would conduct
      a survey of the approximately 15,000 school districts in the country on the following:
      number and types of schools within a school district; the demographics of the school
      district for both teachers and students; the number of students by race and gender in gifted
      and talented programs;; the number of students with disabilities by race and gender; and
      the number of students in math, science, and computer programs by race and gender.
      This data is used by other government agencies, including DO] in its enforcement
      activities for approximately 400 court-ordered school districts. In addition, information
      and data obtained by the survey would be used as a baseline for OCR's proposed
      activities under GPRA. ($1,700,000)

C.    HHS-OCR



                                               2
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

    Analysis of Differential Treatment Modalities. OCR, working with the HHS Data
     Council, would investigate medical decision-making at the individual facility level to see
     how it is influenced by race and ethnicity. OCR would contract for the development of
     methodologies to determine potential areas of discrimination or differential access to
     services through assessment of Departmental and State level administrative data sets.
     The purpose of this initiative is to identify potentially non-complying hospitals and to
     target and implement Title VI compliance reviews and outreach initiatives. As the result
     of this effort, HHS expects to change the compliance status of from 220 to 280 facilities.
     IfHHS were to undertake all such reviews over a three-year period, it would need
     approximately $565,000 per year, beyond an initial $500,000 for survey design and
     analysis, to support the staffing needed to carry out such reviews while simultaneously
     avoiding an accumulation of a backlog. ($1,065,000)

    Managed Care. OCR's FY 1999 budget request seeks consultant services to develop
     data collection measuring the effect of managed care arrangements on Hill-Burton
     facilities and others. The purpose of this initiative is to target compliance reviews and
     outreach activities in support of both the President's Initiative on Race and to ensure
     effective oversight of the nondiscrimination provisions of the Patients' Bill of Rights
     endorsed by the President on November 19. HHS expects that these reviews of managed
     care plans and other insurance arrangements will require 50 percent more time than
     individual facility reviews. Accordingly, HHS estimates that it would need
     approximately $300,000 per year, beyond an initial $250,000 for survey design and
     analysis, to support the staffing needed to carry out 50 such reviews per year. ($550,000)

    Outcome Measurement. OCR is moving from output and process measures to assessing
     the extent to which the number and quality of services to protected classes has changed.
     The purpose of this initiative is: (1) to collect data on program performance that focuses
     on the public's ability to access and benefit from HHS services and (2) to focus
     performance goals and reporting on outcome measures identified in the Annual
     Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) Plan. By collecting outcome data
     focusing on service to individuals, OCR will be able to effectively target activities based
     on which compliance strategies result in the greatest number of additional minority
     persons served by programs, the greatest number of additional services, or changes in the
     quality of services provided. ($250,000)

D.   DOL-OCR

    Improved Targeting. An enhanced management information system could produce
     reports that would identify problem areas that should be targeted for review. This system
     could also identify trends in complaints so that compliance activities could be directed
     towards those entities most in need of assistance. This would maximize the utilization of
     staff resources to address the targeted problem areas in a given year and enhance
     development of work plans and results under GPRA. Approximately $100,000 is needed


                                              3
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


       to design management information reports to meet this performance goal. ($100,000)

      Compliance Activities. 18 FTE will be required to provided total compliance
       monitoring coverage on a three-year cycle. Within existing resources, only 4 compliance
       reviews can now be conducted, due to the regulatory need to process complaints. This
       will enable staff to conduct 18 reviews per year. ($1,620,000)

      Data Collection on JTP A. Currently, applicant data is not captured to identify those
       seeking entry into programs such as JTP A. To ensure that discriminatory factors are not
       being used in the intake process, a pilot program could be instituted. This would require
       revisions to ETA's management information system, agreement by the pilot state to
       participate, and OMB concurrence to collect this data. ($360,000)

      Compliance Assistance. 3 FTE will be required to conduct 20 technical assistance visits
       per year. This represents staff being on travel two weeks out of every month.
       ($270,000)
E.     DOL-OFCCP

      Future Targeting. The OFCCP's three-pronged Fair Enforcement Strategy includes a
       comprehensive regulatory reform component. One aspect of the regulatory reform effort
       is the redesign of the compliance review process. This process, as restyled "compliance
       evaluations," will enable the OFCCP to institute a multi-tiered level of review, varying
       from limited "compliance checks" to the full-scope compliance review. Additional
       resources for the three-pronged strategy will allow OFCCP to revise the requirements for
       the Affirmative Action Plan, fully implement the Affirmative Action Program Summary
       Report, and enhance the tiered compliance review enforcement strategy. ($4,800,000)

      Ombud Activities. OFCCP will increase the use of its Ombud Office to improve
       customer quality and service. The Ombud Office, established in 1995, provides
       customer service, technical assistance, and a means for OFCCP's stakeholders to obtain
       confidential advice regarding the laws, policies, and programs that are administered by
       the OFCCP. Through this expansion of the Ombud Office, OFCCP will provide
       technical assistance earlier with the result of reducing the amount of resources needed
       during full compliance reviews performed at a later time. ($1,500,000)

III.   REDUCING BACKLOG

A.     EEOC

      Inventory Reduction. To reduce the private-sector backlog from the current over 9.4
       months it takes to resolve private sector complaints to 6 months by the year 2000, EEOC
       requires 165 new FTEs. ($6,036,166)



                                               4
                                                                                Hex텱ump ConVerSIGI'

B.    HHS-OCR

     Changes in Complaint Processing to Respond to Additional Workload. OCR proposes
      expanding its pilot program which uses teams of investigators to review incoming cases
      and to provide ongoing case management. This expansion will require additional team
      training. OCR also anticipates increased complaint workload resulting from the
      Patients' Bill of Rights and the Adoption 2002 initiatives. OCR estimates that $360,000
      would be needed both to continue to enhance expedited complaint processing and to
      prevent development of a backlog. ($400,000)

     State and Local Program. OCR's Strategic Plan proposes to increase partnerships with
      state and local agencies to expand the scope of civil rights compliance coverage of HHS
      grantees. OCR proposes a pilot program to contract with states and local civil rights
      agencies to conduct investigations, thus expanding its capacity to enforce civil rights
      while giving states an active role in enforcement. The purpose of these partnerships is to
      enhance the ability to target OCR staff resources on precedent-setting and high priority
      complaint investigations while continuing to improve response times to citizen
      complaints. ($500,000)


IV.   PAPERLESS OFFICE

A.    EEOC

     Information Systems. The EEOC has proposed a three-year $25 million initiative to
      upgrade hardware, communications infrastructure, and the deployment of integrated
      information systems throughout the agency. The FY 1999 request of $1 0 million would
      provide a basic communication infrastructure that would allow the EEOC to complete the
      development and procurement of new information systems capabilities. These upgrades
      will allow the field offices and headquarters to communicate via electronic mail,
      eliminate redundant data entry procedures, and provide for greater operational efficiency
      through the sharing of information and enhanced research capabilities for investigators
      and attorneys. ($10,000,000)

     Replacing Paper Forms. The EEOC proposes developing an "Interactive Diskette" data
      collection to replace "Paper Forms" for all EEOC employment survey data collection
      programs. ($200,000)

B.     HHS-OCR

     Civil Rights on the Internet: New technology that would allow the public to file
      complaints via computer. Also technical assistance to grantees could be accomplished
      via the Internet. Survey data collections, pre-grant certifications, investigative data

                                              5
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion


     requests and responses could also be expedited. ($250,000)

C.   ALL CIVIL RIGHTS ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES (Justice, Labor, HHS,
     Education, and EEOC)

    Linked Civil Rights Data Bases: This linking of all the data bases would permit the
     agencies to share statistics that each agency collects. Linking technology would also
     improve coordination among the civil rights agencies. ($500,000)

D.   DOL-OCR

    Technology Improvements: There is a need for the establishment of a data base that can
     provide management information reports that can respond to GPRA and DOl
     requirements. A review is required of the current information technology infrastructure
     that supports the civil rights enforcement of federal financial assistance programs to
     determine what is needed to achieve the desired outcomes of improved case processing
     and case management. A working group could be established to conduct the survey and
     make recommendations in this area. Some economies of scale could be achieved if
     agencies explored the possibility of selecting a data base system that would meet the
     needs of agencies with some modifications adaptable to their specific programs.
     ($158,000)

E.   DOL-OFCCP

    Information Technology: These funds will be used to upgrade the agency's infrastructure
     and replace outmoded systems hardware, enabling OFCCP to meet its current
     requirements and to develop the systems necessary for federal contractors to submit data
     electronically to the program. The agency will also provide the technology necessary for
     compliance officers to record all documents related to reviews electronically.
     ($3,750,000)

V.   COORDINATION AMONG CIVIL RIGHTS AGENCIES

A.   Proposed by HHS-OCR

    Inter-agency Civil Rights Coordination Group: A standing inter-agency group composed
     of principals or their deputies would address cross-cutting issues including broad strategic
     planning, coordination of litigation strategies, development of performance outcome
     measures, outreach and partnership strategies, coordinated public service announcement
     and public relations initiatives, coordinated town meetings on civil rights issues,
     coordinated training initiatives, data collections, reviews, and investigations.

    Inter-agency training program. A coordinated training strategy could entail creation of


                                              6
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion



     an inter-agency training program. The training program could be under the auspices of
     the Department of Justice. It would focus on investigative methodologies, examination
     of best practices in non-discriminatory service delivery, litigation review and strategy,
     data collection techniques and other compliance techniques that can be employed by
     many agencies, including HHS, ED, HUD, DOL, DOT, and EEOC. The center could
     also provide civil rights investigative and outreach training to state and local partners. A
     training center with dedicated staff could either be contracted or use federal agency staff.
     A rough estimate of the cost for rent, staff support, curriculum development, scholarships
     for non-federal participants, equipment, trainers, etc. is $1,000,000 government-wide per
     year. ($1,000,000)

    Intra-agency civil rights councils. These councils would be a means for furthering civil
     rights compliance throughout individual departments and agencies. Each Department
     would establish a high-level body that would be advisory to the Secretaries or Agency
     Heads on civil rights issues. A Civil Rights Council would be a forum for review of
     agency-wide policies and practices and could serve as a forum for external organizations
     to present civil rights concerns associated with individual agency programs. Such a
     council would be headed by the Department or Agency's chief Civil Rights Official and
     would require minimal staffing (an Executive Secretary to the Council and perhaps one
     support staff) in addition to staff that could be provided from within the agencies.
     ($200,000)

    Geo-codedlMapping Data Base on a Civil Rights Intranet. OCR proposes development,
     in conjunction with the Census Bureau and the Department of Justice, of a
     government-wide pilot project that would make geo-coded mapping of race, ethnicity,
     and national origin Census data available to all civil rights agencies on a Civil Rights
     Intranet. This resource would enable civil rights agencies to have immediate access to
     tract level data during the course of investigations and reviews. Other uses of this
     system could include a government-wide index of administrative decisions, letters of
     findings, and entities under civil rights investigation. ($350,000)

B.   Proposed by DOL-OCR

    Coordination between DOJ and OMB. In order to achieve enhanced civil rights
     enforcement, OMB will be required to review the civil rights enforcement function on a
     cross-cutting basis to achieve performance goals. DOJ could work with OMB and the
     respective agencies to promote a comprehensive civil rights agenda. This would provide
     the framework and overall reporting relationships to integrate civil rights enforcement
     within the budget process. ($90,000)

C.   Proposed by DOL-OFCCP

    The Civil Rights Working Group, made up of all the civil rights agencies in the Federal


                                              7
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

     government and a liaison from the White House, should be fonnalized and meet on a
     regular basis to integrate efforts to achieve civil rights in America.

    Coordination with DO] and Veterans Affairs. Increase compliance on national origin
     discrimination and to share a database with Veterans Affairs so that veterans have equal
     employment opportunities. ($400,000)

D.   Proposed by ED-OCR

    Intranet technology. Civil rights enforcement agencies need to improve their
     communication network. Intranet technology could be used to create a network for used
     by selected civil rights enforcment agencies. The system could be used for various
     purposes such as sharing data; posting infonnation like current research, historical
     document, special alerts, best practices, scheduled meetings/conferences, newsworthy
     events, and training opportunities. The system could also be used to communicate
     essential infonnation and materials to agencies' staff on Presidential initiatives.
     ($100,000 to 500,000)




                                             8


