RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:27-JAN-1998 18:04:01.00

SUBJECT:   draft tobacco memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  I thought it might be useful to have a tobacco update plan memo for
Bowles, particularly as he's calling a meeting tommorow.  This might be a
start. .. ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D73]MAIL48315762R.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750434C050000010A02010000000205000000112B000000020000F9FB2690F6BC3197E7849D
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


                                    January 28, 1998 (Draft)


MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

FROM:                  BRUCE REED
                       ELENA KAGAN
                          TOM FREEDMAN

RE:                         Tobacco Strategy Update

        This memo updates the status of our strategy for the enactment of comprehensive tobacco
legislation as called for by the President on September 17th and reaffirmed in his 1998 State of
the Union address.

I.     BACKGROUND

        The Administration is in a good position, despite some obstacles, to push tobacco
legislation through Congress over the next year. When the President announced the five key
elements in his plan for comprehensive tobacco legislation on September 17, 1997, he brought
together support from the public health community, attorneys general, and many members of
Congress. The President placed himself in a solid strategic position to aid Congress without
having a specific Administration legislative product that would be a target for diversionary
tactics by opponents.

        For a number of reasons, the Administration continues to have strong leverage in shaping
and enacting tobacco legislation. First, there continues to be bipartisan political recognition that
the American public wants tough action to limit smoking. Second, the President continues to be
the most powerful and popular voice against the tobacco industry and in support of the public
health community. Finally, a number oflegislative proposals and players are competing with
each other in Congress, suggesting that the Administration has the ability to negotiate among the
proposals to create a compromise we support. The legislation currently underway includes a
Democratic leadership bill being formulated by Senator Conrad, a Republican leadership process
under the direction of Senator Nickles, specific tobacco bills already introduced by Senators
Kennedy, Ford, and Hatch among others, and hearings set by many committee chairs.

         Since September, we have maintained contact with parties on all sides of the issue,
including members of Congress, industry representatives, and representatives of the health
community, assuring them of the Administration's commitment to passing bipartisan, effective,
legislation. In addition, the Administration has provided technical support for drafting
legislation to any member of Congress who has requested it.
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

          As Congress comes back into session, attention will shift to the upcoming
congressional agenda and the Administration will face several emerging obstacles and
opportunities. Challenges to the Administration's position will likely come from factions on
both the right and left: the right (Lott and McCain) will argue that the Administration has failed
to provide a complete proposal, the left will suggest either there should be no legislation because
documents reveal the industry's moral turpitude or that legislation shouldn't contain any liability
protections for industry--likely killing the possibility of passing a bill.

         Nonetheless, we believe chances for passage of an effective bill remain good. The
Administration can quiet criticism that it is not doing enough to promote passage ofiegislation
by upgrading the President's visibility on the issue and engaging in serious negotiations with
Senate Republicans (many of whom are allies ofLott and genuinely want a bill). Arguments
against a bill from the left will eventually be defeated by the health rationale of the legislation--
this is a unique opportunity to help lengthen the lives of over 300,000 children a year.
Ultimately, opinion leaders in the field such as Dr. Koop and Dr. Kessler, who stood with the
President in his call for legislation on September 17th, recognize the great value and need for
effective comprehensive legislation.

       There will soon be an opportunity to move to more active participation in the legislative
process and improve the chances for passage of effective legislation. Legislation by Senate
Democrats and Republicans is beginning to take shape, and Senator McCain will be holding
hearings and raising questions about relevant Administration positions. In order to answer these
questions, take advantage of the competition among congressional bills, and maintain
Presidential momentum we recommend the following strategic steps.

II.    NEXT STEPS

A.       Presidential Events
         To maintain his leverage as the key advocate for change, it is important the President take
a visible role highlighting newsworthy tobacco issues. The President's comments and radio
address on the release of tobacco documents, as well as his State of the Union speech, were noted
by health groups, the news media, and Congress. We recommend three events over the next two
months to demonstrate continued Presidential leadership on the issue. [Insert three ideas here)
First, a town hall meeting on tobacco issues including children, researchers, health advocates like
Dr. Koop, and farmers. Second, a Presidential endorsement of legislation that has
tobacco-related effects-- such as provisions regarding international cooperation on the issue or
indoor air quality legislation. Finally, a Presidential invitation to Congressional leaders to return
to the White House to update him on progress that has been made on the issue since their last
meeting.
B.       Congressional Strategy
         We have been following a four-stage legislative strategy: (1) laying out the President's
principles; (2) reassuring congressional leadership of our interest in bipartisan legislation and
providing technical assistance; (3) helping to shape legislation and working to form bipartisan
consensus; and finally (4) openly intervening on behalf of certain bills and provisions and
working for enough votes for passage.


                                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

            We believe that it is now appropriate to begin to move from providing the technical
    assistance of stage two into the more active role of stage three working with leaders on the issue
    to form bipartisan consensus. To accomplish this we will be meeting separately this week with
    the staff of Senators Conrad and Nickles. In each case, we hope to encourage them to create
    legislation that meets the tough goals of the President's plan, but does not rule out liability
    protections or raise the cost of legislation so as to make passage impossible. Senator Conrad is
    circulating specific plans for legislation already and several Republican Senators in addition to
    Nickles (Hatch, McCain, Chafee) are pushing for movement. We believe sometime in the next
    month it would be appropriate for the President to invite congressional leaders back to the White
    House to put increased pressure on this process, demonstrate his own commitment to this issue,
    and create a public timetable for Congress to consider legislation.

           In late February and early March it seems likely that there will be a need for the White
    House to become more directly involved in negotiations, perhaps forming a working group with
    appropriate Hill leadership and inviting them to working meetings in the White House.

    C.      Internal Structure
            Currently, the primary tobacco planning process is via the Tobacco Strategy Group.
    Bruce Reed chairs the regular Thursday meetings which include representatives from HHS,
    VPOTUS, OPL, CEA, Legislative Affairs, Treasury, USDA, and DOJ. The function of the
    group is to coordinate planning including resolution of policy issues such as Medicaid funds for
    states, Hill briefings and testimony by agencies, and press and event opportunities. The DPC also
    holds bi-weekly meetings with the Vice-President's staff for event scheduling and strategy. In
    addition there are regular meetings with Mike Moore's group including Moore, Scruggs, Myers,
    and Coale.

            Beginning next month, we plan to broaden the Tobacco Working Group to include
    representatives of Legislative Affairs and the Communications' offices.


