RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-JAN-1998 17:04:06.00

SUBJECT:   Q&A for review

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Jose Cerda I I I ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached are Q&A just on crime and drug-related announcements for
tomorrow's event with the Mayors.  I'm not sure I want to draw attention
to this fact, but this may be the earliest we've ever turned in paper ....

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D79]MAIL41700782P.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043DA040000010A0201000000020500000086390000000200006273AE2523E4DB9F4D2A8C
BD84944A498DFAB840339840A1CBOF682F362A476C4889480BC1AC2640C8D289BA299A5C4DD663
5E0321221DBEAA870292873260DF88COFC4844DF11E0391300B783431B83FB20A317AA76549D21
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

                      Meeting with U.S. Conference of Mayors
                              Questions and Answers
                                 January 30, 1998



Q.    What did the President announce at today's meeting with mayors?

A.    Today, the President talked to Mayors about an urban agenda to help lead our cities into
      the 21st Century and announced the Administration's next steps to help communities
      keep up the fight against crime and drugs. Specifically, the President highlighted that his
      FY 1999 budget will include:

      (1) $50 million for a new community prosecutors initiative. Similar to the President's
      COPS program, the main purpose of the Community Prosecutors initiative is to increase
      the number oflocal prosecutors working with members of the community and community
      police officers. This initiative will allow hundreds of prosecutors offices to hire
      "community prosecutors" or "neighborhood DAs" and will continue to help local
      criminal justice systems be more responsive to their citizens' needs.

      (2)$28 million to crack down on illegal gun traffickers. The President's FY 1999 budget
      includes $28 million to boost his Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative (YCGII), to
      crack down on illegal gun markets that supply firearms to juveniles and criminals. The
      funding will be used by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) in 27 target
      cities to trace all firearms recovered from crime scenes, determine local gun trafficking
      patterns, and hire 162 new ATF agents to investigate and arrest illegal gun traffickers.

       (3) Over $17 billion to fund the most comprehensive National Drug Control Strategy
      ever. Key provisions include: funding for 1,000 new Border Patrol agents and new
      resources for sophisticated new technologies to close the door on drugs at our borders;
      $195 million to continue our commitment for a paid anti-drug media campaign; new
      funds to enhance the Safe and Drug-Free Schools program; increased resources for the
      DEA to enhance its domestic anti-heroin and anti-methamphetamine efforts; and
      heightened resources for more treatment and better prevention programs.


Community Prosecutors Initiative

Q.    Can you explain the President's community prosecutors initiative? Is this linked to
      your community policing initiative?

A.    Community prosecution is the natural next step to community policing. As thousands of
      police departments have moved from reactive policing to putting more police on the
      streets to work with citizens to cut crime, communities are looking to local prosecutors to
      playa more active role. Increasingly, prosecutors are being asked to spend time in their
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
     neighborhoods, help solve local crime problems, and prevent crimes from happening in
     the first place.

     The President's FY 1999 budget proposes $50 million to launch an innovative
     community prosecution initiative to increase the number oflocal prosecutors working
     with members of the community and community police officers.

     This initiative will allow hundreds of prosecutors' offices to hire "community
     prosecutors" or "neighborhood DAs" to help make our communities safer. And just as
     the COPS program has helped bring community policing methods to thousands of police
     departments across the country, the community prosecutor initiative will promote greater
     responsiveness on the part of criminal justice systems to the needs of their citizens.

     The President's initiative will provide direct grants to local prosecutors' offices, with the
     vast majority funds to be used to hire or reassign prosecutors to work directly with police
     and community residents. Remaining funds could be used flexibly for other costs such
     as the development of innovative programs to further link prosecutors to community
     anti-crime activities.


Q.   Is community prosecution being done anywhere?

A.   Yes it is. One of the best examples of a community prosecution initiative is Portland
     (Multnomah County), Oregon. In Portland, local businesses and community residents
     from one neighborhood demanded that the District Attorney dedicate a prosecutor to
     work in their neighborhood. As a result of this successful effort, Portland has now
     established "Neighborhood DAs" throughout the county.

     Others cities that have started to implement community prosecution methods include:
     Boston, MA; Chicago, IL; Denver, CO; Indianapolis, IN; Kansas City, MO; New York
     City, NY; Milwaukee, WI; Austin, TX; and Washington, DC.


Q.   Your community policing initiative -- the COPS Program -- was a $9 billion
     initiative. Assuming that prosecutors are more expensive to hire than police
     officers, do you really think that $50 million will have any impact?

A.   We believe it can make a significant difference. It's important to keep in mind that many
     of the nation's local prosecutors' offices are fairly small with modest budgets. Based on
     the most recent data collected by the Justice Department, nearly one-third (683) of all
     state court prosecutors' offices (2,343) are part-time offices; the median annual office
     budget was $226,000 and total staff size was eight.

     The program we are proposing is $50 million in FY 99 -- $250 million over 5 years.
     This would provide a significant, new funding stream for local prosecutors' offices,
      whose budgets are frequently limited solely to county funds. Similar t~ei~~~6P~version
      Program, the vast majority of new resources would be used to hire or reassign prosecutors
      to work directly with police and community residents. Remaining funds could be used
      flexibly for other costs such as the development of innovative programs to further link
      prosecutors to community anti-crime activities.


Youth Gun Tracing Initiative

Q.    What is the President's gun tracing initiative?

A.    The Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative (YCGII) is ajoint effort between federal and
      local law enforcement to disrupt the illegal firearms market, with a special focus on
      traffickers who supply guns to juveniles and criminals. While the Brady Law stops
      felons and other prohibited purchasers from buying handguns legally. our anti-trafficking
      initiative works to disrupt the illegal gun market.

      Under the President's initiative, ATF and local police departments are working together
      in 27 targeted cities to develop comprehensive gun tracing systems to trace all firearms
      recovered at crime scenes. By tracing these crime guns to their original, lawful source,
      law enforcement can determine gun trafficking patterns and begin to identify the illegal
      suppliers. The YCGn has already traced approximately 93,477 guns from 27
      communities, providing law enforcement with crucial investigative leads about the
      sources of these guns.

      We started this comprehensive gun tracing effort in July 1996 in 17 cities: Atlanta, GA;
      Baltimore, MD; Birmingham, AL; Boston, MA; Bridgeport, CT; Cleveland, OH;
      Inglewood, CA; Jersey City, NJ; Memphis, TN; Milwaukee, WI: New York City, NY;
      Richmond, VA; St. Louis, MO; Salinas, CA; San Antonio, TX; Seattle, W A; and
      Washington, DC.

      Last summer the President announced that 10 additional cities would be added: Miami,
      FL; Houston, TX; Los Angeles, CA; Chicago, IL; Detroit, MI; Philadelphia, PA;
      Cincinnati, OH; Minneapolis, MN; Tucson, AZ; and Geary, IN.

      And today. the President announced that his FY 1999 budget includes $28 million to
      expand the initiative even further: $12 million for gun tracing and $16 million to hire 162
      new ATF agents. Six new ATF agents will be deployed in each of the target cities to
      follow up on the trace information, and investigate and arrest traffickers who are
      supplying guns to gangs and juveniles.


      Expanding the YCGn is part of an overall strategy that also includes: $100 million for
      communities to hire more prosecutors and expand anti-gang task forces; $60 million for
      probation officers and youth gun and drug courts; $95 million for innovative prevention,
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

      anti-truancy and curfew initiatives; and $160 million in Department of
      Education-sponsored after school programs.

Q.    How much of an increase in funding is this? Is this going to make a difference?

A.   When we first kicked off the YCGII in July 1996, we allocated just over $1.1 million to
     begin comprehensive tracing in our original 17 cities. Since then, the program has been
     supported primarily through the use of Treasury's forfeiture funds. In FY 99, the
     President's budget proposal request increases funding to $28 million and makes it a
     permanent part of AFT's budget Specifically, it provides $12 million for tracing efforts
     and $16 million to hire 162 new ATF agents to help investigate and arrest identified gun
     traffickers.

Q:   If gun tracing and trace analysis lead to cracking down on gun traffickers, how
     many have you prosecuted as a result of this effort?

A:   When we began this initiative a year and half ago-- establishing the tracing infrastructure
     (i.e., trained officers, computers, software, etc.) and producing the national and local
     reports were our initial goals. The YCGn is a special component of ATF's overall
     firearms trafficking strategy that has generated thousands of investigations involving tens
     of thousands of illegally trafficked firearms. And over time, we expect the YCGn to
     contribute many important cases to this workload.

     Having said that, to date, ATF estimates that there area already more than 100 cases
     involving gun trafficking to juveniles and youths underway in the original participating
     cities and some of the new cities.


Drug Budget

Q.   What can you tell us about funding for next year's drug budget?

A.   The President's budget provides over $17 billion -- an increase of more than $1 billion
     from FY 98 -- to fund the most comprehensive National Drug Control Strategy ever.
     While the specifics will be released next week when the full budget is released, key
     provisions include funding for:

             Southwest Border. 1,000 new Border Patrol agents and resources for
              sophisticated new technologies to close the door on drugs at our borders;

             Kids. $195 million to continue our commitment for a paid anti-drug media
              campaign and new funds to enhance the Safe and Drug-Free Schools program;

             Law Enforcement. Increased funding for the DEA to enhance its domestic
              anti-heroin and anti-methamphetamine efforts; and



                                                                         Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                                                 Hex-Dump ConversIOn
              Treatment. Additional resources are provided for more drug treatment and better
               prevention programs.

        Many increases in the FY 99 drug budget directly reflect proposals the President received
        at last year's White House Drug Summit with the Mayors.


