 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:29-JAN-1998 10:02:15.00

 SUBJECT:   Feb. Advisory Board Agenda

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is the most recent version of the agenda for the Feb. meeting in
San Jose.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D27)MAIL47913482L.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504361070000010A0201000000020500000024440000000200002D771CAA4DE6DE22AF3207
23F058A3E7230D9AACA3E405A794A88D46777F5BAB5BF3D77205CA8C9276C39F3AA16C4FFE7BF7
                                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


                                DRAFT(asojMarch 18, 2010, 1:44PM)
                                          Agenda
                            President's Advisory Board On Race
                          Northern California, February 10-11, 1998


Theme: Race and Poverty in America

The purpose of this meeting is to examine the relationship between race, poverty, and public policy in
both urban and rural America. While whites are over 45% of the poverty population in the United
States, larger percentages of the minority population are poor. We will examine the racial
characteristics of the poor, the persistence of poverty, its causes including the role of discrimination,
and we will assess the nature of concentrated poverty in "ghettos" or "barrios."

Further, we will examine the need for and effectiveness of public and private sector responses to the
persistence arid concentration of race-based poverty, including breaking the well-documented cycle of
poverty. Recommendations made thirty years ago by the Kerner Commission in addressing race will
be reviewed for their relevance. We will identify some promising practices aimed at reducing
poverty in minority communities including SBA, housing and community development projects.

Key Questions:

·   To what extent are poverty and race related? Is there a link between race and concentrated
    poverty?

·   What are the main causes of continuing and concentrated poverty among whites and minorities?
    Does discrimination continue to affect opportunities for minorities to move out of poor,
    segregated neighborhoods? What are the connections between racial isolation and poverty and
    how can we alter the negative aspects of these connections?

·   What governmental and non-governmental programs and policies are most effective in addressing
    minority group poverty and racial segregation? Should such policies and programs differ in
    order to address the distinctive position and needs of different raciaVethnic groups? How should
    they do this?

Day 1 (San Francisco/OaklandlEast Palo Alto):

The day will be devoted to having Board members visit Promising Practices sites in the San
Francisco, Oakland, and East Palo Alto communities. The day will end with a community forum held
in San Jose.

HUD Secretary Andrew Cuomo has been invited to attend.

San Francisco:
10:30 am - 12:30 pm: Board members visit local Promising Practices. Secretary Andrew Cuomo will
be invited to attend.
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
Oakland:

10:30 am - 12:30 pm: Board members visit local Promising Practices.

East Palo Alto:

10:30 am - 12:30 pm: Board members visit local Promising Practices.

San Jose:

Community Forum: 6:00-7:30 pm

The day will conclude with a community forum in which Board members listen and learn about issues
related to race in the San Jose area.

Possible Welcoming Speakers: Mike Honda, State Assemblyman

Possible Moderators: Local San Jose Moderator.

Day 2 San Jose

9:00 am - 9:10 am Welcome and review of agenda by Chairman Franklin.

9:10 am - 9:15 am Welcoming remarks from local official.

Possible speaker: San Jose Mayor Hammer

9:15 am - 9:35 am      Keynote/Opening Address [HUD Secretary Andrew Cuomo -- invited] and
                       possible Overview on Poverty and Race in America

9:35 am - II :45 am: Poverty and Race: Facts, Causes, and National Issues

HUD Secretary Andrew Cuomo has been invited to participate in the morning panel with the
Advisory Board. This round table discussion will bring together national experts to discuss if there is
a link between race and poverty, as well as the status and causes of continuous and concentrated
poverty in urban and rural communities. Economic inequality and race will be assessed as will the
role of housing discrimination and how it limits opportunities to move out of "ghetto" neighborhoods.
The key controversies have been the extent to which the causes are racial or non-racial and the extent
to which the poor themselves bear responsibility for the continued impoverishment. The focus will be
on national policies, programs, and legislative issues.

Possible panelists:

        Professor William Julius Wilson, Harvard [available]; author of The Declining Significance of
        Race, and When Work Disappears and a nationally recognized expert on race and the urban
        "underclass. "

        Professor Douglas Massey, University of Pennsylvania [available]; Author of the book
                                                                          Automa ~ Hex-Dump ConversIon


       American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making o/the Underclass , and a long-term
       analysts of differences between whites, blacks, Hispanics and Asians in their spatial and
       economic progress and isolation. He is also a major analyst of immigration and race issues.

       Professor Matthew Snipp, Stanford University [available]; A nationally know Native
       American demographic expert on the socio-economic condition of American Indians,
       including analyses of their poverty, housing conditions, ands cultural situation. He is author of
       a forthcoming book, American Indians and Economic Dependency, and author of the 1989
       book, American Indians: The First o/the Land.

       Jack Kemp, Empower America [invited]. Former HUD Secretary and co-director of Empower
       America.

       Professor Min Zhou, Department of Sociology and Asian American Studies, UCLA. She is
                the author of a forthcoming Russell Sage Foundation book on Vietnamese poverty,
       Growing Up American. Her research focusses on how the "social capital" these groups bring
       to their lives helps overcome the problems of poverty and ghettoization.

       Professor Tarry Hum, New York University. She conducted recent research on Asian poverty
       and community economic development, as well as research on immigration, economic
       development and residential segregation. She has argued that ethnic niche economies serve
       to "protect" Asians against discrimination and economic instability. Prior to receiving her
       doctorate in urban planning, she was the executive director of the Asian Community
       Development Corporation as well as the Chinatown-South Cove neighborhood Council in
       Boston, Ma.

       Professor Vilma Ortiz, UCLA, Department of Sociology. She has written extensive on
       Latino poverty issues.

       Professor Raquel Rivera Pinder-Hughes, Urban Studies Program, SF. State University.
       Expert on Latino poverty issues in California and nationally. Has used census data to
       compare white, Black, Asian, and Latino poverty from 1970 to the present.

This session would conclude with 45 minutes of Q&A.

Moderator possibilities: Professor Manuel Pastor, Director of Latin American Studies, University of
California at Santa Cruz; Dr. Laura Tyson, University of California at Berkeley.

11 :45 am - 12:45 pm Lunch Break

I :00 pm - 3:00 pm Poverty and Race: Local Policy Issues and Solutions
This panel discussion will focus on the main State and local options for addressing the causes of
poverty and possible programs and policies to address race-based poverty. The panel will consist
largely of local state and area pr~gram experts. The discussion will likely include a focus on
welfare-to-work as well as community and housing deconcentration and "integration" efforts from
HUD, including Enterprise Zones/Community Development banks as they are being implemented at
the local level. The panel could include:
                                                                            Hex-Dump ConvefSlon


       Denise Fairchild, Community Development Technologies Center in LA; suggested by
       Angela Oh; worked extensively with the Rebuild LA Project; currently heading up an
       anti-poverty organization in Los Angeles; can speak to solutions for California

       Gordon Chin, Executive Director of the Chinatown Community Development Center; the
       organization has been in existence for 20 years and mainly dealt with the Asian American
       community; the organization is now being faced with not only serving that community
       but the growing Russian immigrant and African-American communities; one of the
       largest affordable housing developers and is now moving into larger economic
       development issues; San Francisco

       Jose Padilla, California Rural Legal Services; Los Angeles; an advocate for rural and farm
worker issues;

       Angelo Ancheta, the Asian Law Caucus; challenges racial discrimination in employment,
       housing and public institutions; organization has begun confronting the challenges
       associated with the new welfare-to-work program

       Robert Woodson, Neighborhood Development; proponent of African Americans developing
       their own communities; critic of welfare programs.

       Amy Dean, CEO of the South Bay AFL-CIO Labor Council which represents workers
              in the area; linked to the non-profit organization, Working Partnerships USA which is
       working on regional economic development and minority group issues in the San Jose area.

       Rose Amador is President of the Center for Training and Careers in San Jose. The center
works heavily with families on AFDC/welfare and is beginning a welfare to work program.

This session would conclude with 45 minutes of Q&A from the audience.

Moderator possibilities:
Eva Patterson, Executive Director for the Lawyer's Committee on Civil Rights in San Francisco


