RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-JAN-1998 18:13:46.00

SUBJECT:     INS reform and H1B visas

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,

Any reform that we recommend to the H1B program will likely cause
employers to raise other issues related to immigration and the Labor
Department. The following are a couple of policy issues that we may have
to confront as part of this process.

1.         Labor Certification

        As the Labor folks indicated yesterday, employers use the HIB
program as a way to get foreign workers into the country fast -- short
application and no labor certification process (as there generally is with
the permanent employment-based visa program). Thus, any changes that
limit or more closely subscribe the use of the H1B may cause employers to
focus on what they believe is wrong with the labor certification process,
as presently performed by the Labor Department.

        The CIR recommended that the Labor Department no longer perform
labor certification prior to the issuance of a permanent employment-based
visa, largely because it takes them too long and because the tools that
they use do not fairly reflect the dynamics of the labor market. The CIR
did not suggest an alternative method for testing the labor market to
determine if workers are needed in a particular job category, but
suggested, as part of their overall proposal, that State somehow take care
of it. The Carnegie folks suggested, informally, that the function could
be contracted out to a private entity who could do the labor market tests
more quickly and maybe better.

        This is an issue that we likely need to focus on as part of the
overall INS reform package and as it relates to the H1B program. As you
would imagine, any proposal to change the labor certification process is
very controversial -- particularly any proposal to eliminate Labor's role
in performing a market-test as a predicate to an employment-based
permanent visa.

2.         Employer Sanctions

        The CIR recommended that Labor should be empowered to sanction
employers for failure to verify whether their employees are authorized to
work. Under the current system, if a Labor Department inspector discovers
that an employer is not verifying authorization to work (as demonstrated
by their not filling out the I-9 forms), they refer the case to the INS --


Labor has no authority to sanction the employer for this violation. The
eIR and others have suggested that Labor have this sanction authority, in
part b/c referrals to the INS for this are almost never followed up on.

        In preliminary discussions about this, Labor expressed some
concern that their increased role in enforcing the immigration laws might
chill the reporting of other labor violations by undocumented workers.
However, Labor already has a role (by checking for I-9 violations and
reporting them to INS) and this increased authority could be understood as
enforcing labor laws (that relate to the labor market), not immigration
laws. The chief opponents to this change would likely be Republicans on
the Hill who are concerned with businesses not being penalized for hiring
illegals at all.  This opposition could be significant, but the concept of
sanctioning employers for failing to take steps designed to ensure that
they hire legal workers is a strong one.  Also, this is a good companion
to our successful push last year to launch an employer verification pilot
program, to improve the system of verifying whether employees are
authorized to work.


Aside from the concerns that relate to the Labor Department, there are two
areas of policy decision-making that we may want to resolve in conjunction
with the INS reform.   These are both less pressing, but are likely
important to keep an eye on.

1.      State Department and Visa Issuance

         For employment-based visas issued overseas, there are three
players:   INS, State and Labor. Many (including the eIR, $tate and INS)
have commented that this current process is duplicative. One suggested
reform would be to remove State from doing a separate analysis of the
application, and limiting their role to checking to ensure that there were
no international or foreign policy restrictions on the applicant (checks
with Interpol, etc.). Under the current system, State often readjudicates
the visa petition rather than perform a more limited check.   State has
also identified a need for greater clarity regarding ultimate
responsibility for certain decisions (like this one) where more than one
agency plays a role.

        We may, as part of our proposed reform, want to better clarify
State's role as limited to international/foreign policy concerns only.

2.      Immigration appeals

        Under the current system, administrative review of immigration
decisions is conducted by numerous entities located at the various
agencies (State, Labor and Justice).  In addition, the Bureau of
Immigration Appeals (BIA) -- a 15 member panel appointed by the AG -- has
nationwide jurisdiction over a wide range of cases, including decisions of
Immigration Judges in exclusion, deportation, and removal decisions.
Decisions of the Bureau of Immigration Appeals are reviewed by the
Attorney General. The eIR recommended the creation of an independent body
within the Executive Branch to hear all appeals of immigration-related
administrative decisions, including deportation hearings.  Decisions by
this entity would be binding on the Executive Branch.

        We have not yet fully explored whether the existing immigration
appeals system needs dramatic reform or, if so, whether we would recommend
a solution along the lines of that proposed by the eIR.  It is not clear
that this question has to be answered in the short term, but we may want


 to keep it within our sites.


