 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:30-JAN-1998 15:09:39.00

 SUBJECT:   Weekly 1/30 as of 3:00

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
   We are still waiting for healthcare from Sarah ==================== ATTACHMENT   1
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D1]MAIL46943692E.026 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043ACOF0000010A020100000002050000004B3C000000020000883ED721875D68D1C6CEE7
 F6EA45E108FE5414BF98F08DD8C56B82349592E13D883E51F8C71C52EC6A44F491066806723123
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion




                                         January 31, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report




        Tobacco -- RJR Documents and State Prohibitions Against Sales to Children: In
light of documents released by Rep. Waxman showing RJ. Reynolds Tobacco Company had
plans for targeting children, you asked us to find how many states had laws prohibiting sales of
cigarettes to persons 18 or younger at the time the documents were written. The 81 documents,
spanning from 1973 to 1990, provide evidence of the company marketing to children as young as
age 14. In both 1974 and 1975, documents discuss the need to market to the 14-24 age group
because they "represent tomorrow's cigarette business." According to data gathered by the
National Cancer Institute, as of 1974,27 states had passed legislation prohibiting the sale of
cigarettes or other tobacco products to those 18 and under. Starting around 1980, RJR officials
stopped specifically referring, even internally, to marketing to anyone younger than 18.
However, beginning in around 1987, RJR started its Joe Camel advertising campaign. As of
1987, at least 35 states had passed legislation prohibiting the sale of cigarettes or tobacco
products to those 18 and under. Today, all 50 states, including the District of Columbia, have
laws prohibiting the sale of cigarettes or tobacco products to those 18 or under.

        Child Care -- Senate Republican Child Care Legislation. The day after the State of
the Union Address, Republican Senators Chafee, Hatch, Snowe, Roberts, Specter and Collins
introduced a promising child care package that, like yours, significantly increases child care
subsidies for poor children, provides additional tax relief to help low- and middle-income
families pay for child care, creates a tax credit for businesses that provide child care to their
employees, and improves state enforcement of health and safety standards. In addition, the
package includes a proposal to adjust the child care tax credit to provide assistance to
stay-at-home parents. While the legislation has not been fully costed, in press reports it has been
estimated at $12 billion over five years. Shortly after the bill's introduction, you issued a
statement supporting bipartisan cooperation on this important issue. On Thursday, Senator Dan
Coats, Chairman of the Senate Children and Families Labor Subcommittee, held a news
conference with conservative groups announcing his intention to argue that any new money
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

should be targeted to parents who stay at home and announce his plans to chair a symposium on
child care and parenting sponsored on February 18th.

       Drugs -- Crack Cocaine: The Senate may consider legislation to revise penalties for
cocaine trafficking as early as this spring. Senator Lott listed cocaine penalties as one of the
agenda items for the Senate to take up prior to the Easter recess. As you recall, the Attorney
General and the Drug Director jointly recommended revising the current threshold for as-year
mandatory sentence from 5 grams to 25 grams for crack, and from 500 grams to 250 grams for
powder cocaine -- a ratio of 10: 1 rather than the current 100: 1. We expect the Republicans to
move a proposal to keep the current threshold for a 5-year sentence the same for crack cocaine (5
grams), but significantly lower the threshold for powder cocaine to 100 grams.

        Welfare Reform --Welfare to Work Transportation: After the State of the Union, you
asked us to write up the story of Elaine Kinslow and her colleagues who are helping transport
welfare recipients to work and remind the states that they can use TANF funds to·support such
projects. We think this is an excellent idea. We propose to send a letter to governors, state
legislative leaders, and mayors which 1) describes Elaine Kinslow's story; 2) tells them that
you're fighting for $100 million a year in new welfare to work transportation funds as part of the
ISTEA reauthorization; 3) reminds them that they can in some circumstances use TANF and the
$3 billion welfare to work funds for transportation, and promises more detailed guidance from
HHS, DOL, and DOT. We will want to make clear that the ISTEA funds are still needed despite
the HHS and DOL funds. The T ANF funds, for example, could not be used to provide
transportation to families once they've left the welfare rolls, but only while they are still
receiving TANF. DOL's $3 billion welfare to work funds can be used for both current and
former T ANF recipients, but only those who were long term recipients with certain types of
employment barriers.

        Welfare Reform -- Ninth Circuit Upholds Ban on Lower Welfare Benefits for New
State Residents: On Wednesday, the Ninth Circuit upheld a ban on a California law that would
pay lower welfare benefits for new residents moving to California from other states. California's
law would have reduced benefits for families in the state for less than one year to the amount that
they would have received in their home state. This is the first federal appeals court decision on
the residency issue since enactment of the federal welfare reform law, although there have been
previous lower court rulings. The welfare reform law authorizes states to apply the rules and
benefits levels of the state they came from if they have resided in the new state less than 12
months. The law also requires states to identify in their T ANF plans whether they plan to treat
new residents differently. However, the law did not address the constitutional issue that has
historically blocked such laws as a bar on interstate commerce. At least 14 states have enacted
laws that treat new residents differently in response to the real or perceived concern that they will
become magnets from states with lower welfare benefits, although there is little hard evidence to
support the welfare magnet theory.

[Elena, since you know more about the legal issues here, you may want to add to this.]


                                                 2
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

        Education -- National Test: On Wednesday Goodling's committee marked-up his
bill to prohibit further test development work without specific and explicit Congressional
authorization, beyond that provided for in the appropriations compromise. The bill was
approved in committee by a 23-16 vote. Only one Democrat, Tim Romer, voted with
Goodling; no member of either the Congressional Black or Hispanic Caucuses voted with
him. We were able to hold the caucus members in part because of the school construction,
class size and other initiatives that target resources to their constituents, and in part due to
our appeals for party unity. Goodling is planning on bringing his bill to the floor as early
as next week. Our plan is to first hold the Democrats together again. We are working with
Mr. Clay and Mr. Miller on the authorizing committee, as well as Mr. Gephart, to devise
the best strategy for accomplishing this. Our approach may involve advancing a
Democratic (though not Administration) proposal to authorize national tests, with
provisions that would make the bill acceptable to the Caucuses. Second, we will issue a
veto threat so t~ere is no doubt about your continuing commitment to move forward with
the tests.

       Education -- America Reads: In response to the America Reads annual report, you
had asked for information on the number of work study volunteers, nonwork study
volunteers, and non college volunteers. The America Reads office does not maintain
information at that level of detail. In the initial efforts to sign up colleges and universities,
it became clear that few were comfortable in making specific commitments to either the
number or source of volunteers. Education Department, DPC and NEC staff felt that
pushing for specific commitments and detailed reporting of actual numbers of volunteers
would have seriously reduced our ability to sign colleges and universities up.

       Education -- Ending Social Promotion: Your call to end social promotions is
proving to be the most controversial of all of your proposals within the education
community. Based on feedback to date and discussions with Secretary Riley, we believe
that support within the education community could be increased, without changing your
proposal at all, by a slight change your rhetoric. Clarifying that the point is to educate all
students to pass, rather than retaining students in grade, would help. And in addition to
talking about the need to couple an end to social promotions with second chances such as
mandatory summer school, we recommend that you also talk about the steps that must be
taken to help students meet promotion standards on the first chance. These steps are
completely consistent with your agenda -- smaller classes, rigorous curriculum, well
prepared teachers, modernized schools, early identification and intervention for students
who need help, and accountability for student achievement by the entire school staff.
This would send a clear message that schools can do more than at present to help students
meet promotion standards the first time around, especially with the tools we are working to
provide them.




                                                3


