RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-JAN-1998 15:06:27.00

SUBJECT:   Education Weekly

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
National Test: On Wednesday GoodlingO,s committee marked-up his bill to
prohibit further test development work without specific and explicit
Congressional authorization, beyond that provided for in the
appropriations compromise. The bill was approved in committee by a 23-16
vote. Only one Democrat, Tim Romer, voted with Goodling; no member of
either the Congressional Black or Hispanic Caucuses voted with him. We
were able to hold the caucus members in part because of the school
construction, class size and other initiatives that target resources to
their constituents, and in part due to our appeals for party unity.
Goodling is planning on bringing his bill to the floor as early as next
week. Our plan is to first hold the Democrats together again. We are
working with Mr. Clay and Mr. Miller on the authorizing committee, as well
as Mr. Gephart, to devise the best strategy for accomplishing this.  Our
approach may involve advancing a Democratic (though not Administration)
proposal to authorize national tests, with provisions that would make the
bill acceptable to the Caucuses.  Second, we will issue a veto threat so
there is no doubt about your continuing commitment to move forward with
the tests.

America Reads: In response to the America Reads annual report, you had
asked for information on the number of work study volunteers, nonwork
study volunteers, and noncollege volunteers. The America Reads office
does not maintain information at that level of detail.  In the initial
efforts to sign up colleges and universities, it became clear that few
were comfortable in making specific commitments to either the number or
source of volunteers.  Education Department, DPC and NEC staff felt that
pushing for specific commitments and detailed reporting of actual numbers
of volunteers would have seriously reduced our ability to sign colleges
and universities up.

Ending Social Promotion: Your call to end social promotions is proving to
be the most controversial of all of your proposals within the education
community.  Based on feedback to date and discussions with Secretary
Riley, we believe that support within the education community could be
increased, without changing your proposal at all, by a slight change your
rhetoric. Clarifying that the point is to educate all students to pass,
rather than retaining students in grade, would help. And in addition to
talking about the need to couple an end to social promotions with second
chances such as mandatory summer school, we recommend that you also talk
about the steps that must be taken to help students meet promotion
standards on the first chance. These steps are completely consistent with
your agenda -- smaller classes, rigorous curriculum, well prepared
teachers, modernized schools, early identification and intervention for
students who need help, and accountability for student achievement by the
entire school staff.   This would send a clear message that schools cando
         ·


         more than at present to help students meet promotion standards the first
         time around, especially with the tools we are working to provide them.


