RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Rachel E. Levinson ( CN=Rachel E. Levinson/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP l                     )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-FEB-1998 16:35:13.00

 SUBJECT:   BIO's analysis

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD l        )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Arthur Bienenstock ( CN=Arthur Bienenstock/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP l                        )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP l              )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lucia A. Wyman ( CN=Lucia A. Wyman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO l          )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Clifford J. Gabriel ( CN=Clifford J. Gabriel/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP l                          )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Wendy A. Taylor ( CN=Wendy A. Taylor/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB l            )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rachel E. Levinson ( CN=Rachel E. Levinson/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP l                        )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: william P. Marshall      ( CN=william P. Marshall/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO l                   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD l                  )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jeffrey M. Smith ( CN=Jeffrey M. Smith/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP l                )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: gips_d ( gips_d @ a1.eop.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN l      ) (VPO)
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Toby Donenfeld ( CN=Toby Donenfeld/O=OvP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN l         )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Rachel E. Levinson/OSTP/EOP on
02/03/98 04:34 PM ---------------------------



        cludlam @ mail.bio.org
        02/03/98 02:31:57 PM
Record Type: Record

To: levinson
cc:
Subject: analysis



ANALYSIS OF BOND/FRIST/GREGG
HUMAN CLONING BILL

First Issue: The Bond/Frist/Gregg human cloning bill bans the act of
"producing an embryo (including a preimplantation embryo)" through the use
of a specified technology (somatic cell nuclear transfer).  It would ban
the production of this embryo even if the production of such an embryo is
for purposes completely unrelated to the cloning of a human being.

The bill, therefore, would effectively ban some research to
generate stem cells for the following types of treatments:
cardiac muscle cells to treat heart attack victims and degenerative
heart disease;
skin cells to treat burn victims;
spinal cord neuron cells for treatment of spinal cord trauma and
paralysis;
neural cells for treating those suffering from neurodegenerative
diseases;
pancreas cells to treat diabetes;
blood cells to treat cancer anemia, and immunodeficiencies;
neural cells to treat Parkinson's, Huntington's and Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis (ALS);    cells for use in genetic therapy to treat
5,000 genetic diseases, including Cystic Fibrosis,
Tay-Sachs Disease, schizophrenia, depression, and other diseases;
blood vessel endothelial cells for treating atherosclerosis;
liver cells for liver diseases including hepatitis and cirrhosis;
cartilage cells for treatment of osteoarthritis;
bone cells for treatment of osteoporosis;
myoblast cells for the treatment of Muscular Dystrophy;
respiratory epithelial cells for the treatment of Cystic Fibrosis
and lung cancer;
adrenal cortex cells for the treatment of Addison's disease; retinal
pigment epithelial cells for age-related macular
degeneration;
modified cells for treatment of various genetic diseases; and
other cells for uSe in the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of other
deadly or disabling           diseases or other medical conditions.
To be precise, the bill would ban the generation of stem cells for these
purposes where the stem cells have nuclear DNA from a "human somatic cell"
-- see critical discussion below and somatic cell nuclear transfer
technology was used.

It would not ban stem cell research where the stem cell is generated
without the use of somatic cell nuclear transfer or does not involve
nuclear DNA from a "human somatic cell" -- again, see the critical
discussion below.

If the legislation is limited to somatic cells with nuclear DNA identical
to that of an existing or previously exisiting human being -- again, see
critical discussion below -- the specific type of stem cells research
which is banned is "customized" stem cell research. A researcher or doctor
might want to create a human zygote with DNA identical to that of an
existing or previously existing person through the use of somatic cell
nuclear transfer -- the act prohibited in the Bond/Frist/Gregg bill -- in
order to create a customized stem cell line to treat the individual from
whom the DNA was extracted.  By using the same DNA the stem cell would be
more likely to be compatible and not rejected by the person when the stem
cell is transferred (back) to the person for the treatment.


The statement released by Senators Bond/Frist/Gregg about the impact of
their bill on biomedical research is technically accurate but highly
misleading. The title of the document is "CURRENT RESEARCH UNTOUCHED BY
THE BOND/FRIST/GREGG LEGISLATION" and i t is followed by a list of such
research, including "In Vitro Fertilization," "Stem Cell Research," "Gene
Therapy," "Cloning of Cells, Tissues, Animals and Plants," "Cancer,"
"Diabetes," "Birth Defects," l'Arthritis," "Organ
Failure," "Genetic Disease," "Severe Skin Burns," "Multiple
Sclerosis, ". "Muscular Dystrophy," "Spinal Cord Injuries," "Alzheimer's
Disease," "Parkinson's Disease," and "Lou Gehrig's Disease." The title to
this document includes a critical qualification -- an asterisk. The
asterisk qualification states, "The Bond/FristiGregg bill would not
prohibit any of this research, even embryo research, as long as it did not
involve the use of a very specific technique (somatic cell nuclear
transfer) to create a live cloned human embryo."

This qualification swallows the list.  It acknowledges that the bill
would, in fact, ban some types of stem cell research and other research,
as explained above.  Given the importance of the asterisk, the title to
the document and the list of protected research are highly misleading.

The statement of Senators Bond/Frist/Gregg is a challenge to patient
disease groups to seek to include in the legislation a specific guarantee
that research on the diseases they list is not, in fact, stifled.  Such an
exemption might read as follows:

"NOTHING IN THIS ACT shall apply where the acts or research are for the
purpose of producing or generating stem cells to treat or diagnose deadly
or disabling diseases and other medical conditions including the
following: cardiac muscle cells to treat heart attack victims and
degenerative heart disease; skin cells to treat burn victims; spinal cord
neuron cells for treatment of spinal cord trauma and paralysis; neural
cells for treating those suffering from neurodegenerative diseases;
pancreas cells to treat diabetes; blood cells to treat anemia,
immunodeficiencies, and cancer; neural cells to treat Parkinson's,
Huntington's and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS); cells for use in
genetic therapy to treat 5,000 genetic diseases, including Cystic
Fibrosis, Tay-Sachs Disease, schizophrenia, depression, and other
diseases; blood cells for use in treating patients with cancer, anemia, or
immunodeficiency diseases; blood vessel endothelial cells for treating
atherosclerosis; liver cells for liver diseases including hepatitis and
cirrhosis; cartilage cells for treatment of osteoarthritis; bone cells for
treatment of osteoporosis; myoblast cells for the treatment of Muscular
Dystrophy; respiratory epithelial cells for the treatment of Cystic
Fibrosis and lung cancer; adrenal cortex cells for the treatment of
Addison's disease; retinal pigment epithelial cells for age-related
macular degeneration; modified cells for treatment of various genetic
diseases; and other cells for use in the diagnosis, treatment and preventi
on of other deadly or disabling diseases or other medical conditions; or
for the purpose of conducting scientific research into the mechanisms of
interaction between the genes and their intracellular and extracellular
environments in order to control and redirect the specialization of
somatic cells into novel treatments or diagnostic products for deadly or
disabling diseases and other medical conditions."

If Senators Bond/Frist/Gregg are, in fact, determined to protect this
research, they could not object to including this explicit guarantee in
their bill.

The stem cell technology is exciting and potentially revolutionary.


Scientists are developing an entirely new approach for treating human
diseases that depend not on drugs like antibiotics but on living cells
that can differentiate into blood, skin, heart, or brain cells and
potentially treat cancers, spinal cord injuries, or heart disease. This
research -- called stem cell research -- holds the potential to develop
and improve cancer treatments by gaining a more complete understanding of
cell division and growth and the process of metastasis. This could also
lead to a variety of cancer treatment advances.

The kinds of cells that make up most of the human body are differentiated,
meaning that they have already achieved some sort of specialized function
such as blood, skin, heart or brain cells. The precursor cells that led
to differentiated cells come from the embryo.
They are called stem cells because functions stem from them like the
growth of a plant.   Stem cells have the capacity for self-renewal, meaning
that they can produce more of themselves, and differentiation, meaning
that they can specialize into a variety of cell types with different
functions.  In the last decade, scientists studying mice and other
laboratory animals have discovered powerful new approaches involving
cultured stem cells.    Studies of such cells obtained from mouse stem
cells show that they are capable of differentiating in vitro or in vivo
into a wide variety of specialized cell types.   Stem cells have been
derived by culturing cells of non-human primates and promising efforts to
obtain human stem cells have also recently been reported.

Stem cell research has been hailed as the "[mlost tantalizing of all"
research in this field.  The reason for this is because adults do not have
many stem cells. Most cells are fully differentiated into their proper
functions.   When differentiated cells are damaged, such as cardiac muscle
when someone suffers a heart attack, the adult cells do not have the
ability to regenerate.  If stem cells could be derived from human sources
and induced to differentiate in vitro, they could potentially be used for
transplantation and tissue repair.

Using the heart attack sufferer as an example, we might be able to replace
damaged cardiac cells with healthy stem cells that could differentiate
into cardiac muscle. Research with these stem cells could lead to the
development of "universal donor cells" of invaluable benefit to patients.
Stem cell therapy could make it possible to store tissue reserves that
would give health care providers a wholly new and virtually endless supply
of the cells listed above.  The use of stem cells to create these therapies
 would lead to great medical advances.  We have to be sure that nothing we
do in this legislation concerning human cloning would obstruct in any way
this vital research.

Second Issue: The bill bans the use of somatic cell nuclear to transfer a
"human somatic cell" but it does not state that this is limited to somatic
cell which contains nuclear DNA identical to that of an existing or
previously existing person. This means that the bill is not limited to
cloning (creating a person or embryo with nuclear DNA identical to that of
someone else), but would also apply to the use of somatic cell nuclear
transfer of nuclear DNA which is not identical. It would, in fact,
prohibit the use of somatic cell nuclear transfer where the nuclear DNA is
the product of normal, sexual reproduction -- that is the opposite of
cloning.  It would also prohibit the use of somatic cell nuclear transfer
where the somatic cell had been modified in some way prior to the use of
somatic cell nuclear transfer.  In short, the bill prohibits a broad range
of uses of somatic cell nuclear transfer having nothing whatever to do
with cloning, such as use of this technology to treat mitochondrial
disease.


