RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-FEB-1998 17:48:41.00

SUBJECT:   Tobacco q/a

TO: Elena Kagan    CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  These are the final q/a from the tobacco budget with the following
changes:
1. Changed speaker of q and a so it is President speaking; 2.    Included
POTUS q/a from 1/20/98 on whether legislation is stalled as first
question; 3. added 1/20/98 POTUS q/a on documents marketing to kids
hurting chance for leislation, and 1/20 q/a on lawyer fees as last two
questions; and 4.   cut specific budget question on what the "other uses"
means in the budget.==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D61)MAIL47484633J.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750434E070000010A02010000000205000000C1380000000200004ECCCE337B1007CE221E54
                                                                                 Hex,Dump Conversion

                                    TobaccolBudget Q&A
                                          February 3, 1998



Q:   Are you concerned by comments by some members of Congress that tobacco
     legislation may be getting stalled -- that you may not be serious about getting a bill --
      and suggesting that you should take a more active role in pushing legislation?

A:    I am committed to enacting comprehensive bipartisan tobacco legislation. So any
      comments to the contrary are just wrong. Weare making very solid progress towards
      enacting comprehensive tobacco legislation that will reduce teen smoking. I've
      proposed a very clear set of principles about what should be in the bill-- the first issue
      being that this is about protecting kids, not money or political advantage. I've met
      personally with senior members involved in this issue -- I've assured them that we want
      to get this done, that we will. Our staff has met with members of both parties and will
      continue to do so. And my budget contains a great deal of details on how I think we
      should get this done -- on how much money the tobacco companies should pay and where
      it should go. This has been a long battle we have been fighting and we will stay with it,
     .and it will make a difference to the health of millions of children over the next few years.
       We have to get it done.


Q:   In September, you said the focus of tobacco legislation should not be about money.
     In the budget you unveiled this week, more than 60 percent of the proposed increase
     in discretionary spending is paid for by tobacco legislation. Why have you
     changed course?

A:   My course has not changed -- Congress should send me legislation that will dramatically
     reduce youth smoking. Experts all agree the single most important step we can take to
     reduce youth smoking is to raise the price of a pack of cigarettes significantly. That is
     why last September, and again in the State of the Union speech, I called for Congress to
     pass legislation that raises cigarette. prices by up to $1.50 per pack over the next ten years
     as necessary to reduce youth smoking. Our budget simply scores that part of the plan,
     and allocates the revenues to programs that promote public health and assist children.


Q:   How can you assume revenues from tobacco legislation when it's not at all certain
     whether this legislation will pass?

A:   It is a normal part of the budget process to account for any revenues that will be raised
     from proposed legislation. And we believe strongly that Congress will pass
     comprehensive tobacco legislation this year. If everyone who says they are committed to
     protecting children from tobacco rolls up their sleeves and gets to work, we will pass a
     significant piece ofiegislation.
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion




Q:   Why is it that some of the programs funded with tobacco revenues have no relation
     to tobacco?

A:   Most of the spending is directly related to tobacco, such as health-related research and
     smoking cessation programs. The rest goes to programs that will assist our children. I
     wanted to ensure that states get a substantial share of the resources, because of the states'
     contribution in negotiating the original proposed settlement. It is money that goes to
     children's programs -- to improve child care and reduce class size -- in recognition that
     these are shared federal and state goals.


Q:   Doesn't attaching tobacco legislation to particular spending initiatives hurt the
     chance of passing this legislation?

A:   No. It is a normal part of the budget process to propose how to spend any revenues
     raised from proposed legislation. And we will work on a bipartisan basis with Congress
     if it has other ideas on the best way to allocate these revenues. There is no reason why
     allocation issues should hold up the process of comprehensive legislation.


Q:   Doesn't using tobacco legislation as a funding source for important policy proposals
     -- such as improving child care and reducing class size -- hurt the chances of
     achieving those proposals?

A:   No. I believe Congress will pass tobacco legislation that imposes significant
     financial burdens on tobacco companies. Of course, no offset proposed in a budget
     is guaranteed; Congress can reject any proposed way of financing a program. If
     Congress does not pass comprehensive tobacco legislation, we will work with
     Congress to find other offsets. These are high priorities, and we will find effective
     funding mechanisms.


Q:   How much money do you expect to raise from tobacco legislation next year? What
     about over five years? How did you come to this figure?

A:   This budget is designed to reduce youth smoking by 30% in five years and 50% in seven
     years, which are the goals I've set out. We calculate that the necessary increase in the
     price per pack will result in about $10 billion in revenue next year and $65 billion over
     five years.


Q:   How much does your plan increase the cost of cigarettes?
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


A:   In order to reach the goal of reducing youth smoking by 30% in five years, and 50% in
     seven years, my budget projects about a $1.10 increase in the price of cigarettes over five
     years.


Q:   What programs is tobacco money used for in the budget?

A:   In general, tobacco revenues go toward protecting public health and assisting children.
     First, the budget provides for funds for anti-smoking activities that will help us meet the
     goals of reducing youth smoking rates. In addition, there are funds in the budget to
     support the commitment I made when I announced my plan for tobacco legislation in
     September to fund a dramatic expansion of health-related research in America. Finally,
     in recognition of the states' role in bringing suit against tobacco companies, the budget
     provides for a substantial amount of money to revert to the states. Some of this money
     can be used for any purpose. Other funds must be used on state-administered programs
     to assist children (specifically, for child care, Medicaid child outreach, and class size
     reduction).


Q:       How much money is there for states in the budget?

A:   The states will receive as much money over five years as they would have received under
     the original settlement agreement. A large part of this money will be unrestricted; states
     can use it for whatever purposes they choose. The rest ofthe money will go to states for
     state-administered programs to provide child care subsidies and reduce class size. This
     money represents the usual federal share of Medicaid recoveries, which I believe should
     go back to the states in recognition of the important role the states played in bringing
     about this legislation.


Q:   Does your budget assume that the revenues from tobacco legislation will come from
     increased excise taxes, or from industry payments pursuant to a settlement?

A:   The budget assumes that the money will come from annual industry payments pursuant to
     a settlement.


Q:   Last week, several Republicans came out against tobacco legislation that would
     grant the industry limits on Iiability_ Many public health leaders are also saying
     that tobacco legislation must not include limits on liability. Do you still favor a
     settlement that would include limits on industry liability?

A:   I will evaluate tobacco legislation as a whole to determine whether it protects the public
     health. Liability limits are not necessarily a deal-breaker for us. What's important is
     achieving comprehensive legislation that includes, for example, a large per-pack price
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
      increase, penalties for marketing to children, and broad restrictions on children's access
      to tobacco.

      I hope that these kinds of statements (statements by Republican senators on liability)
      don't mean that some members are seeking to walk away from their responsibility to
      protect children by enacting comprehensive tobacco legislation.

      Piecemeal legislation won't accomplish our goal. It's not enough just to say we did
      something if we don't pass comprehensive legislation that really accomplishes our goals.

 Q:   Do recent events, the tobacco settlement in Texas or the release of documents
      showing some companies were marketing to children, diminish the need for
      legislation or the chance that it would get passed?

A:    No. It is a good sign that industry is being held accountable for the harms it has caused,
      and that we are getting information out about how the industry has hurt children. But
      that should serve as further impetus for comprehensive legislation. We need a
      comprehensive system of penalties to make sure companies reduce teen smoking, we
      need the FDA to have authority over tobacco products to protect our health, to make sure
      advertising doesn't go after our kids. So we need legislation, and it should be
      bi-partisan. I think all the attention from these events makes it clear why we need a
      national solution, and that we should try and get it done soon.


Q:    Lawyers in both Texas and Florida have asked for obscene amounts of money for
      their role in bringing about settlements with the tobacco industry. Will you
      support a provision in national legislation to limit fees for lawyers?

A:    I'm primarily concerned with ensuring that tobacco legislation reduces youth smoking
      and protects the public health -- not with collecting and distributing money from a
      settlement. The lawyers who brought these suits have expended lots of time and effort,
      and deserve to be well recompensed for their work. But everyone agrees that fees
      shouldn't be wildly out of proportion to the work that was done.


