 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-FEB-1998 09:47:19,00

 SUBJECT:   copy of long term planning memo on e-mail

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Ernrnett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D93)MAIL43746363C.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF57504300060000010A02010000000205000000EA5100000002000013068396A23E31E4DOF131
 E42E108B66356D394DOACDF5263FFBDAA68256F2CEB438837BABC373B55E33BCE53DD17A3BC6CB
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
                                LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS

Medicare Buy-in

     Work to ensure passage ofiegislation 5, 1998 through the Congress.
     Finalize the legislative drafting process with Members who have indicated a desire to
      introduce this legislation, (including Senator Moynihan).
     Attempt to attract Republican support and interest, focusing particular efforts with Sen.
      D'Amato and Rep. Nancy Johnson who are on committee's of jurisdiction.
     Consider endorsing the Hill version of the President's proposal in a public event with
      Senator Moynihan.
     Review options to respond to policy concerns raised by opponents and consider any
      adjustments to the legislation that would increase support for this initiative.
     Continue to work to get elite validators to praise this policy and to counter criticisms that
      it will hurt the Medicare program, cause early retirement, or cause employers to drop
      private coverage.
     Ifit becomes clear that passing legislation on this issue is not viable, ensure that this
      remains a good political issue for the Democrats in the upcoming year and that it is
      included in the final recommendations of the Medicare Commission in March, 1999.

Consumer Protections

     Work to ensure passage of this legislation before the Congress adjourns this year.
     Develop a strategy to work with Democrats and moderate Republicans who are looking
      for a reasonable alternative to the Norwood bill to determine ifthere is a legislative
      vehicle we can help facilitate working through the Congress.
     Work with elite validators and others to prepare to counter any attacks that this will raise
      health insurance premiums and cause more people to become uninsured.
     Continue to develop executive/administrative actions to ensure the Federal government
      provides quality health care and is fully in compliance with the consumer bill of rights
      and draw attention to this issue.
     If it proves that passing a bill is not a viable legislative option this year, create the
      environment so that this continues to be a good issue for the Democrats and that it is on
      the top of the legislative agenda for the following year.
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
Medicare Cancer Clinical Trials

      Develop legislative strategy to ensure this proposal is passed before Congress adjourns
       this year.
      Ensure that advocates of this proposal understand its link to tobacco legislation and
       increase their support for overall tobacco legislation.
      Work with cancer advocacy community as well as medical researchers to raise awareness
       about the importance of this issue and validate thc President's proposal.
      Work with co-sponsors Senators Mack and Rockefeller and Rep. Nancy Johnson and Ben
       Cardin to continue to increase bipartisan support for this proposal.
      Highlight through President's AAAS speech on cancer and tobacco.
      Use unprecedented Cancer March in Washington this fall to underscore the President's
       and Vice President's commitment to cancer.

21st Century Research Fund for America

      Work with advocates to ensure they recognize that a multi-year investment in biomedical
       research depends on national tobacco legislation.
      Work with NIH to highlight some of the important contributions this funding could make
       to the prevention, treatment, and possibly cures of important diseases.
      Continue to highlight the President's commitment in this area so that even if Congress
       allocates more dollars in this area (as we expect they will), the President will get credit
       for his commitment to biomedical research.

Children's Health Outreach

      Pass legislation before Congress they adjourn this year that provides resources and
       incentives for states to target and enroll uninsured children who are eligible for Medicaid
       or the new Children'S Health Insurance Program.
      Work with the Congress, children's advocates, Governors, providers, foundations, and
       other supporters to increase support for this legislation.
      Target lead bipartisan co-sponsors for this legislatjon on the Hill.
      Continue to develop administrative initiatives that can help enroll more uninsured
       children in Medicaid or the new children's health program.
      Highlight new states coming into the program and new outreach initiatives.

AIDS

      Work with Congress and community to ensure the President's proposed $165 million
       increase in AIDS prevention and treatment is passed in the Congress.
      Following up on the Vice President's request that HCFA determine the feasibility of
       extending promising new therapies to people with AIDS through Medicaid which raised
       expectations in the AIDS community, we will continue to work with HCF A and AIDS
       community to develop other ways to extend these therapies to more people with AIDS.
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion         .
     Develop a viable strategy to deal with the issue of Federal funding for needle exchange.
Confidentiality Legislation

      Work to enact legislation on this issue before Congress adjourns.
      Provide technical assistance to Republicans and Democrats and help develop
       compromises to difficult issues with regard to privacy and continue to move forward on
       this issue.
      Target bipartisan legislation with a probable focus on legislation introduced by Senator
       Bennett.
      Work with HHS and Justice Department to develop an acceptable compromise on the law
       enforcement issue.
      Contemplate highlighting this issue through a public event.
      Determine the b~st legislative vehicle -- whether this should be folded into the larger
       consumer protection's legislation or possibly in conjunction with genetics legislation.

Genetic Anti-Discrimination Legislation

      Work to pass legislation to prevent both employers and health plans from using genetic
       discrimination.
      Work with Democrats and Republicans to develop broader support for this legislation.
      Work with NIH to continue to highlight the importance of this issue through op-eds by
       validators and other public statements.
      Determine most likely legislative vehicle for this legislation -- whether it be freestanding,
       attached to privacy legislation, or as part of consumer protections.
      Contemplate an Executive Order which ensures the Federal government does not
       discriminate -- either with regard to health insurance or employment -- on the basis of
       health insurance.

Medicaid Provider Tax Issue

      Encourage Congress to pass legislation to give the Secretary more authority to waive any
       past Medicaid dollars owed by states to the Federal government and encourage state
       Medicaid programs to come into compliance in the future.
      Highlight the fact that if this legislation does not pass, the Secretary will have to take
       steps to enforce this issue, both prospectively and retrospectively.
      Work with Senator Moynihan, Senator Damato, and Congressman Rangel to develop
       legislation as this has a particular impact on the state of New York.

MedicarelMedicaid Fraud and Abuse

      Work to pass the President's fraud and abuse legislative proposals.
      Continue to develop Executive/Administrative actions to reduce fraud, abuse, and waste.
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

Race and Health Initiative

     Roll out this initiative in radio address hopefully with Dr. Satcher, who may be confirmed
      as Surgeon General by then
     Work to get the most support from the minority community and the public health
      community.
     Ensure that the minority community gets invested in working with HAS to implement
      this initiative and take steps within the private community.
     Ensure that strategies learned in the demonstrations are applied across the public health
      programs in the Department.



                             NON-LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS

Children's Health Implementation and Outreach

     Continue to work to implement the $24 billion program to provide coverage for up to five
      million children.
     Work with states, providers, children's advocates, foundations and others to sign up the
      three million children who are currently eligible for Medicaid but not enrolled.
     Work with HCFA to approve state plans for the new Children's Health Insurance
      Program (CHIP) and determine appropriate circumstances for a waiver.
     Continue to send guidance to states and advocates on the new children's health program.
     Continue to highlight the program's early successes.
     Develop additional administrative/executive actions to help more uninsured children
      enroll in either in CHIP or Medicaid.

Medicare Reform Implementation

     Work with HCFA to ensure the historic Medicare reforms in the Balanced Budget are
      enacted in a timely, coordinated manner.

Medicare Commission

     Work with NEC to develop materials for Commission members.
     Develop a close constructive working relationship with Congressman Thomas, and
      Senator Breaux.
     Work with the Commission and the Congress to create an environment for widespread
      consensus on broad-based Medicare reforms that most Democrats can support.

FDA Commissioner
                                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


           Develop internal and Congressional process to create support for FDA nomination .


