RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-FEB-1998 17:16:13.00

SUBJECT:   DISREGARD- last weekly- use this one

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP .@ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D38]MAIL44084663T.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750430EOF0000010A020100000002050000004140000000020000BDC027FD1D25D968E37A30
370FE418490CF3B3FCDOC4EDED5012F29082DOCC~C176F89EFBF9D97023A69152653A7A61B8952
                                                                            Hex.Dump Conversion




                                        February 6, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report




        Education -- National Testing: Goodling's bill to prohibit further development of
national tests without specific authorization, beyond what was explicitly agreed to in the FY98
appropriations bill, passed by a vote of 242-174. Twenty-five Democrats (mostly conservative)
joined all but 2 Republicans to support Goodling. Both the Black and Hispanic Caucuses
opposed Goodling's bill, partly in recognition of the substantial and targeted education
investments in your budget, and partly because they viewed Goodling's bill as a partisan effort to
embarrass the Administration. However, this vote does not represent a fundamental change in
position for either caucus; when we face more'substantive votes on national tests in the future,
we will not gain their votes without address their policy concerns, such as a ban on high stakes
testing and development of Spanish-language reading tests.

       Education -- Coverdell Education IRA's: (Laura and Elena: consider this a .
placeholder until after the meeting on Friday with Erskine). Coverdell's proposal for education
IRA's will be marked-up by the Senate Finance Committee next week .....

         Child Care -- Current Legislation. On Thursday, Senator Dodd and a group of 24
Democratic Senators introduced child care legislation similar both to your proposal and to the
Chafee bill introduced last week. While the Dodd bill is substantially similar to your child care
initiative, it has some differences: (1) the dependent care tax credit is made refundable and
reformed to provide assistance to stay-at-home parents; (2) the Family and Medical Leave Act
threshold is lowered to cover businesses of 25 or more employees; (3) after-school programs are
enhanced both through the 21st Century Learning Center Program and through a set-aside in the
block grant; and (4) a new fund is created to promote public-private partnerships in child care.
In addition, on Tuesday, Congresswoman Nancy Johnson introduced the Chafee bill in the
House.
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion



        Drugs -- Home Drug Tests: Next week, HHSIFDA is planning to release a proposed
regulation for "home drug test kits." HHSIFDA intends to codify its policy of the past year to
allow manufacturers to market these kits without prior FDA approval so long as they meet 3
conditions:

       1. That one of the more than 200 already FDA-approved testing procedures is used;
       2. That one of the 70 FDA-certified labs determine the results; and
       3. That the kits themselves be accurately labeled.

Interested parties will have 90-days to comment on this proposed regulation, and HHSIFDA will
also conduct a public hearing on home drug test kits during this time -- and before issuing a final
regulation. Under the proposed regulation, Sunny Cloud -- the individual who initially
challenged HHSIFDA's -- could continue to market her home drug test kits; however, proponents
of hair testing, which is not currently approved by the FDA, are likely to be unhappy with the
regulation. The proposed regulation has no impact on law enforcement-related drug tests.

        Health Care -- Dr. Satcher's Confirmation Vote: Next Tuesday, the Senate is
scheduled to vote on Dr. Satcher's nomination to become Surgeon General. Our current vote
count is 66 votes and we believe that we may get more than 70. Should Dr. Satcher be
confirmed, this would fill an approximately three year void in the Surgeon General position. We
are currently considering recommending a picture of you and/or the Vice President swearing Dr.
Satcher in for this post.

         Health Care -- Congressman John Dingell Update: Following up on your
conversation with John Dingell, Larry Stein, Bruce Reed and Chris Jennings met with the
Congressman on Thursday to discuss prospects of and strategy for the consumer protections
legislative debate and Mr. Dingell's role on the Medicare Commission. It was agreed that the
Administration would continue to give technical assistance to the House Democratic Caucus
consumer protections bill as well as to make positive statements about it without giving an all out
endorsement. The current bill goes farther than is likely to be passed in the Congress and may
well be vulnerable to criticisms from the business community about excessive costs and
regulations. As of yet, we have avoided having to take a position on most of the controversial
positions in Dingell's bill. We informed Dingell about our concems of an overly costly bill. He
said he appreciated the feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of the bill and was pleased we
would say positive things about his efforts in this area.

         Welfare Reform -- Memo from Secretary Shalala: Secretary Shalala has submitted to
you a good memo on welfare reform. The memo notes that the stunning caseload drop
continues -- 2.4 million in the first 13 months of the new law, with 21 states down 25 percent or
more in that time. There has been no "race to the bottom" -- states are spending more per
recipient than in 1994. All states are meeting the maintenance of effort requirement we fought
for in the welfare law, and nearly half the states are exceeding it. And many more recipients are
now working. State evaluations show a substantial increase in the share of people who leave

                                                2
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
welfare for work (from 45-50 percent under AFDC to 50-60 percent now), even as record
numbers leave the rolls. (We had earlier reported to you that the share was about the same as in
the past, but some additional studies reviewed by HHS show an increase). And, the memo
notes, there is little evidence of hardship among those who are sanctioned for not meeting
program rules. Only nine states have adopted lifetime limits of less than five years.

[Note to Elena: the memo from Secretary Shalala to the President says that 20 states are
exceeding the 80 percent maintenance of effort, and, thus, so does Bruce's cover memo. HHS
has since discovered, and will include in the information they release publicly, that 22 states have
MOEs higher than 80 percent. Thus, I said "nearly half the states" here.]

         Welfare Reform -- Performance Bonuses: We are now nearly ready to announce two
new nationwide competitions to promote work and personal responsibility. The first
competition will award $1 billion in bonuses -- $200 million a year over the next five years -- to
states that do the best job of placing welfare recipients into jobs and helping them succeed in the
work place. Sixty percent of the funds will be distributed based on states' success in placing
people in jobs (40 percent to states with the highest job entry rate and 20 percent for those with
the most improved rate). Forty percent of the funds will be distributed based on how well
former recipients succeed in the work place, a measure based on job retention and earnings gains
(with 25 percent for absolute achievement and 15 percent for improvement). The second bonus
will distribute $100 million a year to states that reduce their "illegitimacy ratio" i.e., the
percentage of children born out of wedlock (by statute, states must also have an abortion rate
lower than their 1995 rate to win the bonus). We would issue these policies through proposed
regulations, which would interpret the statutory provisions.

         Cloning -- Legislation to Ban Human Cloning: Senators Frist and Bond have drafted
legislation that Lott has introduced that bans cloning of human beings. However, it defines an
embryo as a single cell zygote, effectively banning all cloning experiments with human cells and
blocking research that might someday be conducted to combat diseases such as diabetes and .
cancer. A number of biotechnology and health groups have objected to the legislation and are
lobbying the Senate. We have met with the staffs of Senators Frist and Bond to encourage them
to reach a compromise that allows for continued research, and Senators Kennedy and Feinstein
have taken the lead with alternative research-friendly legislation. It seems likely that our best
hope of compromise is in the Senate as the House position may be more intractable and could
potentially involve right to life issues. Our goal is to produce legislation that you could sign.
One option may be the addition of a sunset provision that bans human embryo research for a
short time, but allows Congress to revisit the issue when scientists may actually be ready to take
advantage of this technology for human research. Frist's bill also establishes a new bioethics
commission appointed by Congress that would coexist with the one you set up.




                                                 3


