RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-FEB-1998 17:54:27.00

SUBJECT:   You may wish to review these welfare documents

TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
They are updates or compilations of paragraphs you've seen before, but
will be handy for sharing with our friends --

One pager on welfare reform and the FY 99 budget

Updated welfare accomplishments doc (with FY 99 budget and new #s)==================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D58]MAIL498556930.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504332050000010A020100000002050000008D1800000002000032786A69DB9558B866A85A
lDC954D399C6E779B082064B1382FF415D8510B23189059059C4858D5451EE56123A1A2997EF4B
                CLINTON-GORE ACCOMPLISHMENTS                                               Hex텱ump Conversion
                     REFORMING WELFARE


    On August 22, 1996, President Clinton signed the Personal Responsibility and
    Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, fulfilling his longtime commitment to 'end
    welfare as we know it. ' As the President said upon signing, "... this legislation
    provides an historic opportunity to end welfare as we know it and transform our
    broken welfare system by promoting the fundamental values of work,
    responsibility, and family . ..


              TRANSFORMING THE BROKEN WELFARE SYSTEM

    Overhauling the Welfare System with the Personal Responsibility Act: In 1996, the
    President signed a bipartisan welfare plan that is dramatically changing the nation's
    welfare system into one that requires work in exchange for time-limited assistance. The
    law contains strong work requirements, performance bonuses to reward states for moving
    welfare recipients into jobs and reducing illegitimacy, state maintenance of effort
    requirements, comprehensive child support enforcement, and supports for families
    moving from welfare to work -- including increased funding for child care and guaranteed
    medical coverage. State strategies are making a real difference in the success of
    welfare reform, specifically in job placement, child care and transportation.

   Law Builds on the Administration's Welfare Reform Strategy: Even before the
    Personal Responsibility Act became law, many states were well on their way to changing
    their welfare programs to jobs programs. By granting Federal waivers, the Clinton
    Administration allowed 43 states -- more than all previous Administrations combined --
    to require work, time-limit assistance, make work pay, improve child support
    enforcement, and encourage parental responsibility. The vast majority of states have
    chosen to continue or build on their welfare demonstration projects approved by the
    Clinton Administration.

    Largest Decline in the Welfare Rolls in History: The President has announced that
    we've met -- two years ahead of schedule -- the challenge he made in last year's State
    of the Union to move two million more Americans off of welfare by the year 2000.
    New caseload numbers show that welfare caseloads fell by 4.3 million since               .
    President Clinton took office and 2.4 million in the first 13 months of the new law.
    The new figures, from September 1997, show 9.8 million Americans on welfare, a
    drop of more than 30 percent from January 1993. This historic decline occurred in
    response to the Administration's grants of Federal waivers to 43 states, the provisions of
    the new welfare reform law, and the strong economy.




                                           - 1-
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion           Islem

                 MOVING PEOPLE FROM WELFARE TO WORK

   Mobilizing the Business Community: At the President's urging, the Welfare to Work
    Partnership was launched in May 1997 to lead the national business effort to hire people
    from the welfare rolls. Founded with 105 participating businesses, the Partnership now
    has nearly 3,000 members. The Partnership provides technical assistance and support to
    businesses around the country, including: a toll-free number (1-888-USAJOB1), the
    Partnership's Web site (www.welfaretowork.org) and a "Blueprint for Business" manual.

          ... and Civic, Religious and Non-profit Groups: The Vice President created the
    Welfare to Work Coalition to Sustain Success, a coalition of civic groups committed to
    helping former welfare recipients stay in the workforce and succeed. Tailoring their
    services to meet welfare recipients needs and the organizations' strengths, the Coalition
    will focus on providing mentoring and other support services. Charter members of the
    Coalition include: the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, the Baptist Joint Committee, the
    United Way, the YMCA, and other civic and faith-based groups.

   Doing Our Fair Share with the Federal Government's Hiring Initiative: Under the
    Clinton Administration, the Federal workforce is the smallest it has been in thirty years.
    Yet, this Administration also believes that the Federal government, as the nation's largest
    employer, must lead by example. The President asked the Vice President to oversee the
    Federal government's hiring initiative in which Federal agencies have committed to
    directly hire at least 10,000 welfare recipients in the next four years. Already, the
    federal government has hired 2,400 welfare recipients. As a part of this effort, the
    White House pledged, and has already hired, six welfare recipients.

   $3 Billion to Help Move More People from Welfare to Work: Because ofthe
    President's leadership, the 1997 Balanced Budget Act included the total funding
    requested by the President for the creation of his $3 billion welfare to work fund. This
    program will help states and local communities move long-term welfare recipients into
    lasting, unsubsidized jobs. These funds can be used for job creation, job placement and
    job retention efforts, including wage subsidies to private employers and other critical
    post-employment support services. The Department of Labor will provide oversight but
    most of the dollars will be placed, through the Private Industry Councils, in the hands of
    the localities who are on the front lines of the welfare reform effort. In addition, 25
    percent of the funds will be awarded by the Department of Labor on a competitive basis
    to support innovative welfare to work projects.

   Tax Credits for Employers: The Welfare to Work Tax Credit, enacted in the 1997
    Balanced Budget Act, provides a credit equal to 35 percent of the first $10,000 in wages
    in the first year of employment, and 50 percent of the first $10,000 in wages in the second
    year, to encourage the hiring and retention of long term welfare recipients. This credit
    complements the Work Opportunity Tax Credit, which provides a credit of up to $2,400
    for the first year of wages for eight groups of job seekers. The President's FY 1999
    budget extends these two important tax credits for an additional year.



                                           -2-
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
   Welfare to Work Housing Vouchers: In his FY 1999 budget, the President proposes
    $283 million for 50,000 new housing vouchers for welfare recipients who need housing
    assistance to get or keep a job. Families could use these housing vouchers to move
    closer to a new job, to reduce a long commute, or to secure more stable housing to
    eliminate emergencies that keep them from getting to work every day on time. These
    vouchers, awarded to communities on a competitive basis, will give people on welfare a
    new tool to make the transition to a job and succeed in the work place.

   Welfare to Work Transportation: One of the biggest barriers facing people who move
    from welfare to work -- in cities and in rural areas -- is finding transportation to get to
    jobs, training programs and child care centers. Few welfare recipients own cars.
    Existing mass transit does not provide adequate links to many suburban jobs at all,
    or within a reasonable commute time. In addition, many entry level jobs require
    evening or weekend hours that are poorly served by existing transit routes. To help
    those on welfare get to their jobs, President Clinton has proposed a $100 million a year
    welfare to work transportation plan as part of his ISTEA reauthorization bill. This
    competitive grant program would assist states and localities in developing flexible
    transportation alternatives, such as van services.




                                           -3-
                                                                           Records Management System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

                   PROMOTING PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

   Enforcing Child Support -- 63% Increase in Collections: The Clinton Administration
    collected a record $13 billion in child support in 1997 through tougher enforcement, an
    increase of $5 billion, or 63% since 1992. Not only are collections up, but the number of
    families that are actually receiving child support has also increased. In 1997, the number
    of child support cases with collections rose to 4.2 million, an increase of 48% from 2.8
    million in 1992. And paternity establishment, often the first crucial step in child support
    cases, has dramatically increased. In 1997, the number of paternities established or
    acknowledged rose to 1.1 million from 512,000 in 1992, an increase of 115%.

          Making Deadbeat Parents Pay: The President's unprecedented and sustained
    campaign to make deadbeat parents pay is working. In addition to tougher enforcement
    including a strong partnership with states, President Clinton has taken executive action
    including: directing the Treasury Department to collect past-due child support from
    Federal payments including Federal income tax refunds and employee salaries; taking
    steps to Federal deny loans to any delinquent parents; issuing an executive order making
    the Federal government a model employer in the area of child support enforcement. The
    President also directed the Attorney General to submit legislation that strengthens the
    Child Support Recovery Act by prosecuting more parents who take egregious actions to
    avoid paying child support. And most significantly, the welfare reform law contains
    tough child support measures that President Clinton has long supported including: a
    national new hire reporting system; streamlined paternity establishment; uniform
    interstate child support laws; computerized state-wide collections; and tough new
    penalties. These five measures are projected to increase child support collections by an
    additional $24 billion over the next ten years.

   Breaking the Cycle of Dependency -- Preventing Teen Pregnancy: Significant
    components of the President's comprehensive effort to reduce teen pregnancy became law
    when the President signed the 1996 Personal Responsibility Act. The law requires
    unmarried minor parents to stay in school and live at home or in a supervised setting;
    encourages "second chance homes" to provide teen parents with the skills and support
    they need; and provides $50 million a year in new funding for state abstinence education
    activities. Since 1993, the Clinton Administration has supported innovative and
    promising teen pregnancy prevention strategies; HHS-supported programs already reach
    about 30 percent or 1,410 communities in the United States. As part of this effort, the
    National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy, a private nonprofit organization, was
    formed in response to the President's 1995 State of the Union. Notably, data shows we
    are making progress in reducing teen pregnancy -- teen births have fallen five years in a
    row, by 12 percent from 1991 to 1996.




                                           - 4-
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

       RESTORING FAIRNESS AND PROTECTING THE MOST VULNERABLE

The President made a commitment to fix several provisions in the welfare reform law that had
nothing to do with moving people from welfare to work. In 1997, the President fought for and
ultimately was successful in ensuring that the Balanced Budget Act protects the most vulnerable.
 And now, with his 1999 budget, he's continuing the fight.

      Protects Immigrants Who Become Disabled and Those Currently Receiving
       Benefits: The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 restored $11.5 billion in SSI and Medicaid
       benefits for legal immigrants. The new law protects those immigrants now receiving
       assistance, ensuring that they will not be turned out of their apartments or nursing homes
       or otherwise left destitute. And for immigrants already here but not receiving benefits, the
       BBA does not change the rules retroactively. Immigrants in the country as of August 22,
       1996 but not receiving benefits at that time who subsequently become disabled will also
       be fully eligible for SSI and Medicaid benefits.

      Helps People Who Want to Work but Can't Find a Job: The Balanced Budget Act
       also restored $1.5 billion in food stamp cuts. The welfare reform law restricted food
       stamps for able-bodied childless adults to only 3 out of every 36 months, unless they were
       working. This move ignored the fact that finding a job often takes time. The Balanced
       Budget Act provided funds for an estimated 235,000 work slots over 5 years and food
       stamp benefits to those who are willing to work but, through no fault of their own, have
       not yet found employment. In addition, the BBA allows states to exempt up to 15 percent
       of the food stamp recipients (70,000 individuals monthly) who would otherwise be
       denied benefits as a result of the "3 in 36" limit.

      Food Stamps for Legal Immigrants: The President's 1999 budget proposes to restore
       Food Stamp benefits for vulnerable groups oflegal immigrants. The President's
       proposals would provide Food Stamp benefits to 730,000 legal immigrants in 1999 at
       a cost of $2.5 billion over 5 years. Specifically, benefits would be restored for: all
       families with children; immigrants with disabilities and elderly immigrants age 65
       and older who entered the U.S. before welfare reform was enacted, on the same
       basis as the SSI and Medicaid restorations in the 1997 Balaced Budget Act; refugees
       and asylees, whose eligibility would be extended from 5 to 7 years; Hmong
       immigrants who came to the U.S. after the Vietnam war; and certain Native
       Americans living along the Canadian and Mexican borders.

      Protects Children by Keeping the Medicaid Guarantee: The Balanced Budget Act
       preserved the Federal guarantee of Medicaid coverage for the vulnerable populations who
       depend on it, and contains additional investments to extend coverage to uninsured
       children. It also ensures that 30,000 disabled children losing SSI because of the new
       tighter eligibility criteria keep their Medicaid coverage. The President's 1999 budget
       proposes to provide States the option to provide health care coverage through Medicaid
       and the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) for legal immigrant children,
       regardless of when they entered the U.S.              .

                                               -5-
                       Hex-Dump Conversion




         -6-
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
        As the President said in his State of the Union address, we can be proud that after decades of
finger-pointing and failure, we are now replacing welfare checks with paychecks. Welfare caseloads
have fallen another 2.4 million in the first 13 months of the new welfare reform law, a decline of 4.3
million, or 30 percent, since President Clinton took office. The President's 1999 budget will build
on this success, providing several targeted new tools to help even more people move from welfare to
work, while restoring certain food stamp cuts which had nothing to do with welfare reform.

Welfare to Work Housing Vouchers
        The President's FY99 budget will take further steps to promote work and welfare reform
through a new $283 million plan to provide 50,000 new housing vouchers to welfare recipients who
need housing assistance in order to get or keep a job. Families could use these housing vouchers to
move closer to a new job, to reduce a long commute, or to secure more stable housing to eliminate
emergencies that keep them from getting to work every day on time. These vouchers, awarded to
communities on a competitive basis, will give people on welfare a new tool to make the transition to
a job and succeed in the work place.

Welfare to Work Transportation
        One of the biggest barriers facing people who move from welfare to work -- in cities and in
rural areas -- is finding transportation to get to jobs, training programs, and child care centers. Few
welfare recipients own cars. Existing mass transit does not provide adequate links to many suburban
jobs at all, or within a reasonable commute time. In addition, many entry level jobs require evening
or weekend hours that are poorly served by existing transit routes. To help welfare recipients and
other low income workers get to where the jobs are, President Clinton has proposed a $100 million a
year welfare to work transportation plan as part of his ISTEA reauthorization bill. This competitive
grant program would assist states and localities in developing flexible transportation alternatives,
such as van services.

Tax Credits for Employers
        The President's budget proposal extends two important tax credits for employers for an
additional year. The Welfare to Work Tax Credit, enacted in the 1997 Balanced Budget Act,
provides a credit equal to 35 percent of the first $10,000 in wages in the first year of employment, and
50 percent of the first $10,000 in wages in the second year, to encourage the hiring and retention of
long term welfare recipients. The budget also extends the Work Opportunity Tax Credit, which
provides a credit of up to $2,400 for the first year of wages for eight groups of job seekers.

 Food Stamps for Legal Immigrants:
        The President believes that legal immigrants should have the same opportunity, and bear the
same responsibility, as other members of society. To that end, the President's 1999 budget proposes
to restore Food Stamp benefits forvulnerable groups oflegal immigrants. The President's proposals
would provide Food Stamp benefits to 730,000 legal immigrants in 1999 at a cost of $2.5 billion over
5 years. Specifically, benefits would be restored for: all families with children; immigrants with
disabilities and elderly immigrants age 65 and older who entered the U.S. before welfare reform was
enacted, on the same basis as the SSI and Medicaid restorations in the 1997 Balanced Budget Act;
refugees and asylees, whose eligibility would be extended from 5 to 7 years; Hmong immigrants who
came to the U.S. after the Vietnam war; and certain Native Americans living along the Canadian and
Mexican borders.



         Automated Records Management System
                 Hex-Dump Conversion


