RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-APR-1997 18:32:20.00

SUBJECT:   American Indian issue follow up

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
As you may recall, I submitted a memo to Sylvia on two Native American
issue proposals. When I followed up with Angus King of her staff, he told
me that the memo was forwarded to Lynn Cutler, the new person at
Intergovernmental handling Native American issues.  I took this to mean
that Sylvia neither approved nor disapproved the recommendations.

The quarterly DPC Working Group meeting on Native Americans is next
wednesday.  There is a lot of interest on behalf of the DPC working group
staff and Babbitt to issue the kind of memo we recommended to Sylvia to
get updates from agencies on their government-to-government consultation
plans.  It would be ideal if we could tell them something next Wednesday
about this issue.

I've tried to do some legwork on this to see if this is possible.     Here's
where things stand:

I have spoken with Lynn Cutler about the memo and she is very interested
in having some WH action in this area.  She thinks that Marcia Hale may be
interested in issuing or being on it.  Since it is the DPC Native American
Working Group, I think Bruce should be on the memo alone or with Marcia
(assuming he would want to be). Lynn will be meeting with Sylvia to see
if the CoS wants to be on this kind of memo, or if not, if they have any
problems with it.

I discussed the issue with Cabinet Affairs (Kris Balderston), who said he
did not see any problem with issuing this kind of memo to agencies.   His
reaction was more of surprise that little has been done in the way of
follow up in this area.

I ran a draft memo by WH Counsel's office to make sure this kind of memo
doesn't present any legal problems. Robert Weiner made a technical
suggestion but said it looked fine.

I am attaching a copy of the draft memo for your review.  I worked with
the Department of Justice's Office of Tribal Justice on the draft.  I am
also attaching the memo to Sylvia we worked on, in case you wanted to look
at it.

I'm sure your brain must feel like it is in the early childhood
development stage after all the work you've been doing, but any feedback
you could give me on this would be great. Thanks!

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.DS1]MAIL488766602.116 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

       On April 29, 1994, President Clinton issued an Executive Memorandum to all Executive
Departments and Agencies directing them to work on a daily basis of
Government-to-Government relations with federally recognized tribal governments. (See April
29, 1994 Executive Memorandum on Government-to-Government Relations with Native
American Tribal Governments, enclosed.) We write to request the assistance of your
Department or Agency in ensuring that the President's directive is appropriately implemented.

        The April 29, 1994 Executive Memorandum is based on the unique historical and legal
relationship with Native American tribal governments as set forth in the Constitution of the
United States, treaties, statutes, executive actions, and court decisions. When executive actions
will impact government or treaty rights ofIndian tribes or tribal trust property, the Executive
Memorandum requires the responsible Department or Agency to consult with tribal governments
concerning the impact of the federal action to the greatest extent practicable and permitted by
law.

        Government-to-Government consultations should be conducted with knowledge of, and
sensitivity for, tribal governmental and treaty rights. In addition, Executive Departments and
Agencies are required to take steps to remove procedural impediments to working directly and
effectively with Indian tribes.

        Several Executive Departments and Agencies have implemented the President's directive
by adopting their own policies on Government-to-Government relations with Native American
Tribal Governments. In addition, some Departments and Agencies have designated staff as
liaisons with Native American Tribal governments to facilitate the implementation of the
President's directive to ensure that Tribal governments can access their organizations.

       To assist us in ensuring that the President's directive is appropriately implemented, please
send us the following:

a)     your Department or Agency policy on Government-to-Government Relations with native
       American Tribal governments if you have such a policy;

b)     the name, position, address and telephone number of Department or Agency staff
       designated as liaisons with tribal governments; and

c)     a two or three-page synopsis of your Department or Agency approach and activities in
       implementing the President's April 29, 1994 Executive Memorandum.

        If possible, please return this information to us by (X date). Thank you for your
assistance.




                                                                                      d Management s~stem
                                                                  J\Utomated Re~:mS" con'lersion
                                                                           \-\e'J.-UIA' l'

To:      Sylvia Mathews
cc:      Angus King
From:     Leanne Shimabukuro, Bruce Reed
Subject: American Indian Proposals
Date:     March 19, 1997


You requested comment on two proposals submitted by representatives of American Indian
tribes: an Executive Order on Government-to-Government relations with tribes and a Presidential
meeting with tribal leaders.

PROPOSED EXECUTIVE ORDER ON GOVERNMENT-TO-GOVERNMENT RELATIONS

President Clinton signed a Presidential Memorandum on Government-to-Government relations
with tribes on April 29, 1994. This historic Memorandum acknowledged the special
relationship the United States has with American Indian tribes and directed the heads of
Executive Departments and Agencies to consult with Federally-recognized Tribal nations on a
Government-to-Government basis in formulating policies and programs affecting tribes.

In letters to the President, two tribes now have requested the issuance of an Executive Order on
Indian sovereignty and the Government-to-Government relationship. This order would be quite
similar in substance to the current Memorandum. It is likely that the tribes want an Executive
Order because they believe it will produce greater agency responsiveness than has the
Presidential Memorandum.

Federal agencies vary in their compliance with the Memorandum. The Interior Department and
the EPA have been particularly responsive in developing and carrying out policies pursuant to the
Memorandum. Other agencies have been much slower to develop and implement policies on
this front.

An Executive Order is probably not the appropriate response to this problem at this juncture.
Issuing an Executive Order similar to the Presidential Memorandum may suggest a failure of the
Federal government to act on the President's initial request. This suggestion would be unfair
(some agencies have responded well), and could undermine successes achieved by this
Administration on Government-to-Government relations. At any rate, issuing essentially the
same directive in another form is unlikely to change agencies' behavior.

Instead, we should consider prodding agencies on their compliance with the initial
Memorandum. For example, a memorandum to Federal agencies issued by the Chief of Staff or
other appropriate White House official-- or, if more high-profile action is desired, even the
President himself-- could ask for the status of their policies pursuant to the 1994 Presidential
Memorandum. Such a memo could well spur as yet unresponsive agencies to take positive
action. In the event such a memorandum fails to produce results, we should then consider what
                                                                                      ds Management S~stem
                                                                 f1-l.ltomated Re~;mp con~e:sion
                                                                             \-\ex-u,,1



    further steps are necessary to further promote Government-to-Government relations and tribal
    sovereignty (e.g., Executive Order or other Executive action).

    MEETING WITH TRIBAL LEADERS

    In April 1994, the President met with over 300 tribal leaders in a large ceremonial event on the
    White House lawn. The Cabinet was present at the meeting, and the event lasted several hours.
    During the meeting, the President released his Memorandum on Government-to-Government
    relations and a Memorandum on the use of eagle feathers for religious purposes.

    Leaders of approximately 11 tribes now have asked to have another meeting with the President.
    Many other tribes would agree that it is time for another Presidential meeting. .

    We believe that the President should hold another meeting with tribal leaders. This meeting
    would be an important gesture of goodwill to tribes. It also would allow the President to have
    direct contact with a constituency that does not often receive such high-level attention.

    Such a meeting, however, should include a much wider group of tribal leaders than the 11 who
    have made the pending request. It would also require significant planning and sufficient lead
    time-- at least three months for preparation.

    Alternatively, the President could speak at a large inter-tribal conference, such as the National
    Conference of American Indians (NCAI), which meets a few times a year. Secretary Babbitt
    speaks at one NCAI conference annually, and the Vice President spoke to NCAI in November
    1995. A NCAI conference is scheduled for November 1997 in Santa Fe.

    A speaking role at an NCAI conference would be easier to coordinate than a Presidential meeting
    with tribal leaders at the White House. But such an event would not carry quite the same
    symbolic significance. In addition, the Navajo Nation usually does not attend the NCAI
    Conference, and the absence of this very large tribe could count as a serious problem.

    Either event will place the President at some risk of criticism. The tribes may well complain of
    a lack of responsiveness to Native American issues at the Department ofInterior. The
    scheduling of either event should take into account the timing of significant Administration
    decisions affecting tribes that are expected in the near future-- for example, on Indian gaming,
    and the BIAllnterior budget.




                                                                                  Qrds Management s~stem
                                                                    "'utomate~~:'~iJmp COfl'Jersion


