RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Lowell A. Weiss ( CN=Lowell A. Weiss/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-FEB-1998 17:45:03.00

SUBJECT:    aaas 4:45 draft

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 2/12/98 4:45pm
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS TO AAAS ANNUAL MEETING
PHILADELPHIA, PA
February 13, 1998

        Before. I begin, I just want to tell you how jealous Vice President
Gore is that I got to come to your meeting this year.   I mean, this is a
guy who gets very excited about the Spallation Neutron Source.   But we
arm-wrestled for it, and I won.

        The Vice President did, however, have a great honor this morning:
He swore in a caring physician and a world-renowned public-health leader
as AmericaD,s new Surgeon General -- Dr. David Satcher.

           [Other personnel announcements and acknowledgments here]

        I also want to salute your Board of Directors. Yesterday, they
approved a resolution urging the Senate to provide its advice and consent
as soon as possible for ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty. Thank you.   I hope that, together, we can secure ratification
this year.

        Fifty years ago, Harry Truman had the honor of addressing your
100th anniversary meeting.  He praised, as I do today, the D&unflinching
passion for knowledgeD8 that characterizes your work.  And he called upon
the nation, as I will today, to help fuel that passion by significantly
increasing our investments in your research -- not out of altruism, but
because of all the ways your remarkable advances are advancing our
nation.

        After all, it may be your birthday, but it is you, the scientists and
engineers of the AAAS, who have given a gift to the rest of us:  the
precious gift of human progress. At the dawn of the new millennium, at a
sunlit moment of prosperity for our nation, an ever-accelerating cascade
of scientific insights are making our lives are longer, healthier, and
richer in every way than ever before.  I suspect that in t~e long history
of our nation, there has never been a better time to be a scientist.   I am
sure there has never been a better time for us this nation to invest in
the the increasingly vital work that you do.

        To seize this moment of scientific promise, I have proposed a 21st
Century Research Fund to catalyze the process of scientific discovery
to give physicists, chemists, biologists, and other scientists an
unprecendented opportunity to expand the scope of their inquiry on


 everything from the molecular mechanisms of human disease to the
 fundamental building blocks of our universe.

        This commitment represents the largest funding increase in history
for the National Science Foundation and the National Institutes of
Health.  It will provide substantial budget increases for basic and
applied research at NASA and at the Departments of Energy and
Agriculture.  It will spur technological innovations that will help us
combat global climate change -- a growing threat the journal SCIENCE
warned us about more than thirty years ago. It will create, for the first
time, a strong, stable, multi-year source of funding for research
enabling you to engage in long-term planning like never before.

        I am particularly excited by the opportunity that this fund
creates in the burgeoning field of biomedicine Thanks to the work of so
many people from so many scientific disciplines, we are at the verge of
miraculous breakthroughs in the prevention, detection, treatment, and cure
of human disease.   As you will hear in greater detail from Dr. Varmus
later today, we are just a few years away from the completion of the Human
Genome Project, which has already produced a trove of data and insights
that will change the face of medicine forever; in the past year alone,
scientists have discovered genes involved in parkinsonO,s Disease, a
deadly bone marrow disease, a leading cause of blindness, and a fatal
childhood neurological disorder.    Sophisticated new AIDS therapies have
given HIV-positive men and women a new lease on life -- and if your
remarkable progress continues, I believe we will have an effective AIDS
vaccine within a decade.   New treatments are slowing the development of
AlzheimerO,s and lifting our people from the dark depths of depression.
We are developing promising new vaccines to protect against Hepatitis E,
rotaviruses, and the strain of E. coli that has caused deadly outbreaks of
food poisoning. Researchers have begun to regenerate functioning nerve
cells, raising the prospect that victims of spinal cord i~juries will be
able to walk again.

        And we are turning the corner on cancer, one of humankindO,s
greatest threats.  For the first time in history, cancer death rates have
begun to fall.  The 21st Century Research Fund will capitalize on this
progress.  It will help build on your promising results with new classes
of O&smart08 drugs that target specific molecules found in cancer cells.
It will help you discover, within the decade, every single gene and
protein that contributes to the conversion of a normal cell to a cancer
cell.  It will create new opportunities for prevention and new
technologies for earlier and more accurate diagnosis. Today, we can cure
90% of the cases of certain cancers.  If my cancer initiative is passed, I
predict that within a generation, we will be able to cure 90% of the cases
of all cancers.

        We can take one major leap forward right away. We have an
historic opportunity to curtail deadly epidemic of teen smoking, which is
linked in a deadly chain not only with lung cancer, but also emphysema,
heart disease, and strokes. More than three decades ago, responsible,
peer-reviewed journals including SCIENCE presented our society with a
stark conclusion:  Smoking causes cancer.   For years, our efforts to
reduce smoking have been outmatched by billion dollar industry ad
campaigns targeted at our children.  But now, we have the opportunity to
save millions of our children from a life of addiction and a premature,
preventable death.

        I have called on Congress to enact comprehensive legislation that
raises the price of cigarettes by up to $1.50 a pack over the next ten


 years, gives the FDA full authority to regulate tobacco products, changes
 forever the way tobacco companies do business, furthers public-health
 research and goals -- and also protects tobacco farmers and their
 communities.

         Today, the Treasury Department will release a study analyzing the
 probable effects of this comprehensive approach. The study demonstrates
 that price increases as well as the restrictions we have proposed will cut
 teen smoking nearly in half. That means that if we act this year, we
 would save more than two million children from smoking over the next five
 years. We must not let this opportunity go up in smoke. And we must not
 proceed in only a piecemeal way.

         On Wednesday, Sen. Conrad introduced a strong bill in Congress
 that meets my objectives, and I look forward to working with him and
 members of Congress from both sides of the aisle to enact comprehensive
 legislation.  I ask for your support as well. The scientific community
 speaks with a loud voice.  Let it speak loudly for our children.

         For all of the extraordinary promise of science and technology, we
 must never forget the ex~raordinary responsibilities that promise imposes
 on us.  It is incumbent upon us, both scientists and public servants, to
 ensure that science always serves humanity, never the other way around.
 Last month, like most Americans, I learned the profoundly troubling news
 that a member of the scientific community is laying plans to clone a human
 being.  Personally, I believe that human cloning raises deep concerns,
 given our cherished concepts of faith and humanity.  Beyond that, however,
 we know there is virtually unanimous consensus in the scientific and
 medical communities that attempting to use these cloning techniques to
 actually create a human being is untested and unsafe and morally
 unacceptable.

                 We must   continue to maintain our deep commitment to
 scientific research and   technological development.  But when it comes to a
 discovery like cloning,   we must move with caution, care and deep concern
 about the impact of our   actions.

         Two days ago, the Senate voted to take the time necessary to
 carefully craft a bill that will ban the cloning of human beings while
 preserving our ability to use the morally and medically acceptable
 applications of cloning technology.  I thank you for already providing a
 sound scientific foundation for this debate, and I urge you to continue to
 play an important role.

         Our nation was founded by men and women who firmly believed in the
 power of science to transform their world for the better. Benjamin
 Franklin, the father of AmericaD,s scientific revolution, wrote that D&the
 progress of human knowledge will be rapid and discoveries made of which we
 have at present no conception.  I begin to be almost sorry I was born so
 soon, since I cannot have the happiness of knowing what will be known a
 hundred years hence.DB

         I am sure everyone of us shares this lament.   But let us indulge
 for a moment.  Let us imagine what the scientific investments I have
 spoken of today may bring to our children and grandchildren. Let us
 imagine how the breakthroughs at the bench today will blossom into the
 applied technologies of tomorrow.

         By the year 204B, when the President of the United States
 addresses your bicentennial meeting, science fiction will have become


 science fact.  Fusion and solar power may yield abundant energy, without
 emitting pollution or greenhouse gases. We may be able to land a robot on
 the surface of an Earth-like planet orbiting another star. Telephones may
 translate foreign languages in real time.  Schools may be so smart that
 all our ~hildren will be able to experience the wonder of science by
 conversing with a realistic simulation of Galileo or Einstein.· We may
 have crash-proof sports cars that weigh 100 pounds.
         We cannot see the future, but my friends, we can invent it.   In the year
 2048, I want the AAAS to convene in a world where the number of nuclear
 weapons is zero, a world where climatic disruption has been halted, where
 the wars on cancer and AIDS have long since been won, where the noble
 career of science is pursued and then advanced by children of every race
 and background. With the benefit of our new investments in science and
 technology -- and the guidance of our oldest values    I believe we can do
 all these things and more. We have it in our power to create a brighter,
 healthier fut~re for all our people for generations to come.


