RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-FEB-1998 18:32:18.00

SUBJECT:   kids announcement

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D31]MAIL43699774R.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D40B0000010A020100000002050000006F2D000000020000F569656A4E89995C14074D
A83C5DCE7ED7AB5B385C5CC272C3FDAFD0290214DF379BOA6F70967EAE01816EAFA565953A644E
                                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

   PRESIDENT CLINTON ANNOUNCES A SERIES OF NEW EFFORTS TO ENROLL
         UNINSURED CHILDREN IN HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMS
                          February 18, 1998

Today, the President announced the first major state expansions under the recently enacted
Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and released findings that indicate that many States
will soon follow. He also unveiled an unprecedented set of public/private initiatives designed to
enroll the millions of uninsured children who are eligible but not enrolled in Medicaid and other
state-based children's health programs. These initiatives have been designed in partnership with
Governors, health care providers, children's health advocates, foundations, businesses and many
others who are committed to providing health care coverage for the nation's uninsured children.

Over 10 million children in America are uninsured. Nearly 90 percent of these children have
parents who work, but do not have access to or cannot afford health insurance. Over 3 million of
these uninsured children are already eligible for Medicaid. However, many families are not aware
that their children are eligible for Medicaid, and others have difficultly filling out the application.
Similar problems could undermine the new Children's Health Insurance Program's goal to enroll
millions of uninsured children. With these challenges in mind, the President:

   ANNOUNCED THAT COLORADO AND SOUTH CAROLINA HAVE JOINED
   ALABAMA AS THE FIRST COVERAGE EXPANSIONS UNDER THE NEW CHIP
   PROGRAM_ Today, the President announced that Colorado and South Carolina join Alabama
   as the first states to come into the children's health program. In late January, Alabama received
   approval to expand its Medicaid program to children ages 14 to 18 up to 100 percent of poverty.
    South Carolina will expand its Medicaid program to provide coverage to all children up to 150
   percent of poverty. And, Colorado builds upon its current non-Medicaid program to cover
   children up to 185 percent of poverty. The President also highlighted the fact that many more
   States are well on their way to expanding coverage to more uninsured children. Currently, 14
   states have already submitted their plans to HHS for approval, and another 18 States have active
   working groups or task forces to design plans to address the needs of uninsured children in their
   states.

   RELEASED A NEW PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVE TO LAUNCH A
   GOVERNMENT-WIDE EFFORT TO ENROLL UNINSURED CHILDREN. In an
   executive memorandum to seven Federal agencies with jurisdiction over children's programs-
   the Departments of Agriculture, Interior, Education, HHS, HUD, Labor, and Treasury and the
   Social Security Administration -- the President directed the establishment of a multi-agency
   effort to enroll uninsured children. These agencies run programs such as WIC, Food Stamps,
   Head Start, and public housing that target many of the same children who are uninsured and
   eligible for coverage. The memorandum instructs these agencies: (1) to identify all their
   employees and grantees who might come into contact with these children and ensure that these
   individuals are aware of the health insurance programs available to children; (2) to develop an
   intensive children's outreach initiative, such as distributing information, coordinating toll-free
   numbers, and simplifying and coordinating application forms; and (3) to report back in 90 days
   on their plan to help enroll uninsured children.
                                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
HIGHLIGHTED BUDGET PROPOSALS THAT PROVIDE MEDICAID
ENROLLMENT INCENTIVES TO STATES. The President's FY 1999 budget invests
$900 million over 5 years in children's health outreach policies, including encouraging states to
use schools and child care centers to emoll children in Medicaid. The budget provides states
with the option of automatically emolling children in Medicaid even before having received all
of the complicated eligibility and emollment forms (a provision known as "presumptive
eligibility"). It also expands the use of a Federally-financed administrative fund, allowing it to
underwrite the costs for all uninsured children - not just the limited population allowed under
current law.

ANNOUNCED A HISTORIC PRIVATE SECTOR COMMITMENT TO PROVIDE
OUTREACH. To complement the public outreach effort, the President announced
unprecedented new contributions from the private sector to help ensure that all children who are
eligible for health insurance receive it, including:

   A new toll-free number that directs families around the nation to their state enrollment
   centers. The President announced that Bell Atlantic will establish and operate a toll-free
   number to help states emoll uninsured children. The number, that will be put in place
   during the upcoming months, will be used by the nation's Governors to help millions of
   families around the nation by directing them automatically to their local state Medicaid
   emollment agency.

   Over $23 million in commitments from private foundations across the country. The
   Robert Wood Johnson Foundation will spend $13 million over the next 3 years to fund
   innovative state-local coalitions to design and conduct outreach initiatives, simplify
   emollment processes, and coordinate existing coverage programs. The Kaiser Family
   Foundation will spend up to $10 million over the next 5 years on studies to help understand
   why eligible children do not emoll in existing programs and how best to provide insurance
   coverage for these children. America's Promise, with support from the Robert Wood
   Johnson Foundation and the American Academy of Pediatrics, will mobilize the corporation
   such as SmithKline Beecham and Sheering Plough, and local communities nationwide in
   children's health outreach efforts.

   New initiatives from corporate and advocacy organizations America to reach out to
   uninsured children. Pampers has volunteered to include a letter in its child birth
   education packages, given to 90 percent of first-time mothers, giving families information
   about available health insurance options. Chain drug stores across the country will provide
   information about the new Bell Atlantic toll-free number to their customers. The National
   Education Association is launching an unprecedented effort to educate teachers on how they
   can inform children and their families about health insurance, through national newsletters,
   conferences, and special training sessions. The American Hospital Association's Campaign
   for Coverage will increase its nationwide initiative to engage hospitals in helping uninsured
   Americans, including children.

ISSUED A CHALLENGE ACROSS AMERICA TO FIND NEW WAYS TO REACH
OUT TO UNINSURED CHILDREN. The President challenged every physician, nurse,
health care provider, business, school, parent, grandparent, and community across the nation, to
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

find new ways to reach out to ensure that uninsured children eligible for health insurance are
enrolled in Medicaid or CHIP. This national commitment should not stop until every eligible
child across the country is enrolled in one of the existing health care programs.


