RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-FEB-1998 10:20:09.00

SUBJECT:   needle exchange memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D15]MAIL49022835R.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504370040000010A0201000000020500000081280000000200005A14C2F779F9A49BOB36A4
9B64ADD8AA181EB132B995A88356156CB3335E8CD83328660903E3BO19AF70072AOD6AA9C28832
8D58F8361ABB72E1CA6FE58487F42840F2484571B0571DEA2DF950C4A9D477F43BA8CC9F72BDD5
OAB9242090B9CD58B8574738A8D9A1057343DOE34941EF281DE36AA5D159C3569B4BEA3ACD7E4D
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion


                                    MEMORANDUM



                                                                               February 23, 1998


TO:    Elena

FR:    Chris and Sarah

RE:    Needle Exchange


        The purpose of this memo is to help frame the Administration's options as they relate to
the needle exchange issue and to develop a strategy to lay the groundwork for whatever decision
is made. Following the confirmation of Dr. David Satcher as Surgeon General and the
expiration of the Congressional prohibition on releasing needle exchange funds (which is coming
up on March 31 th), there will be great pressure for the Administration to take a formal position
on this issue.

Background: Congress has given the Secretary of Health and Human Services the authority to
release Federal funding for needle exchange programs if she concludes that needle exchange
programs decrease HIV transmission and do not increase drug use. The Secretary has already
concluded that these programs do decrease the transmission of HIV, but has yet to make a formal
finding regarding their impact on drug use. There has been increasing pressure from scientists,
the public health community, and the AIDS community regarding the Administration's position
on needle exchange programs. The pressure has become more intense as a great number of
people believe that the evidence that needle exchange programs do not increase drug use is quite
strong. As a result there is a heightened sense among the advocates that the only reason the
Administration has mot made a positive finding is the fear of the political consequences of such
an action.

        Although there does appear to be credible information that needle exchange programs do
not increase drug use, this is not a widely held view among the public and the law enforcement
community. This fact helps explain why another critical player in this discussion, General
McCaffrey, continues to send strong signals against any movement in this area.

       With the General's opposition in mind and with the confirmation of Dr. Satcher for
Surgeon General pending, the Administration hesitated to make any dispositive finding regarding
needle exchange. This decision was further validated when during the appropriations process,
there was a very real chance that any move to make such a finding would have led Congress to
eliminate, altogether, the Secretary's current authority to release funds for needle exchange
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


 programs. Instead, at least partially as the result of our decision not to act, the authority was not
 repealed and the Congress limited its intervention to delaying our authority to release funds until
 March 31. As a consequence, even if the Administration makes a final determination that
 needle exchange programs do not, in fact, increase drug use, no dollars can be released until the
 end of March.

         There is little question that Dr. Satcher's confirmation and the pending March deadline
 places extraordinary pressure on the Administration to release findings on the impact of needle
 exchange programs on drug use. This means we must quickly move to decide how best to
 position ourselves on this issue and begin to lay the foundation for whatever position we take.

 Options: There are currently three options to contemplate as we move forward.

 (1) Maintain Status Quo: Maintain our current position that there is not enough
 information to make a decision as to whether needle exchange programs increase drug use.
  The Administration could continue to conclude that there is not sufficient data to make a final
 determination on the impact of these programs with regard to drug use. Under this option, we
 would choose to delay the issue until a more appropriate time for a determination (e.g. if ever a
 more friendly Congress is in place). This position would no doubt anger the AIDS community
 even though we would, under this resolution, stand a better chance at retaining the Secretary's
 authority to release funding to needle exchange programs over the long haul. The AIDS
 community believes that there is more than enough information to conclude that needle exchange
 programs do not increase drug use and do help reduce HIV transmission. Therefore they would
 find any efforts by the Administration to further delay this issue to be morally reprehensible.
 We would also likely be criticized by other elite validators who would find this choice to be a
 purely political move.

          On the other hand, under this option, the Secretary is far more likely to retain her current
. statutory authority to fund these programs. It would also help us avoid a major confrontation
  with the Republican Congress on this issue -- a confrontation that many political experts believe
   we would inevitably lose.

 (2) Make and Release a Finding That Needle Exchange Programs Do Not Increase Drug
 Use. The Secretary could, based on a new study (that could easily be produced by HHS),
 conclude that needle exchange programs do not increase drug use and release funding for needle
 exchange programs. With this conclusion, the President would be widely praised by the AIDS
 community for his moral leadership. The American Bar Association, the American Medical
 Association, and other influential validators would also, no doubt, praise the Adminis~ration.
 Our position could be described as one of community empowerment and choice rather than the
 Federal government micromanaging these programs: Federal funds would only be released to
 those communities that decided themselves to have programs. Having said this, the far right and
 the law enforcement community could be expected to react extremely negatively to such a move.
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


        Taking this position would, no doubt, create a very visible fight -- a fight which would be
difficult to sustain in an election year where the Democrats are trying to win back the House by
claiming they are more in touch with the American public. In particular the conservative wing
of the party would have no appetite to fight for this position. Republicans would seize upon this
issue to illustrate their point that the Democrats are out of touch with the public and in the pocket
of certain special interests.

       Ifwe choose this option, Congress would inevitably make an effort to remove the
Secretary's authority to release funds, and many believe they would be successful. Interestingly,
even though it is extremely likely the Secretary could lose all authority to release federal funding,
the AIDS community (even acknowledging this) would still likely back this as the only
acceptable option.

(3) Make Positive Finding But Do Not Release Funds Unless Local Law Enforcement
Community Draws Similar Conclusion. This approach would require the law enforcement
community in each particular area applying for funds to draw a similar conclusion to that of the
Administration: that needle exchange programs do not increase drug use. This compromise
option would help mitigate the inevitable opposition for a positive finding and reduce the
chances that the Congress would remove the Secretary's authority. It would also help immunize
the Administration from attacks from the right. However, this approach would likely draw a
great deal of criticism from the AIDS community, who are likely to approve of nothing less than
full victory because they feel it would reduce the number of communities eligible for funding.
Also, it is important to note that Republicans would still try and use this issue to their advantage,
suggesting that any needle exchange programs will increase drug utilization. As such they would
inevitably use option 2 or 3 as a weapon in the upcoming mid-term Congressional elections.

Addendum: Regardless of what decision is made, it is extremely important that we begin to lay
the foundation for how we plan to proceed. We will have to think about timing as well as how
our decision is rolled out with regard to the AIDS community, the Congress, the law enforcement
community. Most important of all, whatever decision we make must be made with a total
commitment with all the Administration parties to ensure it is consistently communicated and
competently implemented.


