RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-FEB-1998 15:31:39.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly 2/20

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN .

TEXT:
  Education, Crime, and health Care do not have any entries this week===============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ~MS_EXT: [ATTACH.D35]MAIL47675435R.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750431AOF0000010A020100000002050000001941000000020000E6713BA08CD1E1F69291EC
                                                                                       Hex-Dump ConversIon




                                        February 20, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report



        Child Care -- Stay at Home Parents: We are working with NEC and Treasury to
prepare policy options on proposals to help "stay-at-home parents" so that we will be prepared to
offer a proposal as part of a final child care package. Senators Chafee and Dodd have both
included proposals in their child care bills to offer tax credits to parents who choose to stay at
home with their young children. Last week, the House unanimously passed a resolution
introduced by Congressman Goodling noting that any child care initiative passed by the Congress
must not ignore stay-at-home parents (although Democrats complained that they were not given
the opportunity to amend the resolution to include support for child care for working families as
well). Next week, Senator Coats is holding a symposium to discuss the issue further.

        EEOC -- Federal Sector Rule. On Friday, February 20th, the EEOC published a Notice
of Proposed Rulemaking which seeks public comment on a number of proposed changes to the
federal sector complaint process. Most notably, the proposed rule would end the current
practice of allowing federal agencies accused of discrimination to overrule final decisions of
EEOC administrative judges. In addition, the proposed rule would expand the use of ADR
mechanisms, provide for the dismissal of complaints where there is a clear pattern of abuse of the
complaint process, and expand the use of class actions to more effectively combat systemic
discrimination practices in federal employment. These proposed changes would increase the
perception of fairness in the process and would increase efficiency by eliminating unnecessary
layers of review, dealing more expeditiously with meritless claims and delegating more authority
to front-line employees.

        Immigration -- HIB Visas. HIB visas are temporary work visas that allow "highly
skilled" immigrants (with a BA or equivalent) to work in this country for up to six years. Under
current law, the number ofHlB visas issued is capped at 65,000 per year. Last year, this cap
was reached for the first time. According to the INS, this year we are likely to reach the HIB
cap by April. The information technology industry supports either the removal of the HlB cap
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

or a significant increase in the annual allotment. Labor unions would likely oppose any increase
in the cap.

         Welfare Reform -- Update on Fatherhood Initiatives by Governors and Congress:
There is growing interest among governors regarding how states can use their T ANF funds to
promote positive fatherhood involvement. At this week's NGA meeting, the Human Resources
Committee will discuss examples of activities in their states -- Governors Ridge, Carper, Romer
and Beasley are planning to speak -- and NGA will release a document summarizing these
initiatives. Governors were specifically asked not to focus primarily on child support
enforcement or custody rights, but instead on efforts to encourage fathers to be more involved in
their children's lives.

        In addition, Governors Ridge and Carper recently launched a bipartisan national effort to
promote responsible fatherhood and sent a letter to other Governors encouraging them to join a
Governors' Task Force on Fatherhood Promotion (not an NGA initiative). The Task Force will
co-host a June 16th national fatherhood summit, bringing together elected officials from all
levels of government, and leaders from the civic, philanthropic, education and entertainment
communities. Wade Hom's group, The National Fatherhood Initiative, is working on this
summit.

       There are also indications of interest by House Republicans on this issue. Late last
month, Congressman Archer called for $1 billion "Fatherhood Counts" block grant, which he
would pay for by capping tobacco attorney's fees. Details of his plan are not yet available.

         Welfare Reform -- Welfare to Work Transportation: As you asked us to do after the
State of the Union, we have sent a letter from you to all the governors urging them to use existing
welfare funds for welfare to work transportation. The letter highlights Elaine Kinslow's success
story, describes your proposal for $100 million in new welfare to work transportation funds, and
urges states to make full use of existing welfare funds to provide transportation services. To
help states do so, the letter promises that HHS, DOL and DOT will provide more detailed
guidance shortly. The letter will also be sent to state legislative leaders and local elected
officials.

        Welfare Reform--Separate State Programs: New financial data from the states show
that 16 states have created separate state programs. Under T ANF, state expenditures in certain
separate state programs may count toward a state's T ANF Maintenance of Effort (MOE)
requirement, even though individuals served in these separate state programs don't have to
follow the T ANF work and time limit rules. Information from the 16 states show that total state
spending on separate state programs ranges from 1% in Indiana to 52% in Hawaii. Eight states
report spending more than 10% in a separate state programs: Hawaii, Illinois, Colorado, Iowa,
Alabama, Wyoming, Massachusetts, and Arizona. Six of these eight states spent most or all of
their funds on child care (child care funds spent in this way would not be time limited). Hawaii
created a separate state program for two-parent households and legal immigrants (Florida,


                                                2
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

Michigan and Tennessee have similar programs amounting to less than 10%). Colorado's
separate state program is for child welfare services (similar to the Emergency Assistance
program).

        Campaign Finance Reform -- Petitions: Two weeks ago your letter to establish a
system of free and discounted TY time was received by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC). Last week the Federal Elections Commission (FEC), in response to your
petition to ban "soft money" has asked the FEC Gencral Counsel to provide additional the
commission with additional options on restricting "soft money" contributions.

       Assuming bipartisan campaign finance reform legislation is filibustered next week, we
need to focus our attention to your pending petitions before the FCC and FEC. In addition, we
should consider submitting other petitions, including one to the Securities Exchange Commission
(SEC) on disclosure of contributions.

      Campaign Finance Reform --McCain Feingold: Next week we expect the
McCain-Feingold reform legislation to come up for consideration. The bill would ban soft
money, regulate issue-advocacy communications, and increase disclosure requirements for
campaigns.

        After the vote on McCain-Feingold, Lott will then be permitted to hold a vote on an
alternative bill to his liking. We expect Lott to bring up Senate Majority Whip Don Nickles's
(R-Okla) controversial Paycheck Protection Act. The measure would require unions to get prior
consent before using dues for political purposes and is strongly opposed by Democrats who
believe it could cripple labor.

        Senator Snowe -- along with Sens. James Jeffords (R-Yt) and John Chafee (R-RI) -- has
been trying to make aspects of each bill more palatable to Senators on both sides of the aisle.
Snowe's compromise, derived from a proposal crafted by American Enterprise Institute scholar
Norm Ornstein and Thomas Mann of the Brookings Institution -- would restrict both unions and
corporations from airing certain types of advertising within 60 days of a primary or general
election. It is not clear yet whether Democrats will support the Snow compromise. Senator
Daschle's staff was not initially supportive.

         Tobacco -- New Tobacco Ad Campaign and Announcement on Synar Goals: Next
Saturday, February 28, is the one year anniversary of two provisions in FDA's tobacco
regulation going into effect that protect children and adolescents from tobacco products. Those
provisions prohibit retailers from selling tobacco products to anyone under 18 and require
retailers to check the photo identification of anyone under 27 years old. We recommend you
mark the anniversary this Wednesday? BR by announcing a new ad campaign HHS has
prepared. The campaign consists of radio, billboard and print ads as well as a free retailer kit.
Within the next few months the campaign will be running in Arkansas, California, Colorado,
Florida, Illinois, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Washington. As each


                                                3
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

new state signs on, FDA will run ads and distribute retailer kits. In addition, the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration is prepared to release its annual report to
Congress. You can announce that the report will conclude that all 50 states are in compliance
with the Synar amendment, (enforcing age restrictions on tobacco purchases), and list the target
date that each state is expected to achieve its Synar goal. The report also presents state by state
information on the rate of sales to youth of tobacco products: We believe this is a good
opportunity to highlight your success in moving the country forward in the fight to protect
children and to restate your commitment to enacting comprehensive tobacco legislation.




                                                 4


