 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:23-FEB-1998 13:00:08.00

 SUBJECT:   WH Immigrati.on w.orking group mtg.

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO' 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,

The meeting last week went very well.   We covered l.ots of subjects, but we
need t.o make decisions in a few areas.

1.   Public Charge

 We have received draft guidance fr.om INS on how "public charge" sh.ould be
determined for purp.oses of deportation and exclusion under the INA.     This
has been a bit .of a sticky issue .of late, largely b/c of c.onfusi.on that
was created in the wake of welfare reform.     B.oth INS and State Dept. field
.officers have questi.oned whether current .or prior use of Medicaid, food
stamps, WIC or other welfare-type benefits necessarily results in a
finding that the individual is or is likely to become a "public charge."
WIC is clearly n.ot a trigger, and INS issued guidance to that effect last
December.   INS has drafted guidance .on Medicaid and Food Stamps that we
need to clear.    One question for us is how the guidance should be crafted
-- i.e., should it say that x, y, and z are triggers or sh.ould it say that
it is a t.otality test (as it currently does), but that q, r, and s and not
triggers.   R.ob Weiner raised the question of whether we should issue a
regulation, rather than guidance, t.o more firmly establish the criteria
for field .officers and EOIR judges.

Jack Smalligan fr.om OMB has called a meeting f.or Wed. at 3pm so that we
can decide whether to authorize INS t.o appr.ove its draft guidance on
Medicaid, food stamps, and .other welfare-like benefits.

Als.o, the State Dept. recently issued a cable to its consular officials
that is inc.onsistent with INS's current "public charge" guidance.    Because
this was internal State Dept. guidance, it was n.ot sent t.o OMB .or DPC for
clearance.   Sc.ott Busby is g.oing to contact folks at State to figure out
what they are doing.    We may need to convene a meeting with State and INS
t.o get State's guidance to c.onform with what INS is doing.

2.   INS Ref.orm

Several pe.ople at the meeting (including Maria) urged us to decide t.o
adopt the CIR recommendation that Labor be empowered t.o sanction empl.oyers
f.or failure t.o verify whether their empl.oyees are auth.orized to work.
Acc.ording t.o Steve Mertens, the AG has the authority to delegate this
authority t.o Labor.   However, we need to decide whether we want to make
this happen.    Under the current system, the Labor Dept. checks to
determine whether an empl.oyer is verifying auth.orizati.on t.o w.ork (as
dem.onstrated by whether the 1-9 f.orms have been c.ompleted f.or each
empl.oyee) as part .of a regular lab.or standards inspecti.on.  If they find a


violation, they refer the case to the INS -- Labor has no independent
authority to sanction the employer. The INS almost never follows up on
these referrals.

I recommend that we push for this change. We will likely catch heat for
it on the Hill, primarily from those in Congress who oppose any change
that would get tougher on employers who hire illegal workers. This
opposition could be significant, but the concept of sanctioning employers
for failing to take steps designed to ensure that they hire legal workers
in a strong one.

3.   Central Americans

As you know, Justice has committed to issuing guidance to asylum
adjudicators that explains the legal standard that the BIA and the AG have
established for the handling of suspension claims. This guidance would
simply spell out the standard, with no modification.  Maria raised the
issue of doing the same thing by regulation. This reg would not change
the standard for "extreme hardship" or anything else; rather,  it would
codify existing law. Maria thinks that a reg would send a stronger signal
to the groups. The only practical difference between guidance and a
regulation would be that the reg would also apply to the EOIR.  However,
the EOIR is already charged with following the law in this area (as
developed by the BIA and AG). A reg that codifies the law might be seen
as a statement that we don't believe the immigration judges will follow
the law without further guidance. John Morton at DOJ stated that they are
opposed to a reg b/c of (1) how it would be seen by EOIR; and (2) that it
would create a forum (through notice & comment) for the groups to advocate
for a change in the legal standard. According to Morton, it was difficult
for EOIR to accept having this process taken from them to begin with.   Any
reg on how the cases should be handled might be seen as further slap.

I recommend going forward with guidance, and ensuring that the process of
developing guidance is inclusive (with the groups) and that it will
effectively communicate the legal standard as developed by the BIA and AG.

4.   Foreign Health Care Workers

Section 343 of the 1996 Immgration Act provides that all foreign health
care workers (except doctors) that want to enter the U.S. to work must be
certified by a designated U.S. agent. According to Mike Koplovsky at
USTR, this is a likely conflict with Chapter 16 of NAFTA which prohibits
such certifications. Koplovsky tells me that the Canadians are very upset
about this, and may take the U.S. to the NAFTA dispute resolution entity
once we begin to enforce this provision, which will happen as soon as the r
egs are in place.

INS is getting me an update of the status of the regs, etc. According to
Bob Bach, there has been some back-and-forth between the AG and the
Canadians on this.  He is sending me a summary, so that we can know the
status of those conversations. We may need, at some point, to ask INS,
State, and/or DOJ if, in their respective legal opinions, it is possible
to reconcile Sec. 343 with NAFTA.

If there is a conflict, we may have to decide whether to try to amend Sec.
343 to carve out an exception for Canada and Mexico -- according to those
who remember when this provision went through, it was largely directed at
the problem of Filipino nurses.  However, according to some conference
language, the Congress knew that there was a potential conflict with NAFTA
and passed the provision anyway.


