 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Richard L. Hayes ( CN=Richard L. Hayes/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:25-FEB-1998 14:18:14.00

 SUBJECT:   Affirmative action rollout

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Attached are draft materials that we are preparing to support the
 opportunities/affirmative action announcement rollout. As you will see,
 they are too long and need to be edited down.   Please send me any
 comments or edits you might have and I will incorporate them.  I also have
 attached Ann's draft one pager.   We are also preparing a brief (english)
 description of the model and results, as well as a longer technical paper
 that will not be generally circulated.  If you can think of anything else
 that would be useful to have, e.g., charts, figures, etc., please let me
 know. Thanks.



  ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D47)MAIL436066554.026 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043F4040000010A02010000000205000000A111000000020000D6D3C4233C2E2DD8306DD4
                                                                     W9jSAS jU0W즇eUBl!'J spJooaCi pajBWOjnV
                                    TALKING POINTS
                      AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN FEDERAL PROCUREMENT
                                          February 24, 1998 Draft



     THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION HAS TAKEN ANOTHER STEP FORWARD IN
     REFORMING AFFIRMATIVE ACTION_ WE WILL SOON ANNOUNCE SEVERAL
  PROPOSALS THAT WILL MODIFY THE WAY IN WHICH THE GOVERNMENT CAN USE
     RACE-BASED AFFIRMATIVE ACTION MEASURES IN OBTAINING GOODS AND
                      SERVICES FROM CONTRACTORS

      President Clinton's efforts to mend affirmative action programs. Under President
Clinton's
       leadership, his administration has considered carefully existing federal affirmative action
       programs to make sure that they are fair, effective and balanced. In July 1995, the
President
       called for America to "mend not end" affirmative action programs and for the Justice
Department
       to ensure that Federal procurement programs comply with strict judicial scrutiny, as
required by
       the Supreme Court's Adarand decision, while preserving his commitment to enhancing
equal
       opportunity.

         Affirmative action still needed. After more than two years of careful study, that review
has
          concluded that:
          -- affirmative action is still necessary to expand economic and educational opportunity and
that
          societal discrimination has had and continues to have a profound impact on minorities'
          opportunities in the private sector and has affected their ability to participate in government
          procurement.
          -- Currently, only about 7 percent of the value of all federal contracts with private firms
($10
          billion of $151 billion) goes to small disadvantaged businesses. Research conducted by the
U.S.
          Department of Commerce shows that the gaps between the amount of contracting dollars
          awarded to small disadvantaged businesses, in the competitive process, and the average size
of
       contracts typically iwon by firms of their size and age, can be large.
       -- Barriers to entry, like discrimination in the credit market, may also have reduced the
presence
       of minority firms in some industries. The existence of ongoing discrimination justifies the
       government's interest in race-conscious decisionmaking, but government efforts to remedy
past
       discrimination must be narrowly tailored.

rlh:aa---'proc. wpd
these
        challenges in mind, the President is announcing four (three?) narrowly tailored proposals,
        targeted to areas in which disparities, arising from discrimination, continue to exist. His
        proposals are intended to:
        -- help small businesses become successful entrepreneurs;
        -- improve and strengthen the Small Business Administration 8(a) business development
        program;
        - restore opportunities to small businesses' own and controlled by disadvantaged
individuals;
        - and help small businesses in distressed communities (do we want to save this until
        later?)

                       HERE IS HOW THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSALS WILL HELP
                                   RESTORE OPPORTUNITIES

        Helping small businesses become successful entrepreneurs. To make the dream of being a
         successful entrepreneur a reality, President Clinton will issue an Executive Order directing
the
        Vice President in his capacity as chair of the Community Empowerment Board to oversee an
       Administration-wide initiative to develop and promote Federal government efforts on
business
        mentoring. Lead by Treasury Secretary Rubin and Small Business Administration
Administrator
       Alvarez, this initiative will also seek to:
       -- encourage more private-sector businesses across the country to partner with small
businesses
        and to bring to bear on government programs the field's best practices.
       -- help locally owned businesses in distressed communities and provide then with a wide a
range
       of badly needed support, from management consulting, and one-on-one technical assistance,
to
       peer group support and subcontracting opportunities.

       Improve and strengthen the Small Business Administration 8(a) program. President
Clinton
        strongly supports the 8 (a) program, and believes that it significantly increases opportunities for
         the more than 6,000 firms in the program seeking to develop their competitive skills. The 8(a)
         program is a business development program designed to help eligible small firms reach a point of
         self-sufficiency and competitive viability and eligibility for the program is not limited to members
         of minority groups. The President's proposals build upon efforts SBA has already instituted to
         strengthen and improve its effectiveness in encouraging firms to develop in ways that will
ensure
         their success in the competitive marketplace after program completion. His plans include:

         ~        encouraging more equitable distribution of 8(a) contracts by placing a limit on the

rlh:aayroc. wpd

                 amount
                 of sole-source contracting any single firm can receive and also encouraging
participating
                 8(a) firms to compete more effectively for contracts.

                 waiving restrictions against small businesses seeking to affiliate with other companies
                 to create joint ventures on particular procurements, and in doing so, enhance their
                 ability to obtain larger prime contracts than they would otherwise qualify for and
                 still be viewed as small businesses for purposes of qualifying for the 8(a) program.

                 add significant developmental assistance for 8(a) firms by establishing a
                 mentor-protege program. Firms in the early years of 8(a) program participants will
                 be able to tap into the expertise and capital of 8(a) graduates or more experienced
                 firms and take advantage of their knowledge and practical experience, thus
                 enhancing their abilities to be viable businesses after they leave the 8(a) program.

                 Streamline the operation of the 8(a) program by standards set by the National
                 Partnership for Reinventing Government, to ease certain restrictions perceived to
                 be burdensome on program participants, and deleting obsolete regulations. We are
                 also changing the program's eligibility requirements to permit more non-minorities
                 to qualify for the program.

        Restoring government opportunities. To enable minority firms to compete in industries in
         which the data show that the procurement playing field is still not even, the President will
build
         on a successful Department of Defense program, first authorized by Congress in 1994, and
extend
         to other federal agencies the use of price evaluation credits to help increase minority
procurement.
         To ensure the program passes Constitutional muster, the Justice Department is requiring:
         - federal agencies avoid any undue burden on nonbeneficiaries of the program.
         -- federal agencies to use race-neutral means such as outreach and technical assistance to
increase
         opportunities for minorities in federal procurement to the maximum extent possible.
         -- stepped up enforcement to crack down on individuals who misrepresent their disadvantaged
         status or their ownership and control of a business to ensure that the benefits of affirmative
action
         go only to individuals and businesses that are deserving.
         - that race not be relied upon as the sole factor in SDB procurement decisions. Firms,
obtaining
         federal contracts, have to demonstrate that they are qualified to perform the work.
         -- that the U.S. Department of Commerce identify and target those industries where the
effects of
         discrimination continue to marginalize minority firms - to ensure that race-conscious
         procurement is not used unnecessarily.
         - that firms seeking to be recognized under this program certify to the Small Business

rlh:aayroc.wpd

              Administration that the firm is indeed owned and controlled by one or more disadvantaged
              persons before the government awards then a contract. Also, future uses of the 8(a)
        program will
              be guided by the Commerce Department's analyses.

              These procurement reforms represent real and substantial change. This program will expand
               the government's use of price evaluation credits to help restore opportunities for small
       businesses
               owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged persons, who are seeking
       to be
               government contractors. Any credits provided to these firms would be available to SDBs in
               industries in which SDBs are demonstrably underutilized, as judged by a set of
       industry-specific
               benchmarks prepared by the U.S. Department of Commerce.

                 >-     Eligibility for a price credit. To be eligible for a price credit, an offeror must submit
                        a
                        certification, obtained within the past three years, that the business is owned and
                        controlled by one or more socially disadvantaged persons. Members of designated
                        minority groups seeking to participate in SDB programs fall within the statutory
                        presumption of social and economic disadvantage established in Section 8(d) of the
       Small
                        Business Act. Offerors who do not fall within the statutory presumption can qualify
       by
                        proving their social and economic disadvantage based on a preponderance of evidence

                        instead of the current clear and convincing standard.   This change will open SDB
                        participation to more women and nonminorities.

                 >-     Benefits will go only to those who are eligible. SBA's Office of Government
       Contracting
                        and Minority Enterprise Development will certify all qualified concerns requesting
       SDB
                        certification before a contract award being made. SBA will also:
                        -- decide protests and appeals;
                        -- establish and oversee a nationwide network of private certifiers who will help SBA
                        process applications, ensure that they are complete and correct in form, and
       determine that
                        the applicant firm is in fact owned and controlled by the individuals identified as the
                        owner; and
                        -- maintain a national public on-line registry of certified SDBs.

                        Benchmarks to measure the capacity of minority firms to undertake g:overnment contracts.
                        To ensure that race-conscious procurement is not used unnecessarily, the Commerce
                        Department has estimated a set of benchmarks for each of 72 two-digit major industrial


rlh:aayroc.wpd

                     groups.   In developing the capacity estimates, the U.S. Department of Commerce
       gathered
                     data from three sources on firms that were ready and willing to contraCt with the
       federal
                     government in fiscal year 1996: a representative sample of firms that either won or
       lost
                     bids on competitive government contracts; all other firms that had a new definitive
                     contract action let in that year, and; all firms certified for participation in the Small
                     Business Administration's 8(a) program for 1996. For each industry, the
       benchmarks
                      measure the "capacity" compared to the "utilization" of small disadvantaged
       businesses:
                     - The "capacity of small disadvantaged businesses is their share of contracting
       dollars
                     typically obligated in 1996 to firms, ready and willing to contract with the federal
                     government, controlling for the size and age of the firms.
                     -- "Utilization" is the actual small disadvantage business's share of contracting
       dollars
                     obligated.

                     Provide price credits in those industries where the government's utilization of minority
                     firms in a given industry fall below the industry benchmark. The program will work as
                     follows:
                     -- in competitive, negotiated competitions, contracting officers will be able - but not
                     required - to award a contract to an SDB if the SDB is qualified to perform the work and
                     its bid is within a certain percentage of the fair market value of the contract. The Federal
                     Acquisition Streamlining Act passed by Congress in 1994 authorizes credits of up to 10
                     percent.
                     -- the bids of qualified SD Bs will be adjusted from 0 to 10 percent of fair market value,
                     depending upon the analysis conducted by the U.S. Department of Commerce and
                     published by the Office of Federal Procurement Policy.
                     -- prime contractors, who commit to using SDB subcontractors, may also be eligible to
                     receive an adjustment based on an analysis Commerce is now undertaking.
                     - the industries in which price credits are authorized will be adjusted a!lnually and as
                     small disadvantaged businesses are more successful in obtaining federal contracts,
                     reliance on the price credit will decrease automatically.
                     -- The Administrator of SBA will review the benchmarks and determine how to
                     implement them for the 8(a) program. For example, if the level of minority contracting in
                     an industry exceeds the benchmark calculation, the SBA Administrator could take several
                     steps, including limiting entry of new firms into the program in that industry for some
                     time, accelerating graduation for firms that do not need the full period of sheltered
                     competition, or limiting the number of 8(a) contracts awarded in particular industries or in
                     specific geographic areas where contracts may be unduly concentrated.



rlh:aayroc.wpd

              Helping Distressed Communities. (Do we want to save this until later?) Last year, the
       President        issued his Executive Order on Empowerment Contracting aimed at helping disadvantaged
       people
               and distressed communities. Implementing his order, the Administration is sending to Federal
               Register proposed regulations launching the HUBZone program, that will provide federal
               procurement opportunities for small businesses that do significant business in, hire significant
               numbers of residents from, or directly generate economic activity in general areas of economic
               distress. The program will serve as a supplement - and not compete with - existing federal
               procurement programs, such as the 8(a) program.

                As we approach the 21st century, the President believes we must restore the American dream of
                 opportunity; find common ground amid our great diversity of opinion and experience; and
                 strengthen the American commitment to equal opportunity for all, special treatment for none.

              We believe that these carefully crafted policies will enable us to meet the challenges
articulated by
               the Supreme Court about when the federal government is justified in using affirmative action
in
               federal procurement. Simultaneously, these policies reaffirm the President's long standing
               personal commitment to close the opportunity gap by adopting policies aimed at ensuring a
               fundamental fairness in the marketplace so that all Americans have a chance to participate in
our
               nation's economy.




rlh:aayroc.wpd

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROCUREMENT REFORM Q&As

Q.   WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION'S NEW
REGULATIONS
     TO REFORM AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN FEDERAL PROCUREMENT?

A.     These regulations are a serious and thoughtful effort to ensure that federal affirmative action
       procurement programs comply with the standards set in the Supreme Court's 1995 decision in
       Adarand v. Pena. They also fulfill the President's commitment to "mend, not end" these
       programs. These regulations continue this country's efforts to eliminate the effects of past and
       continuing discrimination against minority-owned firms lawfully, without eliminating
       affirmative action entirely.

Q.    HOW DOES THIS NEW PROGRAM                   D~FFER    FROM THE SDB PROGRAMS
PREVIOUSLY
      IN EFFECT?

A.     There are several significant differences. First, the proposal would tighten certification
       requirements for SDB's. Second, agencies would be required to implement procurement
       mechanisms that do not rely on race to broaden the opportunities for small, minority firms.
       Third, a series of "benchmarks" estimated by the Department of Commerce would tie the use
       various SDBprocurement mechanisms to statistical data demonstrating that minority-owned firms
       have been disadvantaged in particular industries. The proposed system would only use SDB
       set-asides as a last resort. Instead, contracts would be open to all firms and agencies would be
       able to use price evaluation adjustments as part of the bidding process, a tool that was previously
       authorized only at the Department of Defense.

Q.     DOESN'T THE SUPREME COURT'S ADARAND DECISION PROHIBIT THIS TYPE OF
       AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM?

A.     No. The Supreme Court confirmed that the federal government can use affirmative action to
       remedy the effects of racial discrimination, but held that we must narrowly tailor such programs
       to serve a compelling government interest. After a thorough review of federal affirmative action
       programs and the legislative history and justifications for them, the Justice Department concluded
       that there still exits a compelling need for federal procurement programs that benefit disadvan-
       taged minority businesses. However, agencies must change the manner in which they use
       affirmative action in federal procurement to meet the requirements of Adarand

Q.     WHAT MAKES THIS NEW SYSTEM NARROWLY TAILORED?

A.     The Supreme Court identified six relevant factors when using race and ethnicity to award federal
       contracts, which these regulations address.

       ~   First, agencies must always use race-neutral alternatives, such as outreach and training, to the
           maximum extent possible.


       ~   Second, race cannot be the sole factor in SDB procurement decisions        -   all firms obtaining
           federal contrads, must show that they qualify to perform the work.

       ~   Third, SDB procurement mechanisms will be used only when the data on procurement show
           that the effects of discrmination agsinst minority businesses continue.

       ~   Fourth, the authorized SDB procurement mechanisms and price evaluation adjustment
           percentages, by major SIC group, will based on an annual analysis of the use of SDB firms as
           related to the number of qualified SDBs to perform the work in question.

       ~   Fifth, as SD B firms are more successful in obtaining federal contracts, the authorized price
           evaluation adjustment level will decrease automatically and end altogether, as the effects
           of discrimination dissipate in various sectors of the economy.

       ~   Finally, the new program will not over burden non-SDB businesses. The overwhelming
           percentage offederal procurement money will continue to flow, as it does now, to non-
           minority businesses.

Q.     IS THERE REALLY ANYWAY TO JUSTIFY A "RACIAL PREFERENCE" PROGRAM?

A.     This is not a racial preference program. Minority firms are not getting a price credit to help
       them win more contracts than similar firms are winning. Price credits merely help level the
       playing field for small disadvantaged firms, where data suggested that they continue to suffer
       the effects of discrimination, and are not winning a fair share of contract dollars.
       [Affirrn'ative action programs are race-based not to show preference for one race over
       another but to resolve that problem.]

Q.     WHAT DO THE BENCHMARKS MEASURE?

A.     For each industry, the benchmarks measure the "capacity" compared to the "utilization" of small
       disadvantaged businesses. THe "eaflaeity ef small aisaavaHtagea ettSiHesses is tHeir sHare ef
       eeHtraetiHg aellars tYflieally eeligatea iIi 199i te flfFHS, reaa;' aHa williIig te eeHtraet witH tHe
       feEleral geyeffimeHt, eeHtrelliIig fer tHe si2e aHEI age ef tHe firms. "Utili2atieH" is the aetttal
       small Elisaa~'aHtage ettsiIiess's share efeeHtraetiIig aellars eeligatea.

       The eapaciitv of small disadvantaged businesses is their share of Iinns reach,. willing, and able to
       contract with the Federal government. controlling for the size and age of the firms. Utilization is
       the SDB's actual share of contract dollars reccivcd in any given Iisenl vcar.

Q.     WHAT FIRMS WERE THE SMALL DISADVANTAGED BUSINESSES COMPARED TO?

A.     The U.S. Department of Commerce gathered data from three sources on firms that were ready
       and wiiling to contract with the federal government in fiscal year 1996: a representative sample
       of firms that either won or lost bids on competitive government contracts; all other firms that had
       new defmitive contract actions let in that year~ and all firms certified for participation in the

         Small Business Administration's Sea) program for 1996.

  Q.     IF THERE IS A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE DOLLARS WON BY SMALL DISADV AN-
         TAGED BUSINESSES, AND THE DOLLARS THEY WERE EXPECTED TO WIN, DOES
         THAT MEAN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS DISCRIMINATING AGAINST SMALL
         DISADVANTAGED BUSINESSES?

  A.     No. Differences between dollars won, and dollars typically awarded to ftrms of similar size and
         age, likely reflect the effects of discrimination in the private sector on the competitiveness of small
         disadvantaged businesses in the federal sector.

  Q.     COULD THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SMALL DISADVANTAGED BUSINESSES AND
         OTHERS, IN THEIR FEDERAL CONTRACTING EXPERIENCE, BE THE RESULT OF
         GREATER EFFICIENCY FOR OTHER FIRMS? AND IF SO, IS THIS PROGRAM JUST
         REW ARDING THE INEFFICIENCY OF SMALL DISADV ANT AGED FIRMS?

I A.     No. The program is aimed at leveling the playing fteld for small disadvantaged businesses. Because
         the benchmarks compare ftrms of equal age, and size, any remaining differences in the amount of
         government contract bids won between small disadvantaged ftrms and others, are likely to be related,
         directly or indirectly, to some factor of discrimination like access to working capital or price
         discrimination from suppliers.

 Q.      WHY SHOULD THE GOVERNMENT CARE IF THIS PARTICULAR GROUP OF FIRMS
         IS "UNDERUTILIZED, " AS OPPOSED TO ANY OTHER GROUP OF FIRMS?

 A.      The President is committed to removing any remaining vestiges of racial discrimination, that block
         full participation of all Americans in our society and economy.

         Small disadvantaged businesses playa signiftcant role in making the competitive bid process more
         competitive.

         ~     SDB ftrms represent about 16 percent of all ftrms in the competitive bid process, with higher
               shares in some industries

         ~     In many industries, SDB presence is vital to the competitive process. For instance, in the
               standard industrial code for repair services, almost 10 percent of solicitations would have
               resulted in only one bidder, if SDB ftrms had not also bid.

 Q.      GIVEN THE SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION'S Sea) PROGRAM, DOESN'T THIS
         PROGRAM CREATE ADDITIONAL ADVANTAGES FOR THE SAME FIRMS?

 A.      No.

         ~     We have taken Sea) contracts into account in determining whether the level of minority
               participation in governmenet contracting in each industry justiftes using price credits.
               Basically, if 5 percent of contracts in an industry wenl to SDBs under Sea), that would

                                                        3

               be included in utilization.
          ~    The price credit program will be offered to a set of small disadvantaged business owners
               virtually distinct from the set offums in the 8(a) program. Fewer than 10 percent of the
               small disadvantaged businesses who bid on contracts, outside the 8(a) program, are 8(a) fums.

          ~    Slightly more small disadvantaged businesses are participating in the competitive bid process
               (estimated to be about 7,000, excluding Sea) fums that participate in the non-8(a) competitive bid
               process) than are in the 8(a) program (around 6,200).

          ~    While still small, these non-8(a) small disadvantaged businesses, tend to be larger, slightly older,
               and appear to have higher productivity than 8(a) fums.

  Q.     WHY HAVE TWO PROGRAMS AIMED AT MINORITY BUSINESSES? CAN'T THIS
         PROGRAM JUST REPLACE THE SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION'S 8(a)
         PROGRAM?

  A.     No. The price credit addresses fair utilization of existing disadvantaged businesses. The 8(a)
         program seeks to foster new minority competitors. It addresses the low number of minority fums.
         Because the problems faced in fum creation are different from the problems existing fums face in
         being successful, one program is not suitable for both.

  Q.     DOESN'T THIS PROGRAM CREATE NEEDLESS ARGUMENTS OVER RACE,
         WHEN THE GAPS IN CONTRACTING FACED BY MINORITY FIRMS IS SMALL?

  A.     No. The gaps between the amount of contracting dollars awarded to small disadvantaged
         businesses, and the average size of contracts typically won by firms of their size, can be large. For
         instance, in the industrial classification for engineering, accounting and management related
         services, SDBs won about x percent of contracting dollars, though given their fum size, SDBs
         might have won about x percent of contracting dollars. On a national scale, SDBs won about x
         percent of contract dollars in competitive bids for general construction, while given their fum size
         they might have won about x percent.

I Q.     WON'T THIS PRICE CREDIT MEAN THE COST TfUIU-: FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
         WILL BE HIGHER?

  A.     No.

         ~     The flriee ereeit ma;' malEe all fIffilS bie more eomflotitivoly. Tho ellfleriolleo tho Deflartmollt
               of Dofellso hae with its alithority to lise a flrieo ereeit showee that ill tho iIlelistries, whor~ we
               aro aflfllYJ1g tho flriee ereeit, tlie flriee eredit eie Hot iIlefoase eosts fer tho DOflartmOHt of
               DefeHso fer tlio eOHtraets WOH by small eisaevaHtagee blisillessos. Almost all small
               eisaevaHtagee blisiHessos tliat WOIl eOHtraets .... ore tlie low bie.

               The price credit may make all firms bid more competitiVely. The DOD experience with its price
               crcdilalithoLUY reV\?i.LUJ.!;!i the 12ficc_t.:nxU!"~ Qi~Ll!QillcreasS!_ C(~~nUrJ contracts won by slllail


                                                          4

             disadvantaged businesses. Almost all small disadvantaged businesses thai won contracts were
             the low offeror.

       >-    Price is only one factor in determining a winning contractor. The low price is not the automatic
             winning offer. Only a small share of government contracting is subject to full, and open
             competition bids where award is based on low price.

       >-    Over time, the government's interest is in maintaining a competitive process. Small
             disadvantaged firms have proven themselves important to keeping the process competitive. So,
             in the end, a viable, small disadvantaged business community helps keep costs down.

Q.     WHY DO MINORITY FIRMS GET PRICE CREDITS IN INDUSTRIES WHERE THEY
       ALREADY MAKE UP A LARGE SHARE OF CONTRACTS, FOR INSTANCE, AS IN
       STANDARD INDUSTRY CODE 73?

A.     This program is not a racial preference program, and it is not a racial quota. The price credits are
       being used to level the playing field for small disadvantaged firms, where the data show they are not
       winning their fair share of contract dollars, when compared to otherwise similar firms. The purpose
       of the benchmarks is not to preordain a limit on minority contracting, but to establish a fair and
       level playing field. On that fair and level playing field, minority contracting may be at a high, or a
       low level. Overall, small disadvantaged firms make up 25 percent of the firms identified in the data
       base used to create the benchmarks. Adjusting for the age and size of those firms, it could be
       expected that they could handle 12 percent of all contracting. So, in some industries that number
       will be higher, and in other industries it will be lower.

       Minority firms faee aiserimination that mal,es the t)'j3e of inaustries the;' start eusinesses in aiffer
       from the t)'pes of inaustries non minorities start eusinesses. M inoritv firms face discrimina!.ion lha!
       make the type ofbllsincsses lhcv start different from thqvpc ofhllsinesses non-minorities starl.
       Consequently, they will be more concentrated in some industries than others. Because of differences
       in access to clients, perhaps because of overt discrimination, perhaps because of differences in the
       ability to network, minority firms can also have different attitudes toward public sector contracting
       than non-minority firms. Unlike employment, civil rights laws do not cover business contracts with
       other businesses. Because the public sector is so small compared to the private sector, minority firms
       may show up as a disproportionate share of businesses in the public sector.

Q.     WON'T THIS PROGRAM RESTRICT OPPORTUNITIES FOR NON-DISADVANTAGED
       FIRMS?

A.     No.

       >-    In 1996, on I" 6.4 perc:ent of the federal ~rovemmcllt's purdwsillP IVa, condtlctt'd with
             disadvamuL'ed lmsinesses cven with til<: usc of affirmative actioll prOPTGllb.    Thl!>, 93.5
             percent Dr the p'overllmcnt's business POl'S to non-SD B firms. The President's review
             of affirmative action programs did find that the use of set -asides has created some
             concentrations of SDB awards in some industries and regions. The Defense department

                                                      5

            suspended use of the rule of two set-aside program in Odober 1995.

       >-   The new regulations open participation in the SDB program to more women and nonminorities.

       >-   Second, firms that do not participate in SDB programs received more than 94 of
            the government's contracting business in FY 1996, and that will likely continue under the new
            proposal.

       >-   Third, contracts will be awarded in competitive bidding, with price evaluation adjustments,
            rather than being set aside for bidding only by SDB firms.

       >-   Finally, the regulations are designed to ensure that SDB awards will not be unduly concentrated
            in particular industries and geographic markets. The benchmark limitations will limit the use of
            SDB procurement mechanisms to circumstances where discrimination has reduced SDB
            participation in contracting.

Q.     WE HAVE HAD AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN FEDERAL PROCUREMENT FOR TWO
       DECADES. WHY DO WE STILL NEED MINORITY BUSINESS PROGRAMS? DO THEY
       REALLY SERVE A "COMPELLING INTERESTI"

       Yes. In the 1970's, small minoritv-owned firms received only 1 of the federal contracting dollar.
       With affirmative action programs, small minoritr bu,inesscs have been able to make progress in
       breaking into a government procurement system that had effectively locked them out before. The
       evidence today demonstrates, however, that discriminatory practices continue to create additional
       hurdles for minority firms competing for government contracts. The available evidence of
       discrimination paints a compelling picture for remedial action in government procurement, a need
       that was reaffirmed by Congress in 1994 when it enaded FASA.

Q.     WHAT EVIDENCE DO YOU HAVE TO BACK UP YOUR CONTENTION?

A.     The evidence is overwhelming and has been thoroughly documented in an analysis of the
       legislative history and available empirical data conducted by the Department of Justice. For
       example,

       >-   the typical white-owned business receives three times as many loan dollars as the typical
            black-owned business with the same amount of equity capital.

       >-   In construction, white-owned firms receive fifty times as many loan dollars as black-owned firms
            with identical equity. Once formed, the exclusion of minority firms from "old boy" business
            networks deprives them of critical information about potential contracts and places them at a
            competitive disadvantage.

       >-   Difficulties in obtaining bonding also hinder minority firms who want to participate in

                                                     6

            government procurement. One Louisiana study found that minority firms were nearly twice
            as likely to be rejected for bonding, three times more likely to be rejected for bonding for
            more than $1 million, and on average were charged higher rates for the same bonding policies
            than white firms with the same experience level.

Q.     IS THE SBA 8(a) BD PROGRAM AFFECTED BY THE NEW REGULATIONS?

A.     Yes, but the 8(a) program would remain in effect. The 8(a) program is a business development
       program that is distinct from the other SDB programs.

        ~   It is more narrowly tailored because of its more stringent requirements for eligibility and
            certification, especially with respect to whether participating firms are economically
            disadvantaged.

        ~   Firms in the XI a) pro!!ram must develop business plans and may unl\' stay in the pro[I'ilm for a
            limited time. The Justice Department will continue to defend the constitlltionality of the prmrram
            on that basis.

Q.     WHAT IMPACT WILL THE BENCHMARKS HAVE ON SBA'S 8(a) BUSINESS
       DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM?

A.     The Administrator will review the benchmarks and determine how to implement them for
       the 8( a) program. For example, if the level of minority contracting in an industry exceeds the
       benchmark calculation, the SBA Administrator could take several steps, including: (1) limiting
       entry of new firms into the program in that industry for some time; (2) accelerating graduation for
       firms that do not need the full period of sheltered competition; or (3) limiting the number of 8(a)
       contracts awarded in particular industries or in specific geographic areas where contracts may be
       unduly concentrated.

Q.     HOW WILL THE BENCHMARK LIMITATIONS WORK?

A.     The benchmark limitations will represent the level of minority participation in federal procurement that
       would be expected in the absence of discrimination. They are a measure of the capacity of minority
       contractors to perform the work in a particular industry - or what it would be, absent discrimination.
         Bencht11<lrk limitations h'lVe been determined for major SIC g-roups at the two-di!,!it (or, where
       'lppropriate fC)\)r-digitl level and by lwion lif any!. If in an industry, SDB participation! utilization
       in federal procurement matches or exceeds the capacity of SDB firms to do the work, the authorized
       price evaluation would be eliminated or decreased.

Q.     HOW WILL THE PRICE EVALUATION ADJUSTMENTS WORK IN PRAGfICE?

A.     In competitive, negotiated competitions, contracting officers will be able - but not required - to
       award a contract to an SDB if the SDB is qualified to perform the work and its bid is within a

                                                     7

       certain percentage of the fair market value of the contract. The Federal Acquisition Streamlining
       Act (TIFASA") passed by Congress in 1994 authorizes credits of up to 10 percent. Under the new
       regulations, price evaluation adjustments will be anywhere from 0 to 10 percent, depending upon the
       analysis conducted by the U.S. Department of Commerce. Prime contractors, who commit to using
       SDB subcontractors, may also be eligible to receive an adjustment based on an analysis Commerce
       is now undertaking.

Q.     ARE THE BENCHMARK LIMITATIONS QUOTAS?

       No. A quota is a fixed number that must be achieved despite the availability of qualified individuals.
         It lacks flexibility and disregards merit. The benchmark limitations are precisely the opposite.
       They impose limitations on the use of SDB procurement mechanisms. They provide a price credit,
       making race indirectly one of many factors considered in the award of a contract, and only then is ....
       there is a showing of discrmination. As minority firms are more successful in obtaining federal
       contracts, reliance on price credits will decrease. The benchmark limitations provide a means to
       measure success in providing oppornmities for SDBs, but they do not set a minimum or a maximum
       level of minority contracting that must be achieved. An ,H:ency would never be reqllired to award a
       contract to an llnqllalliiicd linn simpl" to meet a benchmark.

Q.     WILL SDB SET-ASIDES BE PERMITTED UNDER THESE REGULATIONS?

A.     Agencies would only be authorized to award price evaluation adjustments under the
       new program. Only if these mechanisms do not eliminate the vestiges of discrimination in
       particular industrial sectors, will the use of set -asides then be considered.

Q.     WHO IS ELIGIBLE TO PARTICIPATE IN THIS PROGRAM? IS THE PROGRAM
       RESTRICTED TO MINORITIES? HOW MANY FIRMS DO YOU EXPECrTO APPLY?

A.     Any business owned and controlled by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged is
       eligible to participate in the program. AlthOlWh the statute enacted 111' COlll'TeSS preslImes certain
       racial and ethnic minorities to be disadvantag:ed, the regulations permit others to be incl\lded as well.
       For example, a poor Appalachian white person who has never had a quality education or the ability to
       expand his or her cultural horizons mav be elipible to participate. In order for a non-minority firm
       to establish their eligibility, the new regulations permit them to establish that they are socially and
       economically disadvantaged under a lower standard of proof - a preponderance of the evidence test
       rather than a clear and convincing test.

Q.     WHAT IS THE PROCESS fOR CERTIFYING DISADVANTAGED AND ECONOMIC
       STATUS? WHAT EVIDENCE WILL SBA RELY UPON?

A.     In determining whether an individual is socially disadvantaged, SBA will consider the totality of
       the circumstances experienced by the individual, such as their education, employment and
       business history, as it demonstrates such disadvantage. In evaluating whether an individual is

                                                    8

       economically disadvantaged, SBA will consider the extent to which a disadvantaged individuals
       ability to compete in the free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and
       credit opportunities.

Q.     IS THE NEW PROGRAM A RETREAT FROM CURRENT AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
       PROGRAMS? WILL IT RESULT IN A REDUCTION IN MINORITY CONTRACfING?
A.     The new regulations implement the authority extended to federal agencies by FASA to
       promote oppornmities for SDBs, including the use of the measures such as price evaluation
       adjustments for SDB in a manner consistent with the Supreme Court's decision. Previously, only
       DoD had this authority. Agencies are also being encouraged to make even greater efforts to use
       tools that do not explicitly rely on race in procurement decisions, such as outreach and training for
       SDB contractors.

Q.     WHAT EFFECr WILL THESE REGULATIONS HAVE ON WOMEN-OWNED
       BUSINESSES?

A.    . These new regulations may increase opportunities for women and other non-minorities. By
        lowering the standard of proof that women-owned businesses, among others, must meet to
        establish that they are socially and economically disadvantaged, qualifying as SD Bs will be easier
        for them.

       ~      This proposal does not alter the current goal for the inclusion of women in federal contracting,
              nor does it alter the Department of Transportation's Disadvantaged Business Enterprise program,
              which includes women in its procurement goals. Neither of these programs provide for price
              evaluation adjustments or sheltered competition.

Q.     DOES THIS PROPOSAL ATTEMPT TO COMBAT FRAUD?

A.     Yes.

        ~     For the first time, firms must present a certification from entities approved by SBA that the
              identified socially and economically disadvantaged individuals in fact own and control the
              company.

       ~      The' IWW rule, also require prime contructurs to verify the SDH status uf their subwntractors bv
              consulting the SBA list of ..:ertified tirms in order to receive J monetary incentive tor exceedin!} the
              subcontract tan'ets under th ... inu:ntivc ,"hcontractim' pru!rram.

       ~      Also, the rules allow for challenges as to the veracity of a firm's representation of being an SDB.

       ~      In addition, the Department of Justice and SBA are committed to identifying and prosecuting to
              the full extent of the law individuals who misrepresent their SDB status.


                                                         9

Q..     DOES THIS PROGRAM CREATE BENEFITS FOR UNQUALIFIED FIRMS?

A.     No. Every firm is required to meet all quality and performance standards in order to be seleded
       for any contract award.

Q.     DO THESE NEW REGULATIONS AFFECT THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION'S
       DBE PROGRAMS?

       No.      DOrs DBE program is covered by a separate statue. The proposed regulation does not
       affect the Transportation Department's Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Program
       authorized by the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA). Under this
       program, state and local recipients of federal highway, transit, and airport grants are required
       to establish affirmative action goals for the participation of DBEs in DOT-assisted
       contracting. The Transportation Department recently published a supplemental notice of
       proposed rulemaking that modifies the way that this program operates to help ensure that it
       too comports with Adarand, while improving its overall effectiveness and reduce burden.

Q.     WON'T THESE REGULATIONS REPRESENT A GREAT DEAL OF ADDITIONAL WORK
       FOR PRIME CONTRACTORS?

A.     No. These regulations will not require significant contractor investment or a long implementation
       period, nor will they be particularly complex to carry out, particularly for contractors who have
       experience dealing with DOD. Pllee credits h~lW been IIsed in DOD Ii)!' some time. In c'xtel1dilW
       the procuremcnt mechanisms to civilian a!,;cncies, the'\' haw been simplified to the maximum extent
       possible and should not calise 1H1Iwcessarv difficulties as non-DOD contractors try to cornpl\' with
       them.     Outre,lCh and trainint! of procurement officials and contractors will be essential to successfltl
       impk~mentation of the SD B rei,)!'!n pro~ram.


Q.     WHAT IS THE PROCESS FOR DETERMINING WHEN ADDITIONAL OR ALTERNATE
       SDB PROCUREMENT MECHANISMS WILL BE AUTHORIZED?

A.     If aA ageAc), k!els a I"articular iAthistry category to aear a disl"fOl"ortioAate SHare of tHe coAtracts
       awarded a)' a coAtractiAg activity's goals for SDg COACefAS, reEjliests for a determiAatioA, iAcllidiAg
       sUl"l"OrtiRg ratioRale, iRcludiRg aRY l"ecHliarities related to iRdlistry, regioAs, or demogral"Hics, may ae
       sliamitted to Commerce for a determiRatioR. If al"l"fOved a)' commerce, a cORtractiRg office will ae
       I"ermitted to limit tHe lise of tHe al"l"fOved SDg mecHaAism iA mtme solicitatioAs.

       l'lirtHer, tHe Del"artmeAt of Commerce is AOt limited to tHe SDg I"fOcHfemeAt mecHaAism ideAtified iA
       tHis sectioA WHere tHe Del"artmeAt Has foliAd sHastaAtial aAd I"ersliasive e',ideAE:e of (1) a l"ersisteAt
       aAd sigAificaAt HAdeflitilizatioA of miAority firms iA a I"articular im:illstr)" attrialitaale to I"ast or I"reseAt
       discrimiAatioA; aAd (2) a demoAstrated iAcal"acit)' to alle,'iate tHe I"fOalem ay lisiAg tHose mecHaAisms.



                                                        10


        Note: INSERT ANSWER FOR THE OUESTION THAT READS: WILL SDB SET-ASIDES HE
        PERMITTED UNDER THESE REGULATIONS.

Q.      HOW ARE YOU GOING TO KEEP PRIME CONTRACTORS FROM MISREPRESENTING
        THEIR SDB UTILIZATION?

A.      These new regulations require firms claiming an SDB procurement benefit to be certified and included
        on a SBA-maintained register. By requiring prime contractors to check that register before treating
        their slIhcontractors as SDBs, they will know that they are using legitimate SDB firms. Moreover, the
        government will review the accuracy of any reports submitted by prime contractors as part of the
        normal contract oversight.

Q.      DO THE BENCHMARKS FACTOR IN THE LEVEL OF SUBCONTRACTING?                                 HOW IS
        THIS DONE, WHEN THERE IS NO SUCH DATA BASE TO DO IT WITH?

A.      No.   (Elaborate).

Q.    IN ITS MAY 23, 1996 PROPOSED RULE, THE DO] INDICATED IT INTENDED TO STEP
      UP OUTREACH AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE. ARE THERE ANY SUCH
INITIATIVES
      BEING PURSUED?

A.      ????????????

Q.      ARE AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROCUREMENT PROGRAMS STILL NEEDED?

A.      Yes. Disadvantaged business programs were enacted in response to specific findings that
        discrimination has impeded the ability of minority-owned and other disadvantaged firms from
        developing in our economy. Affirmative action has closed many gaps in economic opportunity, but
        the need remains.     '1'I-I/S OUESTION APPEARS TO BE DUPLICATIVE OF TI IE
        QUESTION I'HAT READS:              We have had aflinnativc action in procurcment fi)!' two dcc'ldes.
        \Vh)' do we still need minoritv business programs;' Doe they really serve a compellirw illterests?

Q.      AREN'T AGENCY GOALS FOR AWARDING CONTRACfS TO SDBS REALLY
        QUOTAS?

A.      No. Goals are not a numerical straight-jacket -- they reflect an aspiration that a certain percentage
        of contracting will be with small disadvantaged firms, not a guarantee that it will happen. Indeed,
until
        1993, even the 5 goal was not achieved. The only consequence of failure to meet a goal is that
        an agency will be expected to continue to make a good faith effort. Similarly, the 5 goal is not a
        cap.

                                                     11


Q.     WHAT OTHER CHANGES ARE YOU MAKING TO THE SBA 8(A) BD PROGRAM?

A.     SBA is working hard to improve the efficiency of the program and have already carried out
       important changes in this regard. In the future, we hope the program can give meaningful help to
       a greater number of eligible participants. (More)

Q.     WHAT MUST AN SDB DO TO BE ELIGIBLE FOR THE PROGRAM?

A.     To be eligible for a price credit, an offeror must submit a certification, obtained within the
past
       three years, that the business is owned and controlled by one or more socially disadvantaged
       persons. Members of designated minority groups seeking to participate in SDB programs
fall
        within. the statutorily mandated presumption of social and economic disadvantage
established
        in Section 8(d) of the Small Business Act. Non-presumed offerors who do not fall within
the
        statutory presumption can qualify by SUbmitting evidence proving their social and economic
        disadvantage status.

Q.     WHO .lli..RESPONSIBLE FOR CERTIFYING SDBS?

A.     The Small Business Administration's Office of Government Contracting and Minority
       Enterprise Development will administer the new SDB Certification program. In particular,
       they will:

       ~   certify all qualified concerns requesting SD B certification;

       ~   decide protests and appeals;

       ~   establish and oversee a nationwide network of private certifiers who will help SBA
           process applications, ensure that they are complete and correct in form, and make
           a determination that the applicant firm is in fact owned and controlled by the
           individuals identified as the owner; and

       ~   maintain a national public on-line registry of    certified SDBs.

Q.     WHAT IS THE STATUTORY AUTHORITY FOR THE PRICE CREDIT PROGRAM?

A.     Section 1207, Public Law 99-661 (10 U.S.C. 2323 (e authorizes awards to small disadvantaged


                                                   12



    Draft:February 25, 1998, document: pro_ Q&A. wpd

            businesses (SDBs) at a price not exceeding fair market price (FMP) by not more than 10
            percent.

               The price evaluation program is one of two prime contract tools authorized under the
                statute aimed at increasing awards going to SDBs. The other was the SDB set-aside
                (i.e., "Rulc of Two" program) that was suspended in response to the Supreme Court's
                Adarand decision.

               Originally the program applied to DOD contract awards conducted under full and open
                solicitation procuedures, based on price only. After suspension of the Rule of Two
                SDB set-aside, DOD expanded the program to include awards based on price and other
                factors (e.g., best value procurements).

               During fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996, DOD awarded $356 million, $215, and $198
                million, respectively, to SDBs under the evaluation program.

               Analysis of the FY 1994 data shows that DOD most often made SDB evaluation
                preference awards in connection with oil refining, engineering services, equipment
                maintenance and repair, and equipment installation contracts.




                                                        13

President Clinton has directed his administration to consider carefully existing federal affirmatio
action policies, pursuant to his goal of "mend it, don't end it" and recent Supreme Court rulings,
such as the Adarand decsion.

In accordance with that direction, the following recommendations represent narrolwly tailored
policies, targeted to areas in which disparities, arising from discrimination, continue to exist:

      Develop and expand mentoring programs, encouraging large businesses across the
       country to partner with smaller, locally owned businesses located in distressed
       communities to engage in a range of activities, from advice and guidance to
       subcontracting. As part of this process the President wi11 issue an Executive Order
       directing the Vice President as chair of the Community Empowerment Board to oversee
       an administration-wide initiative to develop and promote the federal govemt's efforts on
       mentoring.

      Strengthen and improve the SBA 8(a) process, including permitting two or more firms to
       jointly venture on particular procurements; establishing a new 8(a) mentoring program;
       and streamlining the 8(a) program to be more effective; clarifying eligibility, including
       permittting more non-minorities to qualify; and deleting burdensome and obsolete
       regulations.

      Build on the successful program enacted by the Congress and operated by the Department
       of Defense, which enables minority firms to compete in industries in which the data
       demonstrate that the procurement playing field is still not even, by expanding DoD's
       price credits system to government wide use using market driven benchmarks to ensure
       appropriate targeting.

       Note: What does market driven mean? Need to emphasize more the reform/mend it
       aspect of the proposal.

      Help distressed communities by publishing proposed regulations launching the
       HUB Zone program, that will provide federal procurement opportunities for small
       businesses that do significant business in, hire significant numbers of residents from, or
       directly generate economic activity in general areas of economic distress. The program
       will serve as a supplement - and not compete with - existing federal procurement
       programs, such as the 8(a) program.


