RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD l )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-FEB-1998 13:41:43.00

SUBJECT:   H1-B rewrite from Labor

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD l   )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO l     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,

Sorry for the piecemeal nature of this.    The attached are the comments
from the Labor person at OMB.

jf
---------------------- Forwarded by Julie A. Fernandes/OPD/EOP on 02/24/98
01:50 PM ---------------------------




INGRID M. SCHROEDER
02/24/98 01:33:06 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Julie A. Fernandes/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         H1-B rewrite from Labor


---------------------- Forwarded by Ingrid M. Schroeder/OMB/EOP on
02/24/98 01:32 PM ---------------------------



Debra J. Bond
02/24/98 11:21:43 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Ingrid M. Schroeder/OMB/EOP@EOP
cc:      Larry R. Matlack/OMBiEOP@EOP, Maureen H. Walsh/OMB/EOP@EOP, Daniel J.
Chenok/OMB/EOP@EOP
Subject:         H1-B rewrite from Labor

Below are our suggested edits to the H-1B testimony. We do not think that
any substance is lost. Our changes attempt to make the testimony more
concise. The changes also qualify some of the statements because DOL does
not provide any evidence.  please let me know if there are any questions
about our edits. Thanks--

STATEMENT OF RAYMOND J. UHALDE
ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF LABOR
before the
THE SENATE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE



February 25, 1998


Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:

         Let me begin today, Mr~ Chairman, by expressing my sincere
appreciation to you for affording me this opportunity to share the views
of the Administration regarding immigration, labor market conditions in
high-technology industries, and possible reforms in the H-IB nonimmigrant
visa program. The Administration shares your interest in the information
technology industry, as evidenced by our participation in a recent
convocation in Berkeley that addressed Information Technology (IT) work
force needs.   Further, as you know from Administration proposals advanced
beginning in 1993, we believe that the H-IB program needs reform.    This
employment-based visa program is seriously flawed in its current form and
urgently requires the attention of Congress.   I would like to commend the
Committee for its interest in these issues.
Tight Labor Markets and IT Skills Shortages
         It is clear that IT employment is growing rapidly, IT labor
markets are tight, and they are likely to remain so. Although this is
true for the nation as a whole, given our sustained economic expansion and
low national unemployment rate, IT labor markets appear to be particularly
affected.   Employment of computer systems analysts, engineers, and
scientists has been growing by 10% a year -- well above the growth of
comparable occupations -- and is expected to continue growing at a
comparable rate through 2006.   BLS projects that the U.S. will require
more than 1.3 million new workers in IT core occupations between 1996 and
2006 to fill job openings projected to occur due to growth and the need to
replace workers who leave the labor force or transfer to other occupations.
        The IT skills shortage issue is very controversial.   Industry
advocates say that hundreds of thousands of jobs cannot be filled and that
these vacancies are hurting U.S. competitiveness.   Critics say the IT
industry: (1) drastically overstates any problem by producing inflated job
vacancy data and equating it to skills shortages; (2) continues to layoff
tens of thousands of workers (e.g., AT&T recently announced large
lay-offs); and (3) fails to tap reservoirs of talent available by using
unnecessarily specific recruitment requirements and not providing more
training to current IT workers.
        One point of contention is the confusion between job vacancies and
actual skills shortages.   Even if the latest industry survey, which found
nearly 350,000 job vacancies in the IT industry is accurate, it does not
mean that there is a skills shortage of that same magnitude.   Nearly all
industries and firms, particularly those with rapid employment growth and
high worker turnover, will have large numbers of jobs openings or
vacancies without experiencing skills shortages.     An industry
association survey of job vacancies indicates that there may already be a
shortage of 350,000 workers in the IT industry.   However, this may not be
a signal that there is a shortage of skilled workers.   Most industries and
firms have job openings at any point in time reflecting worker turnover
and employment growth.
        Evidence from perhaps the best predictor of skills shortages -- wage
growth -- does not suggest acute skills shortages nationwide in the IT
industry, but may be consistent with skills shortages in specialized
occupational areas and selected local areas.    Wages growing substantially
faster than average can be a reliable indicator of skill shortages, but
the wage growth record for the IT industry is mixed. Broad-based Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) surveys show increases in IT wages in 1996 and 1997
that are only modestly above comparable occupations, while more
specialized industry surveys show much larger wage increases in more


specialized, high-skills occupations.    BLS wage trends for broad
computer-related categories show average wage growth between 1988 and 1997
for all categories, but with above-average growth in wages for 1996 and
1997 in the lower-skill computer-related categories, particularly
programmers. At the same time, a variety of industry wage surveys show
larger wage increases in 1996 and 1997 in more specialized, high-skill
occupations.
Educating and Training U.S. Workers
         The Administration believes it is essential, regardless of the magnitude
of the problem, to shape public policy to assure that IT meet the
workforce needs of the IT industry, as well as those of any other
industry, through the education and training of u.s. workers. but that
increased immigration should be the last -- not the first -- public policy
response to skills shortages. Our first response should be to provide the
needed skills to U.S. workers to qualify them for IT jobs.   Increased
immigration should be the last -- not the first -- public policy response
to skills shortages. Accordingly, care must be taken before turning to
immigration to expand the supply of workers.
         The existence of a tight labor market causes employers to raise wages,
improve working conditions, and provide increased training to enable
currently employed workers to keep pace with technology and induce more
workers to enter the labor market. The increased demand for trained
workers induces educational and job training institutions to teach new
skills. with more opportunities for training, workers acquire skills
needed to obtain better, higher-paying and more secure jobs, thereby
creating open jobs and career ladders for those just entering or
reentering the labor market -- young people, welfare recipients, displaced
workers, and other disadvantaged groups.    [from below]
         Therefor, tTight labor markets and skills shortages create incentives for
employers and workers to behave in ways needed to achieve many of the
AdministrationO,s top priorities: moving welfare recipients, out-of-school
youth, and workers dislocated by trade into jobs; providing greater
opportunities for lifelong learning; and raising wages and reducing income
inequality. Reliance on increased immigration, however, would undercut
these market incentives and adversely affect our ability to upgrade the
skills of U.S. workers to meet emerging skills shortages.
         The existence of a tight labor market causes employers to raise wages,
improve working conditions, and provide increased training to enable
currently employed workers to keep pace with technology and induce more
workers to enter the labor market. The increased demand for trained
workers induces educational and job training institutions to teach new
skills. With more opportunities for training, workers acquire skills
needed to obtain better, higher-paying and more secure jobs, thereby
creating open jobs and career ladders for those just entering or
reentering the labor market -- young people, welfare recipients, displaced
workers, and other disadvantaged groups.
         However, ILabor markets are sometimes slow to respond to skills
shortages.   In these circumstances, it is often argued that foreign
temporary workers are needed in the short-term to provide necessary skills
while the labor market adjusts and provides u.s. workers with the
requisite training. Without needed foreign temporary workers, some argue
that the IT industry may adjust to skills shortages in ways that do not
serve the short-term or. long-term priorities of the country, either by
reducing job creation or by moving jobs overseas. Further, it is argued
that IT industries are so critical to our competitive edge in an array of
industries and services that disproportionate harm could come to the U.S.
economy.
         Even in such circumstances, however, the use of foreign temporary workers
will may interfere with labor market adjustments and may makes achieving
our other priorities more difficult.   It dampens the market signals of


increased wages, improved working conditions, and enhanced job security
and growth potential so that    may reduce the incentive for fewer U.S.
workers will be induced to acquire new skills, and fewer employers and
institutions will may be induced to increase provide more training and
education.
         Our primary public policy response to skills mismatches due to changing
technologies and economic restructuring must be to prepare the U.S.
workforce to meet new demands.    Importing needed skills should usually be
a short-term response to meet urgent needs while we actively adjust to
quickly changing circumstances.
         The Administration already has taken significant steps to increase
our capacity for increasing workforce skills. The President continues to
pursue comprehensive reform of the NationO,s employment and training
system by working with Congress to enact the principles embodied in his GI
Bill proposal.   Moreover, in the historic balanced budget agreement of
last summer, the President insisted on and achieved the largest increase
in 30 years in the Federal investment to expand the skills of American
workers, including:
         the largest Pell Grant increase in two decades -- boosting the
maximum from $2,700 to $3,000;
         a $1,500 Hope Scholarship to make the first two years of school
post-secondary universally available through tax credits;
         the Lifelong Learning Tax Credit for the last 2 years of college
and continuing adult education and training to upgrade worker skills;
         a 10 percent major increase in employment and training resources,
including increases for dislocated workers and disadvantaged workers
adults and youth to over $5 billion; and [note: these increases were not
realized in FY 1998 appropriations which were 6% above FY 1997]
         a $3 billion program to help move 1 million people from long-term
welfare recipients secure lasting, unsubsidized employmentwelfare to work

        Further, the Administration announced several new efforts at the
recent Berkeley Convocation to help address the growing demand for
information technology workers:
        A Labor Department Technology Demonstration project to test
innovative ways of establishing partnerships between local workforce
development systems, employers, training providers and others to train
dislocated workers in needed high tech skills;
        The expansion and integration of AmericaO,s Job Bank and
AmericaD,s Talent Bank by the Labor Department to allow employers and
workers to list and access job openings and worker resumes in one
integrated system.
A Commerce Department grant program to bring information technology to
low-income persons, particularly to enhance education and life-long
learning;
The convening of four town hall meetings by the Commerce Department to
discuss IT workforce needs, identify best practices, and showcase
successful models; and
A joint Education and Labor grant program to expand employer involvement
in high technology school-to-work programs.
        We think that there is more that we can do to move U.S. workers
into high technology jobs, and we welcome the discussions that may be
sparked by this hearing.   We are committed to pursuing a continued
dialogue with the major stakeholders in the IT workforce issue --
government, industry, workers, and education and training institutions
to better define the workforce needs of the IT industry and develop appropr
iate solutions to meet these needs involving commitments from each of the
stakeholders.   Such a dialogue is critical because increased immigration,
if needed, can be only a small part of the solution to the workforce needs
of the IT industry.


         Given this broader context, let me turn to the need for reform of
the H-IB nonimmigrant program.
  H-IB Nonimmigrant Program
         The H-IB program allows the admission of up to 65,000 workers each
year (to stay for as long as six years), ostensibly to meet short-term,
high-skills employment needs in the domestic labor market.    In principle,
this can be an appropriate purpose, consistent with our overall goal of
giving priority to improving the skills of U.S. workers.            -
         In practice, however, employers do not have to demonstrate any
type of employment need or domestic recruitment prior to getting a foreign
worker.   Exacerbating this problem, the Labor Department is limited
strictly in its ability to enforce the minimum standards that employers
must adhere to.     Employers obtain H-IB foreign workers by filing a labor
condition application with the Department affirming that they have
complied with four requirements:
         that a wage (not less than the local prevailing rate) will be
paid to the foreign workers;
         that no strike or lockout exists;
         that notification has been provided to U.S. workers and their
unions; and
         that the employment of H-IB non immigrants will not adversely
affect the working- conditions of U.S. workers similarly employed.
By law, the Labor Department can do no more than review these attestations
for completeness and obvious inaccuracies -- to determine whether an
employer checked all of the boxes, made no flagrant errors, and signed the
attestation. Once the Department has reviewed the attestation, its
enforcement has been limited by the fact that foreign worker is unlikely
to make a complaint.
         Our experience with the practical operation of the H-IB program has
raised serious concerns that what was conceived as a means to meet
temporary business needs for unique, highly-skilled professionals from
abroad is, in fact, being used for a totally different purpose.    Some
employers -- though a minority of those who use the H-IB program -- seek
admission of foreign workers to compete with qualified U.S. workers
because temporary foreign workers are tied to one employer and are likely
to be willing to work for lower wages and under less favorable working
conditions. As a result, relatively large numbers of foreign workers who
may well be displacing U.S. workers and eroding employers' commitment to
the domestic workforce. Unfortunately, in some cases the H-IB program
appears not to operate as a temporary workers program with workers coming
to this country for a short duration and then returning to their home
country.   Instead, it operates as a "probationary" employment program
where employers bring workers to the US and, if they perform well, sponsor
them for permanent admission to this country. Thus, in some instances,
the US worker is never afforded the opportunity to compete for the job.
         Many employers, to be sure, use the H-IB nonimmigrant program for
its stated purpose: to provide U.S. businesses with timely access to the
"best and the brightest" in the international labor market to meet urgent
but generally temporary business needs.    I want to emphasize that the
Administration recognizes the need for this legitimate use of the
program.   But reform of the H-IB program is needed because it does not
provide the needed balance between timely access to the international
labor market and adequate protection of U.S. workers' job opportunities,
wages and working conditions.
         Greater protections for U.S. workers are needed because many employers
use the H-IB program to employ not the o&best and the brightest,08 but
rather entry-level foreign workers who compete with U.S. workers.     Minimum
education and work experience qualifications for H-IB jobs are quite low
-- a 4-year college degree and no work experience, or the equivalent in
terms of combined education and work experience. Thus, a foreign worker


with the equivalent of a community college degree and a few years of
experience can compete with U.S. workers.   These low educational
requirements result in nearly 80 percent of H-IB jobs paying less than
$50,000 a year and more than 70 percent of the jobs being in
computer-related occupations, physical therapists, and other
health-related occupations.
         The H-IB program is broken in several respects.  First, current
law does not require any test for the availability of qualified U.S.
workers in the domestic labor market.   Therefore, many of the visas under
the current cap of 65,000 can be used lawfully by employers to hire
foreign workers for purposes other than meeting a skills shortage.
Second, current law allows a U.S. employer to layoff U.S. workers and
replace them with H-1B workers -- although employers do attest to no
strike or lock-out at the time of the application. Third, current law
allows employers to retain H-1B workers for up to 6 years to fill a
presumably D&temporaryD8 need. We simply do not believe this is right.
The H-IB program does almost nothing to encourage U.S. employers to
develop U.S. workers to perform the jobs for which they are seeking
nonimmigrants, or to limit their dependency on a nonimmigrant workforce.
         As a result of these weaknesses in the program, it has become
increasingly evident that the H-IB program is being utilized by some as
the basis for building businesses dependent on the labors of foreign
workers in relatively low-level computer-related and health care
occupations. This is a clear example of companies using H-IB visas for
foreign workers that are not needed to meet skills shortages. Such
businesses are, in some cases, in unfair competition with U.S. workers and
those U.S. businesses that employ mostly U.S. workers.   The existence of
"job contractors" with work forces composed predominantly or even entirely
of H-1B workers, which then lease these employees to other U.S. companies
or use them to provide services previously provided by laid off U.S.
workers, is cause for serious concern.
         Mr. Chairman, the Administration asked the Congress in 1995 to
amend the H-1B nonimmigrant program to address these problems.
Unfortunately for many U.S. businesses and workers, these amendments were
not enacted. The amendments requested in 1995 were carefully designed to
assure continued business access to needed high-skills workers in the
international labor market while decreasing the H-lB program's
susceptibility to misuse to the detriment of U.S. workers and the
businesses which employ them.   Briefly stated, the amendments would
require employers which seek access to temporary foreign "professional"
workers to attest that:
                  they have not laid off or otherwise displaced U.S.
workers in the occupations for which they seek nonimmigrant workers in the
periods preceding and following their seeking such workers; and,
                 in certain circumstances, they have taken timely and
significant steps to recruit and retain U.S. workers in these occupations.
In addition, the Administration urged enactment of another amendment to
reduce the allowable period of stay under the H-1B program from six to
three years to better reflect the "temporary" nature of the presumed
employment need.                                                   .
         Enactment of these amendments will help employers actually facing
skills shortages, including those in the IT industry, obtain needed
workers through the H-1B program. Under existing program rules law,
employers facing skills shortages are disadvantaged because they must
compete for available visas (up to the cap of 65,000) on a first-come,
first-served basis with other employers that do may not face such
shortages. Enactment of the proposed amendments would reduce pressure on
the visa cap by screening out employers that are not faced with skills
shortages and have no interest in recruiting U.S. workers.
         A significant number of such employers use the H-lB program as a


    probationary program for foreign students who graduate from u.s. colleges,
    without a market test for U.S. workers, to determine if they want to
    sponsor the foreign student for permanent immigration status.  By reducing
    the use of the H-IB for such purposes, more visas would be available for
    employers who need to use the H-IB program for its original purpose --
    bringing in foreign workers to fill a temporary, critical need that
    cannot be met by U.S. workers.
     Conclusion
            Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by restating that the workforce needs of
    the IT industry can only be met if we take the steps needed to fully
    develop and utilize the skills of U.S. workers.  Increased immigration can
    only be a very small part of the solution and must be viewed as a minor co
    mplement to the development of the U.S. workforce.  Further, let me repeat
    ing that reform of the H-IB program is integral and essential to
    eliminating abuses under the program and providing greater protections for
    U.S. workers. At a bare minimum, we must not expand a program as
    fundamentally flawed as the H-IB nonimmigrant visa program.   Further, eE
    nactment of these reforms would effectively allocate a greater share of
    H-IB visas to employers facing actual skills shortages.
            I appreciate the interest shown by the Committee Members and staff
    in our views, and your thoughtful consideration of them.  The Department
    looks forward to continuing to work closely and cooperatively with you and
    your staff on these issues. Mr. Chairman, that concludes my prepared
    statement.


