RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:27-FEB-1998 17:40:35.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly Report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D47]MAIL49064675Q.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504316050000010A020100000002050000003A3900000002000089A8880E2D38BFB3A3FOC6
A512F393694221B536A14347EOCDDE9ED56FOC8FD0556EE2624C93AC1C2A6FA67E623CA39795CE


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report


        l.Medicare Commission Meeting. Next Friday, the Medicare Commission will hold its
first meeting. Because of the media's preoccupation with entitlement reform, just the fact that
the process is starting is likely to generate a good deal of attention. To help illustrate your
commitment to addressing long-term financing challenges facing the Medicare program, you are
scheduled to meet with the Commission to thank them for their willingness to serve the day
before the first meeting (Thursday). During that meeting, you may want to also discuss how this
effort builds on your commitment recent commitment to develop consensus on needed Social
Security reforms. You may also want to ask the Commission to work together in the same
bipartisan fashion that produced the unprecedented Medicare reforms in the balanced budget
agreement. To date, Senator Breaux and Congressman Thomas are still working out a
somewhat uneasy leadership collaboration for the Commission. They have solicited suggestions
from all Commission members as to how best to structure the process and set the agenda. Their
first meeting will likely be devoted to approving the structure and laws that govern the process as
well as setting the desired goals and outcomes. As a result, little news, other than the fact that
commission is meeting, is likely (or desired) to come out at the beginning of the process.


        2.Patients' Bill of Rights Legislation. Next week, the Democratic Leadership is
expected to unveil its version of the patients' bill of rights. The legislation will go beyond the
consumer bill of rights recommended by your Quality Commission and is likely to include
several provisions that are extremely controversial, particularly with the business community.
These include an enforcement provision that allows remedies through state courts as well as new
benefits requirements which would direct all health plans to cover all clinical trials, all services
associated with mastectomies, and breast reconstructive surgery. The business community will
no doubt argue that these provisions will lead to uncontrollable litigation, higher premiums, and
more uninsured Americans. These claims are overblown and there will be studies to counter
these charges, it is highly likely that the well-financed business efforts will have an impact on the
perception of this view in Congress. Because this version of the bill of rights stands little to no
chance of passing this Congress, our challenge is to indicate support for the legislation without
offering a complete endorsement. We will be meeting with the Democratic Leadership to
construct a communications and legislative strategy before the bill is unveiled. In addition,
will require health plans to cover a number of new benefits, including requiring medically
necessary services following a mastectomy, breast reconstructive surgery, and requiring patients
to be able to get a second opinion on cancer. Although elite validators and the business
community despise these benefits, we expect they will likely pass the Senate.

         3.Children and Families -- Indicators on the Well-Being of Children -- You had
asked us to look into ways we could incorporate recent data from the Weekly Economic Report
and the Economic Report of the President on the well-being of children into our ongoing agenda
on children. These data indicate that your focus on and commitment to children has had
measurable results. While we should regularly include this information in speeches and written
materials, we are currently looking for an opportunity -- such as the release of a comprehensive
report or a high profile speech -- to highlight both these recent positive trends and your ongoing
efforts to improve the well-being of children and families.

        4.Welfare Reform -- Republicans Introduce "Fatherhood Counts" Block Grants:
On February 26th, Congressman Shaw announced block grant legislation to enhance
fatherhood and parental responsibility. The bill is co-sponsored by Congressman Archer
and other Republican Ways and Means members. Shaw characterized this initiative as the
next step in welfare reform, as a way "to help children by providing them with more than a
working mother and sporadic child support." The initiative creates a $2 billion block
grant over five years, with funding allocated to states based on population. The block
grants would be paid for either by reducing other spending or capping tobacco attorney
fees. States would award funds to community-based projects that encourage marriage and
better parenting by fathers--even if they are not living with their children-- and help
fathers obtain employment or get better jobs. At least 75% of the funds would be directed
to non-governmental organizations and at least 80% would be spent on low-income fathers.
 The legislation sets aside $100 million for research, evaluation, and technical assistance.
Shaw was joined at the announcement by Charles Ballard and Wade Horn, who is also
working closely with a bipartisan Governor's Task Force on Fathers.

       Welfare Reform: Treasury Finalizing Notice to Exempt Workfare from FICA
Taxes -- Treasury and the IRS have prepared a draft notice stating that workfare positions
are not subject to FICA taxes, a ruling the Governors have long sought. However, the
unions are unhappy with the notice because they believe it will buttress their opponents'
arguments that workfare is not really employment but a welfare payment. Treasury's
notice states clearly that it deals only with tax law, with no implication intended for the
Fair Labor Standards Act and other employment laws. Nevertheless, the unions still fear
a potential spillover effect. It does not appear possible for Treasury to issue such a ruling
without creating some additional risk for labor.

        We favor issuing the notice anyway. It would defuse much of the Governors'
criticism that the Department of Labor has made it very difficult for states to run workfare
programs (because of its ruling last year that the minimum wage and other labor
protections apply to workfare positions). In particular, Democratic Governors such as
this issue would likely be satisfied with this ruling. The fact that we have a new minimum
wage increase on the table will serve to keep this issue alive with the Governors and the
Republicans in Congress this year.

        5.Tobacco -- Response to Senator McCain: On Friday, we responded by letter to 74
questions posed by Senator McCain regarding our views of his tobacco legislation, which mirrors
the proposed tobacco settlement. In the lctter, we stressed that the Administration looks forward
to working with the Senator and others in Congress to develop comprehensive, bipartisan
legislation that will reduce teen tobacco use and stressed our view that a piecemeal approach will
not meet our overriding goal of dramatically reducing teen smoking.

         Senator McCain primarily asked questions about advertising restrictions and other issues
within the jurisdiction of the Commerce Committee. In our response, drafted with extensive
assistance from the Department of Justice and HHS, we explain our view that the FDA
regulations that restrict the advertising of tobacco products are consistent with the First
Amendment -- a view which DOJ has explained at length in the 4th Circuit FDA litigation.
However, we do note that other restrictions in the McCain bill that go beyond the FDA rule give
rise to constitutional concerns, such as whether such restrictions would be sufficiently tailored to
serve the governmental interest in reducing teenage smoking. The letter stresses that such limits
on advertising nonetheless may be valuable in reducing youth smoking and protecting the public
health, and the Administration would like to work with Senator McCain to minimize
constitutional difficulties.

         6.Conversation with Bill Thomas. Next week, Larry Stein and Chris Jennings are
scheduled to meet with Congressman Thomas on a range of health issues, including the Medicare
Commission, the patients' bill of rights, and other health reform initiatives. In a conversation
this week with Chris, Mr. Thomas indicated his desire to set up a meeting (along with Dennis
Hastert, who has been asked by the Speaker to coordinate the Republican House consumer
protections' strategy). Notably, Mr. Thomas said that the current Republican "go slow" strategy
on the patients' bill of rights is not serving the interests of either the House Republicans or the
Administration. He believes that the House Republicans need to move quickly to develop an
alternative to the Dinge\llKennedy and Norwood legislation. Although his vision of consumer
protections may be problematic, we view this as positive news. However, bipartisan efforts in
this regard will be made more difficult by the fact that some House Democrats, particular Mr.
Gephardt, continue to be more interested in using this as a political issue rather than passing
legislation.

        Mr. Thomas also indicated his desire to work closely with the Administration on the
Medicare Commission. In particular, he will work with us to assure that various communications
about the Commission do not catch the other side off guard. He also indicated that he would
work with Republicans to encourage good behavior in the upcoming White House meeting, but
wanted a commitment that we were not planning any surprise announcements. Finally, Mr.
Thomas indicated his desire to open discussions on a range of major health reforms in the
upcoming months. He is particularly interested in: (1) considering capping the tax deductions
                                                                          Automated Records Ma[\"t;~,-:,::": 0')&t3;'
                                                                                  I-Ip.x-Dump ConversIon

    for health care plans and using the savings to help provide coverage to low-income workers; (2)
    designing significant insurance reforms including community rating; and (3) mandating that
    individuals buy health insurance. He recognizes that these aggressive options will not be well
    received, particularly coming from a high ranking Republican. However, he wanted us to be
    aware of his interest in this area and says he is seriously willing to push this agenda (and all of
    the ensuing controversy) if we are willing to engage on this front as well. It is clearly premature
    to take any action on this front, but the fact that Mr. Thomas is moving in this direction is well
    worth noting.

            7.State Medicaid Update. Following the NGA conference, the New Hampshire and
    Missouri Governors have indicated a strong interest in pushing a quick and positive resolution to
    their proposed Medicaid waivers. Both have requested waivers as part of their application under
    the new CHIP program, and both have proposed provider taxes as financing mechanisms that are
    holding up their final approval. Earlier this week, Governor Carnahan and his staff met with
    representatives from DPC, OMB, HHS, and Intergovernmental Affairs. The Governor
    expressed his frustration with HHS's lack of clarity about the problems with his proposal. He
    did, however, seem quite satisfied with the conclusion of the meeting which resulted in an
    agreement to have more formal and expedited discussions about the provider tax issue.
    Governor Shaheen and her staff have also been working on a children's health proposal that
    includes a creative financing mechanism to raise the Federal/state match through funds from a
    non-profit insurer (Blue Cross/Blue Shield). Although HHS's counsels office initially has
    indicated that this financing structure is unworkable, Nancy-Ann DeParle has indicated her desire
    to work with the state to see if there is any way to make this kind of an arrangement work. The
    Governor's office was quite pleased to see the commitment of the White House and the
    Department to do everything possible to be responsive.


