RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:27-FEB-1998 16:52:49.00

    SUBJECT:   weekly

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D57]MAIL43432675K.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504370040000010A020100000002050000005924000000020000CC5D1B5DC2752ABOBD492B
                                                                       Automated Records Management SystelT'
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


    Medicare Commission Meeting. Next Friday, the Medicare Commission will hold its first
    meeting. Because of the media's preoccupation with entitlement reform, just the fact that the
    process is starting is likely to generate a good deal of attention. To help illustrate your
    commitment to addressing long-term financing challenges facing the Medicare program, you are
    scheduled to meet with the Commission to thank them for their willingness to serve the day
    before the first meeting (Thursday). During that meeting, you may want to also discuss how this
    effort builds on your commitment recent commitment to develop consensus on needed Social
    Security reforms. You may also want to ask the Commission to work together in the same
    bipartisan fashion that produced the unprecedented Medicare reforms in the balanced budget
    agreement. To date, Senator Breaux and Congressman Thomas are still working out a
    somewhat uneasy leadership collaboration for the Commission. They have solicited suggestions
    from all Commission inembers as to how best to structure the process and set the agenda. Their
    first meeting will likely be devoted to approving the structure and laws that govern the process as
    well as setting the desired goals and outcomes. As a result, little news, other than the fact that
    commission is meeting, is likely (or desired) to come out at the beginning of the process.


     Patients' Bill of Rights Legislation. Next week, the Democratic Leadership is expected to
     unveil its version of the patients' bill of rights. The legislation will go beyond the consumer bill
     of rights recommended by your Quality Commission and is likely to include several provisions
     that are extremely controversial, particularly with the business community. These include an
     enforcement provision that allows remedies through state courts as well as new benefits
     requirements which would direct all health plans to cover all clinical trials, all services associated
     with mastectomies, and breast reconstructive surgery. The business community will no doubt
     argue that these provisions will lead to uncontrollable litigation, higher premiums, and more
     uninsured Americans. These claims are overblown and there will be studies to counter these
     charges, it is highly likely that the well-financed business efforts will have an impact on the
     perception of this view in Congress. Because this version of the bill of rights stands little to no
    -chance of passing this Congress, our challenge is to indicate support for the legislation without
     offering a complete endorsement. We will be meeting with the Democratic Leadership to
     construct a communications and legislative strategy before the bill is unveiled. In addition,
     Senator D' Amato is expected to introduce legislation as an amendment on the Senate floor that
     will require health plans to cover a number of new benefits, including requiring medically
     necessary services following a mastectomy, breast reconstructive surgery, and requiring patients
     to be able to get a second opinion on cancer. Although elite validators and the business
     community despise these benefits, we expect they will likely pass the Senate.
                                                                                Hex- ump        "


Conversation with Bill Thomas. Next week, Larry Stein and Chris Jennings are scheduled to
meet with Congressman Thomas on a range of health issues, including the Medicare
Commission, the patients' bill of rights, and other health reform initiatives. In a conversation
this week with Chris, Mr. Thomas indicated his desire to set up a meeting (along with Dennis
Hastert, who has been asked by the Speaker to coordinate the Republican House consumer
protections'strategy). Notably, Mr. Thomas said that the current Republican "go slow" strategy
on the patients' bill of rights is not serving the interests of either the House Republicans or the
Administration. He believes that the House Republicans need to move quickly to develop an
alternative to the DingelllKennedy and Norwood legislation. Although his vision of consumer
protections may be problematic, we view this as positive news. However, bipartisan efforts in
this regard will be made more difficult by the fact that some House Democrats, particular Mr.
Gephardt, continue to be more interested in using this as a political issue rather than passing
legislation.

Mr. Thomas also indicated his desire to work closely with the Administration on the Medicare
Commission. In particular, he will work with us to assure that various communications about the
Commission do not catch the other side off guard. He also indicated that he would work with
Republicans to encourage good behavior in the upcoming White House meeting, but wanted a
commitment that we were not planning any surprise announcements. Finally, Mr. Thomas
indicated his desire to open discussions on a range of major health reforms in the upcoming
months. He is particularly interested in: (1) considering capping the tax deductions for health
care plans and using the savings to help provide coverage to low-income workers; (2) designing
significant insurance reforms including community rating; and (3) mandating that individuals
buy health insurance. He recognizes that these aggressive options will not be well received,
particularly coming from a high ranking Republican. However, he wanted us to be aware of his
interest in this area and says he is seriously willing to push this agenda (and all of the ensuing
controversy) if we are willing to engage on this front as well. It is clearly premature to take any
action on this front, but the fact that Mr. Thomas is moving in this direction is well worth noting.

State Medicaid Update. Following the NGA conference, the New Hampshire and Missouri
Governors have indicated a strong interest in pushing a quick and positive resolution to their
proposed Medicaid waivers. Both have requested waivers as part of their application under the
new CHIP program, and both have proposed provider taxes as financing mechanisms that are
holding up their final approval. Earlier this week, Governor Carnahan and his staff met with
representatives from DPC, OMB, HHS, and Intergovernmental Affairs. The Governor
expressed his frustration with HHS's lack of clarity about the problems with his proposal. He
did, however, seem quite satisfied with the conclusion ofthe meeting which resulted in an
agreement to have more formal and expedited discussions about the provider tax issue.
Governor Shaheen and her staffhave also been working on a children's health proposal that
includes a creative financing mechanism to raise the Federal/state match through funds from a
non-profit insurer (Blue Cross/Blue Shield). Although HHS's counsels office initially has
indicated that this financing structure is unworkable, Nancy-Ann DeParle has indicated her desire
to work with the state to see if there is any way to make this kind of an arrangement work. The
Governor's office was quite pleased to see the commitment of the White House and the
Department to do everything possible to be responsive.
