RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-MAR-1998 20:18:20.00

SUBJECT:     Food Safety

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 03/03/98 8:00PM

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS ON THE SAFETY OF IMPORTED FOOD ACT
THE ROOSEVELT ROOM
March 4, 1998

        Acknowledgments: VPOTUS; Sen. Barbara Mikulski; Sen. Edward Kennedy; Rep.
Anna Eshoo; Rep. Frank Pallone; Rep. Lynn Rivers

        Last night I was in New York, celebrating the heroes who have made
this the American Century.  I spoke about one of my heroes, Franklin
Roosevelt.  But itn,s Theodore Roosevelt that IG,m thinking of today.  At
the beginning of this century, he made an unprecedented national
commitment to protecting American families from unsafe food.  That was at
the dawn of the Industrial Age--when Americans were moving from the farm
to the city, and for the first time buying their food from others rather
than growing it themselves. Theodore Roosevelt ensured Americans that
their food was safe--whoever grew it and wherever it was grown.

        Now, as we move into the 21st century, the health and well being
and productivity of Americans remain our top priorities.  But the world is
changing, and it takes new methods to protect enduring values. The Vice
President has just told you what our administration has done to modernize
food safety. AmericaO,s food supply is the safest in the world, but we
have yet to meet all the challenges of the global marketplace.

         It wasnO,t long ago that you could walk through the produce
section of your local grocery store, look around, and find no more than a
dozen items that would be there all year.   Today, thanks to the global
food market, itO,s not uncommon to find up to 400 varieties, and almost
all of them year-round.   You can get summer squash during the chill of
winter, and winter squash in the heat of summer. And the farmer who grows
those vegetables no longer lives down the road. That farmer might live
across the ocean or on the other side of the world.   It is more important
than ever that the food we eat be inspected and protected from orchard to
fruit basket, from farm to table--wherever that orchard or farm may be.
And when the families that join us here today--and the millions of
Americans like them--walk through the produce section, they shouldn[~,t
have to worry where that food comes from or whether itU,s safe.

           Food safety is part of the basic contract between American consumers and


their government. Any food that doesnD,t meet our clear and strict
standards shouldnD,t make it into the United States. ItO,s that simple.

        Last fall, I announced a new initiative to ensure that fruits and
vegetables coming from abroad are every bit as safe as those grown here at
home--and to halt at the border or at the dock any food that fails to meet
our strict standards.  I also directed the Secretary of Health and Human
Services and the Secretary of Agriculture to report on our progress in
improving food safety at home and abroad.   ItO,s a good, thorough report.
And it underscores my belief that Congress must now take the next,
important step to protect AmericaD,s families from food-borne illness.   I
call on Congress to enact the bill introduced by Senator Mikulski in the
Senate and Representatives Eshoo and Pallone in the House. This is not a
political issue--it is not a Democratic or Republican issue--it is simply
an issue whose time has come.  By giving the FDA the tools and the
technology it needs to do its job, this legislation gives American
families the extra protection they deserve.

        Theodore Roosevelt recognized nearly a century ago that new
challenges demand a new kind of government--in this case, a government
that demands responsibility from industry and producers but also provides
clearer, stricter standards of safety--and provides the means to enforce
them. American families enjoy the greatest bounty and variety of food in
the world. We must ensure that when they walk the aisles of their
supermarket to buy food for their children, they can continue to do so
with confidence and without fear.  Acting now will strengthen America
today--and throughout the 21st century.


