RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-MAR-1998 19:29:49.00

SUBJECT:   food safety q's and a's

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a draft q&a that has been signed off by USTR, USDA, HHS, and OMB.
Thanks, Mary==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D82]MAIL436038167.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750430E240000010A02010000000205000000DD7B00000002000077F15A8EDCD42COCB21A5B
lA3B9C468615360C3FDA4F6AF2A5FEBOB0633ACOBll10B8D281C4376542FC6004263278BAD6491
                                                                      Hex.Dump Conve\'Slon


            Q&A for Presidential Announcement on Food Safety Legislation
            and Report to Ensure Safety of Imported Fruits and Vegetables
                                   March 3,1998

Q:   What did the President announce today?

A:   The President announced the introduction offood safety legislation in the Senate that will
     pennit the FDA to deny the entry of imports of fruits, vegetables, or other food from any
     foreign country or facility that does not meet U.S. food safety requirements or otherwise
     achieve the level of protection required. The legislation also will pennit the FDA to
     consider halting imports from countries or facilities that do not allow FDA inspections to
     occur in addition to other factors. This legislation was introduced in the House in
     November oflast year. The President also announced the release of a report that
     provides a roadmap for the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in cooperation with
     the Secretary of Agriculture and the agricultural community, to develop guidance on good
     agricultural and good manufacturing practices for any fruits and vegetables that are sold
     in the U.S. market.

Q:   Why is your Administration proposing these actions?

A:   There have been dramatic changes in the produce department of the grocery store. Thirty
     years ago, most produce sections only had around a dozen items year round, increasing to
     as many as 50 in the summer. Today, the chances are that there are 400 or more items in
     the produce section and they are there all year round. Last year, 38 percent of the fruit
     and 12 percent of the vegetables Americans ate were imported.

     We have changed as well. Americans are eating more fresh fruits and vegetables than
     ever before, and our nation's health experts tell us we will live longer, better quality lives
     as a result. Our environment is also changing. We are finding "new" exotic bugs such
     as cyclospora and E. coli 0157:H7 on our food that once were not there.

     We must ensure that these changes do not increase the risk to American consumers of
     foodbome illnesses. Although raw produce -- including that imported from foreign
     countries -- is now safe, experts have suggested ways to make further improvements, and
     my actions accord with their recommendations.

Q:   Are you saying that imported produce is unsafe?




                                               1
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


A:   There is no data indicating that imported fruits and vegetables are more unsafe than
     domestic products. But some recent outbreaks of foodborne illness have been traced
     back to imports, and it is important to ensure that foreign fruits and vegetables meet U.S.
     food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. The steps
     we are taking today are adding additional layers of protection. We am making sure that
     there are no gaps in our food safety system -- that high safety standards apply to imported
     as well as domestic food, and to fruits and vegetables as well as to meat, poultry, and
     seafood.

Q:   What steps is the Administration taking to improve food safety?

A:   Last year we launched a new Presidential food safety initiative, and added more than $40
     million to the FY '98 budget. With that money we started putting in place new
     science-based preventive systems to improve the safety of seafood, meat and poultry and
     began work on a new early warning system to help detect and respond to outbreaks of
     foodborne illness. This year, our budget seeks an even more substantial increase in
     resources, $101 million, to improve food safety. The resources will go to a variety of
     initiatives, including: giving FDA authority to prevent the import of produce from
     countries without safety precautions equivalent to our own; hiring FDA inspectors to
     improve the safety of our nation's fruits and vegetables, both domestic and imported;
     developing new ways for federal inspectors to detect food-borne illnesses in meat and
     poultry and determine the source of contamination; improving educational outreach on
     proper food handling; and further expanding our early warning system and strengthening
     state surveillance activities for foodborne illnesses.


     Questions on Food Safety Legislation

Q:   What does the legislation do?

A:   This legislation provides the FDA with the authority to refuse imports of any food
     regulated by the FDA, including fruits and vegetables, from any country or facility that
     does not meet U.S. food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection
     required. The legislation also will permit the FDA to consider halting imports from
     countries or facilities that do not allow FDA inspections to occur in addition to other
     factors.

Q:   How is this different from current authority?

A:   This legislation increases the FDA authority to refuse imports for foods from countries or
     facilities that do not meet U.S. food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of
     protection required. do not have food safety systems that are comparable to those in this
     country. Currently, the FDA can only refuse imports after inspection or testing at the

                                              2
                                                                       Hex-Dump Convarsion

     border when the FDA determines that the food appears to be unsafe or otherwise violates
     U.S. law. This new legislation would give FDA the authority to ensure that food
     products entering this country were grown and processed in conditions that meet U.S.
     food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. This
     authority is necessary because experience has shown that inspection and testing of
     products at the border may not be sufficient in all cases to ensure the safety of food
     products. It may be necessary to identify and address the source of potential
     contamination to ensure that products offered for sale in the United States meet domestic
     food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. FDA
     currently has such authority with respect to domestic production.

Q:   Does this legislation give FDA additional authority to inspect in other countries?

A:   No. Foreign inspections will continue to be done by consent. In making the
     determination that a food offered for import into the U.S. is adulterated, the legislation
     does permit the Secretary to consider whether FDA has been refused access to conduct
     inspection of the places where such food has been prepared, packed or held. The
     Secretary may deny importation to foods from such location or establishment on the basis
     of such refusal and other relevant factors. Given that denying reasonable access is one
     factor in making that determination, the exporting country and the food establishment
     both have an incentive to allow such access.


Q:   There is concern that this legislation is the first step in providing FDA with the
     authority to inspect farms in the U.S. Is that next?

A:   No. Under current law, FDA has authority to inspect establishments where food is
     prepared, packed, or held, which would include places where food is grown, such as
     domestic farms. While such inspections are infrequent, FDA has taken action against a
     U.S. farmer when a violation occurs. When FDA is involved in a food safety problem
     that is found to originate on a farm, the agency's focus generally is on identifying the
     source of the problem and removing the unsafe food from commerce.

Q.   Doesn't this legislation impose trade barriers to food imports at a time when you are
     saying you want to lower them? Is this legislation consistent with free trade?

A.   This legislation is consistent with free trade and all our treaty obligations. We have no
     obligation to open our borders to imports that pose a greater risk than domestic products
     to American consumers. As long as we are not imposing any greater requirements on
     foreign countries -- as long as we are only holding them to our standards -- we are acting
     consistently with our trade policy and international obligations.

Q:   What makes you think this new legislation can be effective? Do you seriously think


                                              3
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

     you are going to be able to put FDA inspectors in every country abroad?

A:   The new legislation would give the FDA the same kind of responsibility that the USDA
     already has for meat and poultry. The USDA system has worked well to ensure that
     unsafe meat and poultry, produced in foreign facilities which do not provide the same
     level of protection that is required in domestic facilities, will not be imported. The FDA
     should be able to run a similarly effective system that ensures food safety and prevents
     imports from any foreign country or facility that does not meet u.S. food safety
     requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required.

     Questions Related to Report on Guidance

Q:   Why has this report been prepared?

A:   On October 2, 1997, President Clinton announced an initiative to ensure the safety of
     imported and domestic fruits and vegetables which included the development of good
     agricultural practices and good manufacturing practices for fresh fruits and vegetables
     that would include ways to prevent potential contamination. This voluntary guidance
     will address potential food safety problems throughout the production and distribution
     system and help ensure the sanitation and safety practices of all those seeking to sell
     produce in the U.S. market. The guidance effort will include outreach and education,
     reflecting the Administration's commitment to direct resources toward improving food
     safety and the availability of food safety technologies.

     The President requested this status report about progress made toward providing industry
     with good agricultural and good manufacturing practices guidance for fresh fruits and
     vegetables. It also presents a plan for outreach to the domestic and foreign industry.

Q:   When you say good agricultural practices (GAPs) and good manufacturing
     practices (GMPs), are you talking about mandatory GAPs and GMPs?

A:   No, the GAP/GMP guidance is voluntary. We are developing this science-based
     guidance with input from USDA, states, the agricultural community, industry, academia,
     consumers, and organizations representing the foreign produce industry. The guidance is
     intended for appropriate use by growers, packers, manufacturers of minimally processed
     products and produce distributors. Because the guidance is broad-based, it may be used,
     where applicable, by both the domestic and foreign produce industry to reduce the risk of
     microbial contamination.

Q:   Does the report give a timeline for publishing the guidance?

A:   Yes, we anticipate publishing the draft guidance in late March with a 75-day comment
     period. We anticipate that the guidance will be available in final form in October 1998.


                                              4
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


Q:   Is the development of commodity-specific guidance part of the future plans
     discussed in the report?
A:   FDA, along with USDA, will oversee a task force to assist in developing additional
     guidance if sound science, risk, or experience with general guidance indicate a need.
     Any additional guidance will be developed through an open process involving industry,
     consumers, academia, states, and public health professionals, including the FDA public
     review and comment process.


Q:   What kind of technical assistance and educational outreach is envisioned and who will provide
     it?

A:   The plan involves a broad input from both the public and private sectors, including
     public health agencies, domestic and foreign industry groups, international organizations,
     and academia. In the U.S., the Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension
     Service within the USDA has lead responsibility for developing the outreach and
     education strategy for domestic growers.

     USDA and FDA intend to work with appropriate U.S. and foreign government public
                                                    health and agriculture agencies, as
                                                    well as with industry groups, to
                                                    provide technical assistance needed to
                                                   support application of the guidance
                                                    by the produce industry overseas.
                                                   The State Department will help
                                                   facilitate visits to foreign countries for
                                                    this purpose. We also anticipate
                                                    that international organizations, such
                                                    as FAOjWHO and subsidiary
                                                   organizations (e.g., Pan American
                                                    Health Organization), and exporter
                                                    organizations will playa role in
                                                    international activities.

Q:   The Directive calls for "an acceleration" offood safety research.   What is being
     "accelerated"?

A:   Research is an essential element of the President's initiative. Food safety research focuses
     on development of rapid detection methods for pathogens and of prevention and

                                                5
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Comers/on
     intervention strategies that may be used to reduce the risk of microbial foodborne illness.
     A coordinated, interagency fresh produce research plan will be available in early 1998.

            Additional Information:       In September, 1997, FDA initiated an interagency
            meeting to review ongoing research on fresh fruits and vegetables. Since that
            time, several interagency meetings involving USDA, CDC, EPA, the Department
            of Defense, NIH, and others have been held, as well as a public meeting to
            discuss what research is being conducted by industry and academia and to identify
            research priorities. In coordinating the fresh produce research programs of all
            the agencies, four primary research areas have been identified. They are:
            improved detection methods, resistance to traditional preservation techniques,
            antibiotic resistance, and development of intervention strategies. Research is
            currently underway in all of these areas.

            Research and characterization of risks is a high priority. Research on preventive
            technologies and intervention strategies to reduce or eliminate microbial
            contamination is a specific major area of focus. An interagency research plan has
            been developed and will be available in early 1998.


Q:   We have heard about the development of Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) and
     Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs) for fresh fruits and vegetables, both of
     which are intended to help domestic growers meet the U.S. level of protection.
     What are they and how will they be applied to foreign growers?

A:   When the President announced an initiative to ensure the safety of imported and domestic
     fruits and vegetables on October 2, 1997, he directed the Secretary of Health and Human
     Services and the Secretary of Agriculture, to work together in close cooperation with the
     agricultural community, to issue guidance on good agricultural and manufacturing
     practices (GAPs and GMPs).

     This voluntary, science-based guidance can be used by both domestic and foreign fresh
     fruit and vegetable producers to help ensure the safety of their produce. The voluntary
     guidance will be consistent with U.S. trade rights and obligations and will not impose
     unnecessary or unequal restrictions or barriers on either domestic or foreign producers.

Q:   We expected the report at the beginning of January? Why the delay?

A:   The fresh fruits and vegetables initiative is highly complex because it may not only
     impact the domestic industry, but also the foreign produce industry. Our main concern
     was that the report accurately portray the good agricultural and good manufacturing
     practices guidance and the planned support activities (technical assistance, education,

                                              6
                                                                                  Hex-Dump COnl'<;I$;on
     outreach, evaluation, and research) and public participation in the process. The timing of
     the report in no way affects that the guidance will be available in October of this year, as
     the President announced.

     This may come up because the deadline for the importation of Guatemalan
     raspberries is March 15_

Q:   What is the status of Guatemalan raspberries?

A:   On November 20, 1997, FDA notified the Guatemalans that fresh raspberries will not be
     allowed entry into the U.S. during the period of March 15 through August 15, 1998.
     However, if the source of Cyclospora contamination is found and corrected or if
     intervention technologies are developed that will prevent cyc1osporiasis in humans, we
     will revisit this decision. FDA has assisted Guatemala in seeking a resolution to this
     problem since 1996. In fact, we currently have people in Guatemala reviewing the
     interventions they have reportedly put in place.




                                               7
            Hex-D~rJ1p Conversion




8


