RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Melissa N. Benton ( CN=Melissa N. Benton/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-MAR-1998 14:28:22.00

SUBJECT:   LABOR Report on HR2327 Drive for Teen Employment Act

TO: Anne H. Lewis ( CN=Anne H. Lewis/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Alice E. Shuffield ( CN=Alice E. Shuffield/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

Debra J. Bond ( CN=Debra J. Bond/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below is OMB's proposed markup of the letter.  Please notify me ASAP
whether you have any problems with the proposed revisions.

See edits/comments below (highlighted in blue). One comment up front.    We
found it difficult to oppose this bill given states license 16 and 17 year
olds to drive anytime of the day or even all day.  Under this proposal,
teens would be limited to drive a maximum of approximately 2.5 hours per
day / 8 hours per week during the summer (while schools out) and 1 hour
per day / 3.6 hours per week during the school year.  The legislation
seems limited.
---------------------- Forwarded by Debra J. Bond/OMB/EOP on 03/04/98
12:12 PM ---------------------------

DRAFT

The Honorable Cass Ballenger
Chairman
Subcommittee on Workforce Protections
Committee on Economic and Educational
   Opportunities
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C.  20515

Dear Chairman Ballenger:

I am writing to provide you with the views of the Department of Labor on
H.R. 2327. The Department is concerned that the result of this
legislation would increase the number of automobile-related injuries and
deaths caused by very young and inexperienced drivers on the job.   (Note:
This sentence is moved from the next paragraph.)

The Department of Labor is committed to helping this nation's youth find
meaningful and productive employment; however, while protecting their


safety and health on the job must not be placed at risk by such employment
   H.R. 2327 would substantially weaken existing restrictions on the
employment of 16- and 17-year olds in jobs that require driving.  It will
increase the on-the-job driving time of young workers which is currently
only allowed for "·incidental and occasional" driving. The Department is
concerned that the result of this legislation would increase the number of
automobile-related injuries and deaths caused by very young and
inexperienced drivers on the job.

The existing rules governing occupational driving for young workers, set
forth in Hazardous Occupations Order No.2 (HO 2), prohibit anyone under
the age of 18 from being employed to drive--with limited exception for
"incidental and occasional" driving of automobiles (and trucks weighing
6,000 pounds or less) under certain circumstances.  H.R. 2327 would greatly
 expand the exemption and allow teenagers--many of whom will have just
been licensed to drive--to spend as much as one-fifth of their workweek
behind the wheel on public roads and highways.  Sixteen and 17-year old
youths could be employed to deliver pizzas or to shuttle passengers to and
from hotels, for example, as long as they did not exceed the 20 percent
limitation.

Although we realize that the proposed legislation seeks to reduce the risk
to teen drivers and the public by limiting their driving to a 50-mile
radius, we do not believe this offers sufficient protection.    (This
sentence is moved to later in the letter.)   Statistics show that 80
percent of fatal accidents occur less than 25 miles from home.    (Comment:
This statistic is irrelevant to the legislation.   The statistic represents
all drivers and has no barring on the differences between youth and adult
drivers. Also, the legislation's 50 mile radius deals with the place of
employment, not the home.)

The need to protect young workers in an increasingly fast-paced highly
competitive workplace is as real as when the child labor laws were first
enacted. According to a National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) study, automobile crashes are the number one cause of
occupational deaths for 16- and 17-year olds despite the fact that most
occupational driving is prohibited for this age group.  QUESTION: Does
this statistic represent fatalities of 16-17 year old drivers or does it
include 16/17 year old fatalities as a passenger or being struck by a car
- - example a bike messenger? If it represents all 16/17 year olds
regardless of whether they were driving then the statistic should be
caveated. This question also applies to the next sentence. At least a
third of all occupational fatalities involving young workers involved
driving. Newly licensed drivers are especially at risk, with higher crash
rates than any other age group. The American Automobile Association, the
National Safety Council and the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety
publicly support greater restrictions on teenage driving.  The Department
of Labor is aware of several examples of 16- and 17-year olds injured or
killed while driving.

Although we realize that the proposed legislation seeks to reduce the risk
to teen drivers and the public by limiting their driving to a 50-mile
radius, we do not believe this offers sufficient protection. The
Department opposes the legislative changes proposed in H.R. 2327. We
believe that responsible public policy dictates that any modifications to
weaken child labor protections be carefully weighed against the potential
harm to the health and safety of these young workers.

However, wWe have heard recognize the concerns raised concerns about the
current regulations from those who advocate more driving by teenage


workers. We are currently exploring ways to make the H02 restrictions
more flexible looking at the regulations to determine if there are changes
that can be made to accommodate these concerns without jeopardizing the
safety and well-being of these young workers.  Rather than changing the
restrictions through legislation, we would prefer to modify the
regulations to reflect our experience and changes in the workplace.

The Office of Management and Budget advises that there is no objection to
the submission of this report to the Congress from the standpoint of the
Administration's program.

                                           Sincerely,



                                           Alexis M. Herman


cc; Major Owens, Ranking Minority Member


