RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-MAR-1998 11:03:37.00

SUBJECT:   Decision on high performance bonus guidance

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=E1ena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a decision paper on an issue we need your guidance on. We
need to resolve this before HHS can release its high performance bonus
guidance, so it would be great if you could look at this today.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D97]MAIL442924268.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D1070000010A02010000000205000000F642000000020000423D455C087C1186F59462
1B582617EIIA4C78A46AA427BAFOD6589A402092B2ED252C5E621D2F2F635D718F519DE508C06A
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

      Proposal to Exempt Certain Separate State Programs From T ANF Data Report

Issue: As part of our guidance on the high-performance bonus, HHS proposes that we agree to
consider exceptions on a case-by-case basis to our requirement that states must report the same
extens.ive data on people in separate state programs as for T ANF.

The high-performance bonus guidance to states has not yet gone out because HHS has been
consulting with states on technical issues. As part of states' general objection to the data
requirements on separate state programs, states have raised one particularly compelling issue.
For certain separate state programs, the required reporting may not be feasible. The best
example is a state EITC, such as Wisconsin has. HHS argues that this requirement may
convince a state like Wisconsin that it should not even bother to compete for the bonus.

States only have contact with recipients of an EITC annually, via their tax returns, rather than
monthly as our reporting requires. In addition, states argue that they will not know most of the
required detailed information about these recipients -- e.g., whether they get HUD rent subsidies
or transportation assistance, the amount of food stamps and child support received each month,
highest education level by teen parents, hours of work per week in each of 12 T ANF work
activities, and detailed citizenship information on each person in the family. (See attached
listing of data requirements for more information.)

Therefore, HHS proposes that we inform states in the guidance that we will entertain limited
requests from states that they report more limited data on a given separate state program if the
data required is not feasible to collect.

Background: To discourage states from using their authority to create separate state programs
to get around the work requirements, we included a number of critical features in the T ANF
NPRM. In the chart below, they are listed in the row "Discourage Bifurcation".

In addition, we required states to report the same data for SSP programs as for T ANF programs if
they wish to:
        (I) receive a high performance bonus;
        (ii) qualify for work participation caseload reduction credit; or
        (iii) be considered for a reduction in the penalty for failing to meet the work participation
        requirements. The HPB draft guidance repeats this requirement.




                 Summary of Tools for Accountability of Separate State Programs (SSP)
                                                                            . Hex-Dump Conversion
 Our Goals        Caseload Reduction Credit         Penalty             High Performance Bonus
 on SSP                                             Reduction

 Discourage       Require states to include SSP     Can't get relief    If exclusion of SSP causes a
 Bifurcation      caseload in CRC calculation       unless you          state to score higher, HHS
                  (unless state has a good          prove you did       could add SSP cases to the
                  argument to omit, like EITC)      not bifurcate       HPB performance measures

 Report           T ANF reg states that a state must report the same data for SSP programs as
 same data        T ANF programs if it wishes to:
 on SSP           (I) receive a high performance bonus;
 recipients as    (ii) qualify for work participation caseload reduction credit; or
 on TANF          (iii) be considered for a reduction in the penalty for failing to meet the work
 recipients       participation requirements.

                 The HPB draft guidance repeats this requirement.

During negotiations on the rule, DPC did not focus as extensively on data requirements as it did
on policies to discourage bifurcation, partly because HHS readily agreed to the former.

Our goals in requiring extensive data reporting were to (a) enable us to understand the
characteristics of the populations being served in separate state programs, both for program
integrity and evaluation purposes; (b) treat separate state programs the same as T ANF programs,
both to reinforce our belief that separate state programs are really part ofTANF, and arguably to
make it onerous for states to establish them.

(It is important to note that, while states especially object to the data requirements for separate
state programs, they are complaining about all the data requirements, including the general
T ANF requirements. HHS believes that they can defend all or most of the data required for
T ANF as being required by the statute, which is not the case for separate state programs. This is
an issue we will have to address in the final rule. However, we need to address this now
because states are currently making decisions about whether to compete for the high-performance
bonus.)

Decision to be Made:
We must decide whether we will continue to insist on all the data now required, either because
we believe this data is critical for us to evaluate TANF, or because we believe it is a legitimate
way to discourage separate state programs. We recommend Option 1.

Option 1: Agree to HHS's proposal that we will consider exceptions to the data reporting
requirements for separate state programs on a case-by-case basis. When full data submission is
not possible, we would require the state to submit the data they do have with a full explanation of
why the complete data set is not possible.

Pro:
      Responds moderately to a reasonable request by the states.
                                                                               Hex-Dump Cor,\'~~6 )"1

      WelHHS would retain control over the ultimate decision in any individual case.
      Our key goal is to prevent states from gutting the work requirements or time limits by
       segregating certain people in separate state programs. This goal is best served by the
       requirements we were able to impose to discourage bifurcation -- eligibility for the
       caseload reduction credit, penalty reduction, and high-performance bonus. Requiring
       states to report reams of data in order to discourage them from establishing these
       programs is a much clumsier way to accomplish this goal. This is particularly true if we
       only exempt programs like EITC, which we favor, and which go only to working T ANF
       recipients, and by definition can't be used to segregate those who are not working.

Con:
      We are caving in too hastily on our hard-won victory on separate state programs by
       agreeing to treat these programs di fferently than T ANF programs. A concession here
       will set us up to make further, more damaging concessions as we develop the final T ANF
       rule, such as removing more critical requirements on separate state programs; or
       removing data requirements on T ANF programs.

Note: To be consistent, if we agree to this provision for the purpose of the high-performance
bonus, we would make the same concession on our requirement that states report this same data
for the caseload reduction credit and to qualifY for penalty relief.

Option 2: Exempt EITC programs from the full data reporting requirements, but impose a
lesser, more reasonable requirement on such programs.

Pro:
      Provides a clean solution to the problem by singling out EITC, a strategy to support work
       that we favor.

Con:
      Option 1 may give us more control over the outcome, and would allow us to be involved
       in HHS 's decision-making on these matters.
      While HHS is using EITC as its best example, they believe that there are other separate
       state programs that could make similar compelling arguments.

Option 3:   Continue current policy.

Pro:
      Preserves victory we have won to date.

Con:
      Takes the unreasonable position that states may not compete for the high-performance
       bonus if they have an EITC, or else must undertake burdensome reporting requirements.
                          Data Reporting Required by T ANF NPRM                  Hex-Dump Conv5rsion y

The T ANF rule requires states to report on 178 data elements for T ANF families, and 160 data
elements for separate state program families. States must report monthly data on a quarterly
basis. Examples of data required for T ANF families are below. There is an asterisk next to
items where data is not required for separate state program families.

      Composition of family
       Whether person is a new applicant*
      One or two parent family
      Whether the family benefits from public housing or HUD or other rent subsidy
      Whether family gets Medicaid
      How much the family gets in food stamps, including wage subsidy under food stamps
      How much the family gets in subsidized child care, including the size of any disregard
      How much child support the family got that month
      Amount of family's cash resources that month
      Amount of educational benefits, employment services, work subsidies, transportation
       assistance, home heating assistance, contributions to IDA's that month
      Amount family was sanctioned, and which of 10 possible reasons
      Whether person was in a waiver control or experimental group
      Whether the family is exempt from the 5-year time limit, and why*
      Head of household's date of birth, SSN, race, gender, marital status
      Whether person in family is getting federal disability benefits, and what type
      For teen parents, highest education level attained
      Data on citizenship, including whether a naturalized citizen; legal permanent resident
       who has worked 40 quarters in the U.S.; alien who is a veteran; refugee; Cuban or Haitian
       entrant; eligible for T ANF per state option
      Number of months used toward the 5-year time limit to date in own state; in other states*
      Whether employed; which of 18 categories (e.g., exempt because child under 1;
       sanctioned; tribal exemption; child under 6 and no child care available; caring for a
       disabled child; temporary good cause domestic violence waiver; state waiver; teen
       head-of-household going to school; working but not at minimum participation
       requirements)
      Average number of hours per week of work participation in each of the statute's work
       activities: unsubsidized employment, subsidized employment, work experience,
       on-the-job training, job search/job readiness, community service, voc ed, job skills
       training directly related to employment, etc.
      Amount of earned and unearned income, including EITC, Social Security payments, SSI,
       workers' compensation, and other (e.g., veterans benefits, unemployment compensation,
       housing subsidy, public assistance, educational grants/scholarships/loans
      For up to 10 children in the family: relationship in family and to head of household, date
       of birth, SSN, race, gender, receipt of disability benefits, citizenship, whether cooperating
       with child support, unearned income such as SSI, type of child care* (licensed or not;
       in-home, family, group home, center-based; by relative or non-relative), amount charged
       for child care* and hours provided in the month*
      For the month after someone leaves TANF, 53 data elements, including many of the
       above, plus reason for case closure
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

       For separate state programs, most of the above, plus whether the family got TANF
        assistance within the prior 6 months


