RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-MAR-1998 10:09:15.00

SUBJECT:   food safety q&a

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is an updated q&a.    FDA and USTR say that they would never halt
imports based solely on a refusal to allow inspections; it would only be
considered with other factors.   USTR says it would cause quite a problem
if we gave the impression that imports could be halted for that reason
alone.   So, in the 2 places where you deleted "in addition to other
factors,"   FDA and USTR came up with the following sentence:    "The
legislation. permits FDA to consider refusal of inspection as a factor in
halting imports from a facility or country." Let me know, Mary ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D72)MAIL480193267.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504318050000010A02010000000205000000883E000000020000970C63D37D535CF706B453
760A8622620D8441B9B61042D6139C3DE36217A9F7BCD7C2D5E887D67C96C1F6C1A57729DD085B
                                                                               Hex-Dump Con\'a~sl:ln

            Q&A for Presidential Announcement on Food Safety Legislation
            and Report to Ensure Safety of Imported Fruits and Vegetables
                       .           March 3, 1998

Q:   What did the President announce today?

A:   The President announced the introduction of food safety legislation in the Senate that will
     ensure that the FDA denies the entry of imports of fruits, vegetables, or other food from
     any foreign country or facility that does not meet U.S. food safety requirements or
     otherwise achieve the level of protection required. The legislation also permits FDA to
     consider refusal of inspection as a factor in halting imports from a facility or country.
     This legislation was introduced in the House in November oflast year. The President
     also announced the release of a report on how the Secretary of Health and Human
     Services, in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture and the agricultural
     community, will develop guidance on good agricultural and good manufacturing practices
     for any fruits and vegetables that are sold in the u.S. market.

Q:   Why is your Administration proposing these actions?

A:   There have been dramatic changes in the produce department of the grocery store. Thirty
     years ago, most produce sections only had around a dozen items year round, increasing to
     as many as 50 in the summer. Today, the chances are that there are 400 or more items in
     the produce section and they are there all year round. Last year, 38 percent of the fruit
     and 12 percent of the vegetables Americans ate were imported.

     We have changed as well. Americans are eating more fresh fruits and vegetables than
     ever before, and our nation's health experts tell us we will live longer, better quality lives
     as a result. Our environment is also changing. We are finding "new" exotic bugs such
     as cyclospora and E. coli 0157:H7 on our food that once were not there.

     We must ensure that these changes do not increase the risk to American consumers of
     foodbome illnesses. Although raw produce -- including that imported from foreign
     countries -- is now safe, experts have suggested ways to make further improvements, and
     my actions accord with their recommendations.

Q:   Are you saying that imported produce is unsafe?
                                                                                Hex-Dump Convarsion

A:   There is no data indicating that imported fruits and vegetables are more unsafe than
     domestic products. But some recent outbreaks of foodborne illness have been traced
     back to imports, and it is important to ensure that foreign fruits and vegetables meet U.S.
     food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. The steps
     we are taking today are adding additional layers of protection. We am making sure that
     there are no gaps in our food safety system -- that high safety standards apply to imported
     as well as domestic food, and to fruits and vegetables as well as to meat, poultry, and
     seafood.

Q:   What steps is the Administration taking to improve food safety?

A:   Last year we launched a new Presidential food safety initiative, and added more than $40
     million to the FY '98 budget. With that money we started putting in place new
     science-based preventive systems to improve the safety of seafood, meat and poultry and
     began work on a new early warning system to heIp detect and respond to outbreaks of
     foodborne illness. This year, our budget seeks an even more substantial increase in
     resources, $101 million, to improve food safety. The resources will go to a variety of
     initiatives, including: giving FDA authority to prevent the import of produce from
     countries without safety precautions equivalent to our own; hiring FDA inspectors to
     improve the safety of our nation's fruits and vegetables, both domestic and imported;
     developing new ways for federal inspectors to detect food-borne illnesses in meat and
     poultry and determine the source of contamination; improving educational outreach on
     proper food handling; and further expanding our early warning system and strengthening
     state surveillance activities for foodborne illnesses.


     Questions on Food Safety Legislation

Q:   What does the legislation do?

A:   This legislation helps ensure that the FDA will refuse imports of any food regulated by
     the FDA, including fruits and vegetables, from any country or facility that does not meet
     U.S. food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. The
     legislation also permits FDA to consider refusal of inspection as a factor in halting
     imports from a facility or country.

Q:   How is this different from current authority?

A:   This legislation increases the FDA's authority to refuse imports for foods from countries
     or facilities that do not meet U.S. food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level
     of protection required. Currently, the FDA can only refuse imports after inspection or
     testing at the border when the FDA determines that the food appears to be unsafe or
     otherwise violates U.S. law. This new legislation will enable the FDA to ensure that


                                              2




                                                                    Automated Records ManaClement Systerr
                                                                            1Jr"vr'I.     r·· ... ('., "," .. ~

     food products entering this country were grown and processed in conditions that meet
     U.S. food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. This
     authority is necessary because experience has shown that inspection and testing of
     products at the border may not be sufficient in all cases to ensure the safety of food
     products. It may be necessary to identify and address the source of potential
     contamination to ensure that products offered for sale in the United States meet domestic
     food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. FDA
     currently has such authority with respect to domestic production.

Q:   Does this legislation give FDA additional authority to inspect in other countries?

A:   No. Foreign inspections will continue to be done by consent. In making the
     determination that a food offered for import into the U.S. is adulterated, the legislation
     does permit the Secretary to consider whether FDA has been refused access to conduct
     inspection of the places where such food has been prepared, packed or held. The
     Secretary may deny importation to foods from such location or establishment on the basis
     of such refusal and other relevant factors. Because denying reasonable access is one
     factor in making that determination, the exporting country and the food establishment
     both have a strong incentive to allow such access.


Q:   There is concern that this legislation is the first step in providing FDA with the
     authority to inspect farms in the U.S. Is that next?

A:   Under current law, FDA already has authority to inspect establishments where food is
     prepared, packed, or held, which would include places where food is grown, such as
     domestic farms. While such inspections are infrequent, FDA has taken action against a
     U.S. farmer when a violation occurs. When FDA is involved in a food safety problem
     that is found to originate on a farm, the agency's focus generally is on identifying the
     source of the problem and removing the unsafe food from commerce.

Q.   Doesn't this legislation impose trade barriers to food imports at a time when you are
     saying you want to lower them? Is this legislation consistent with free trade?

A.   This legislation is consistent with free trade and all our treaty obligations. We have no
     obligation to open our borders to imports that pose a greater risk than domestic products
     to American consumers. As long as we are not imposing any greater requirements on
     foreign countries -- as long as we are only holding them to our standards -- we are acting
     consistently with our trade policy and international obligations.

Q:   What makes you think this new legislation can be effective? Do you seriously think
     you are going to be able to put FDA inspectors in every country abroad?



                                              3
                                                                           Hex-Dum~ CWIf2;S:O"
A:   The new legislation would give the FDA the same kind of responsibility that the USDA
     already has for meat and poultry, The USDA system has worked well to ensure that
     unsafe meat and poultry, produced in foreign facilities which do not provide the same
     level of protection that is required in domestic facilities, will not be imported, The FDA
     should be able to run a similarly effective system that ensures food safety and prevents
     imports from any foreign country or facility that does not meet U,S, food safety
     requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required,

     Questions Related to Report on Guidance

Q:   Why has this report been prepared?

A:   On October 2, 1997, President Clinton announced an initiative to ensure the safety of
     imported and domestic fruits and vegetables which included the development of good
     agricultural practices and good manufacturing practices for fresh fruits and vegetables
     that would include ways to prevent potential contamination. This voluntary guidance
     will address potential food safety problems throughout the production and distribution
     system and help ensure the sanitation and safety practices of all those seeking to sell
     produce in the U.S. market. The guidance effort will include outreach and education,
     reflecting the Administration's commitment to direct resources toward improving food
     safety and the availability of food safety technologies.

     The President requested this status report about progress made toward providing industry
     with good agricultural and good manufacturing practices guidance for fresh fruits and
     vegetables. It also presents a plan for outreach to the domestic and foreign industry.

Q:   When you say good agricultural practices (GAPs) and good manufacturing
     practices (GMPs), are you talking about mandatory GAPs and GMPs?

A:   No, the GAP/GMP guidance is voluntary. We are developing this science-based
     guidance with input from USDA, states, the agricultural community, industry, academia,
     consumers, and organizations representing the foreign produce industry. The guidance is
     intended for appropriate use by growers, packers, manufacturers of minimally processed
     products and produce distributors. Because the guidance is broad-based, it may be used,
     where applicable, by both the domestic and foreign produce industry to reduce the risk of
     microbial contamination.

Q:   Does the report give a timeline for publishing the guidance?

A:   Yes, we anticipate publishing the draft guidance in late March with a 75-day comment
     period. We anticipate that the guidance will be available in final form in October 1998.




                                             4
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


     This may come up because the deadline for the importation of Guatemalan
     raspberries is March 15_

Q:   What is the status of the Guatemalan raspberries?

A:   On November 20,1997, FDA notified the Guatemalans that fresh raspberries will not be
     allowed entry into the U.S. during the period of March 15 through August 15, 1998.
     However, if the source of Cyclospora contamination is found and corrected or if
     intervention technologies are developed that will prevent cyclosporiasis in humans, we
     will revisit this decision. FDA has assisted Guatemala in seeking a resolution to this
     problem since 1996. In fact, we currently have people in Guatemala reviewing the
     interventions they have reportedly put in place.




                                            5


