 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1998 19:44:53.00

 SUBJECT:   Tuesday's child care event

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Neera and I want to bring you up-to-date on the planning for TuesdayD,s
 child care event with the President in Connecticut.

 The event will include a brief tour of a child care facility in
 Bridgeport, CT (Housatonic Community College) and a speech.  The speaking
 program will include the Mayor of Bridgeport, Senator Dodd, a parent-, and
 the President.

 The PresidentO,s remarks will focus on his child care initiative, and
 include two policy announcements:

(1)   Release of a new HHS report that summarizes State plans to
administer the Child Care and Development Block Grant. The message of this
report is that States have innovative plans to spend their current CCDBG
dollars, and with those dollars, cannot meet the need.

 (2)  Issuing a Presidential Directive on Steps to improve
federally-sponsored child care in the executive branch by (1) ensuring
proper background checks of child care workers in federally-sponsored
child care; (2) achieving 100 percent national accreditation of eligible,
federally-sponsored child care; (3) exploring partnerships among federal
agencies and with the private sectors to improve child care quality and
affordability; and (4) ensuring that all federal workers have full
information on child care benefits and options available to them.
Q: Should the President sign the directive at this event? Our instinct is
that he should not sign.

ChildrenD,s Defense Fund (CDF) plans to release its compelling
state-by-state on Tuesday, and leak it to Bob Pear for a story on Tuesday.
Q: Should you leak any of the POTUS' announcements?

In terms of process, the directive is in OMB clearance (via Mac Reed) for
comment by the agencies by COB tomorrow (Friday).  Staff Secretary plans
to circulate the directive around the West Wing tomorrow for any comment.
Attached is the latest draft for your review.  Also, HHS and GSA are
developing lists for heads up calls to MOC and/or Congressional staff to
be made on Monday.

With respect to the HHS report, we are working to develop a solid


 executive summary (which HHS seems incapable of doing)   for release.=================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D99]MAIL43885736Y.026 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF57504332050000010A02010000000205000000ADID000000020000CBC061394A344137F6E4ED
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT 315198


                                                Date


MEMORANDUM FOR HEADS OF FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES

SUBJECT:               Steps to Improve Federally-Sponsored Child Care


        Now more than ever, America's working parents struggle to balance their obligations to
be good workers -- and their more important obligations to be good parents. By choice or by
financial necessity, millions of Americans rely on child care to care for their children for part of
each day. Parents deserve to know that their children are safe and nurtured in child care.

        One of my highest priorities is to make child care better, safer, and more affordable.
That is why my balanced budget includes the largest single investment in child care in our
nation's history, and proposes specific measures to improve child care quality.

         As a supplier of child care and as an employer that must recruit and retain a strong
workforce, the federal government should lead the way in improving child care. I am proud that
our military has developed one of the finest child care delivery systems in the world, and that the
Department of Defense, at my request, is sharing its expertise with the public and private sectors.
 Still, we need to do more. The executive branch of the federal government operates 1,030 child
care centers -- 788 by the military, 109 by the General Services Administration, and 133 by other
federal departments. In addition, the military sponsors nearly 10,000 professional family child
care providers. In total, approximately 215,000 children are in our care.

        Today, I am directing my Cabinet to take significant new steps to improve the quality of
federally-sponsored child care in the executive branch by (I) ensuring proper background checks
of workers in federally-sponsored child care; (II) achieving one hundred percent accreditation of
eligible, federally-sponsored child care; (III) exploring partnerships among federal agencies and
with the private sectors to improve child care quality and affordability; and (IV) ensuring that all
federal workers have full information on child care benefits and options available to them.

        First, I want to ensure that all child care workers in federally-sponsored centers undergo
thorough background checks to make sure they are they are suitable for the job. The vast
majority of child care providers are caring people who have dedicated their lives to teaching and
nurturing children. But one tragedy in child care is too many, and criminal and civil background
checks are important ways to know that the people caring for our children are fit for this
responsibility. Background checks for workers in federally-sponsored child care facilities are
required under federal law, and I want to guarantee that they are being administered appropriately
and in a timely fashion. In addition, I want to make sure that we know as much as we can about
what is happening in federally-sponsored child care by stepping up data collection and
maintenance.                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

        Therefore, today, I am directing Administrator of the General Services Administration
David Barram to report to me within ninety days with a plan to ensure complete and timely
background checks, to the fullest extent possible, for all child care workers in non-military,
federally-sponsored child care settings. Administrator Barram will also report to me on plans to
improve data collection and maintenance concerning non-military, federally-sponsored child
care. Agencies with oversight of non-military child care settings will report to the Administrator
within sixty days on this matter.

        Second, I believe that all eligible, federally-sponsored child care should achieve
nationally-recognized, independent accreditation to ensure and maintain quality. Currently, 76
percent of military child care centers are accredited and 35 percent of other federally-sponsored
child care centers in the executive branch are accredited. By the year 2000, I want one hundred
percent to be accredited.

        Today, therefore, I am directing Secretary of Defense William Cohen and Administrator
David Barram to report to me within ninety days with a plan to ensure, to the fullest extent
possible, independent, nationally-recognized accreditation of all eligible, federally-sponsored
child care by the year 2000. Agencies with oversight of non-military child care settings will
report to the Administrator within sixty days on this matter.

       Third, partnerships among federal agencies and with the private sector are an increasingly
important way to maximize existing resources and improve child care.

        Today, therefore, I am directing Administrator Barram to work with the heads of all
federal departments and agencies to explore opportunities for collaboration both within
government and with the private sector to leverage resources to improve child care quality and
affordability in federally-sponsored settings.

         Finally, I believe that employers have a reponsibility to make sure that their workers have
full information on child care and options available to them at the national, state, and local levels.

        Today, therefore, I am directing Director of the Office of Personnel Management Janice
Lachance to ensure that to the fullest extent possible all federal workers receive full information
about child care benefits available to them on the federal, state, and local levels, including
information on resource and referral networks, available tax credits such as the Child and
Dependent Care Tax Credits and Child Tax Credit, as well as public subsidies. Director
Lachance will also host a nationwide summit designed to showcase model public and private
sector solutions to child care needs.


