RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-MAR-1998 22:39:00.00

SUBJECT:   weekly

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)      )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D6)MAIL45842846J.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BA040000010A02010000000205000000632F000000020000C2AIBED9D2626D3736D501
36CA6F8E52D62AF65A20D7A94DAOA3241Fl15ABAOFII0E41AOF63AB9AF817B95680E70439BOOC5
B20E04E5CB4C98E28B61942831CCBC9B98C4531F5501B7E093B5283734EC21703A448657795080
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


 CBO Analysis of Medicare Buy-in_ Late this week, the Congressional Budget Office released
 extremely positive estimates on your Medicare buy-in proposal. CBO's estimates confirm that
 your proposal will have no notable impact on the Medicare Trust Fund and projects even greater
 participation and lower costs than HCFA initially estimated. In fact, they assume that your
 proposal would provide coverage for 410,000 individuals, 33 percent higher than our internal
 estimates. Moreover, they projected that beneficiaries would have to pay less in premiums after
 they tum 65 to cover the costs of the buy-in. We are hopeful that these estimates will give a
 needed shot in the arm to this policy and its perceived viablity. Also, we believe that Senator
 Moynihan will likely introduce this legislation sometime in mid-March.

  AMA Speech. On Monday, you are scheduled to give a speech to the American Medical
. Association (AM A) to outline your shared goals of enhancing quality in the health care system,
  stopping children from smoking, and providing health insurance for as many children as possible.
   This is also a great opportunity to thank the AMA for their extremely helpful efforts to confirm
  the new Surgeon General, Dr. David Satcher. This will be the first time you have addressed the
  AMA and the first time that any President has spoken to the AMA since Ronald Reagan did in
  1983. You will release a new patients' bill of rights survey prepared by the Domestic Policy
  Council that documents how many states have enacted the consumer protections recommended
  by your Quality Commission. Specifically, the survey will report that more than forty-three
  states have enacted one or more of the consumer protection laws, and that more than twenty-five
  of these states have Republican Governors. The report will also point out, however, that state
  laws are limited in scope and they have no jurisdiction over 140 million Americans.

 The AMA strongly supports Federal legislation, including one provision that is particularly
 objectionable to the business community -- the enforcement of these standards through the
 removal of current ERISA barriers that in essence prohibit litigation. As controversial as
 this provision is, it is now included in the Norwood bill, which the AMA endorses, as well
 as the Democratic leadership bill, which will likely be introduced later this week. The
 Administration has yet to take a position on the best way to enforce the patient protections,
 primarily because the ensuing business opposition resulting from such an endorsement
 might prove so great as to stop any patients' rights legislation from becoming law. This
 speech will lead off a number of quality events that will take place this week, including the final
·report from your Quality Commission and the likely introduction of Democratic patients' bill of
 rights outlined below.

 Final Quality Commission Meeting and Report. On Thursday and Friday, your Quality
 Commission is scheduled to release its final report on the second part of its charge: how best to
 develop and use health care standards for both businesses and consumers. There are currently
 numerous quality problems in the health care system, such as avoidable errors, over utilization
 and variation in services. For example, each year 80,000 women undergo unnecessary
 hysterectomies and more than one million Americans are injured as a result of avoidable errors.
 The Commission is proposing a Quality Council to develop goals to improve health care quality
 and strategies to achieve these goals.'They are also suggesting a Quality Forum, comprised of
 private and public sector purchasers, that will develop a consistent set of health quality measures,
 so that meaningful comparisons can be made. This aspect of the Commission has not received
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
as much attention as the consumer bill of rights but many health policy experts as well as a range
of providers, consumers, and insurers believe it may have the greatest potential to positively
affect the health care system. Since this is the final report of an unusually successful
Commission, the media is clearly interested in their findings. However, because ofthe
Democratic Leadership's intention to introduce a bill next week and because of scheduling
conflicts we have yet to make a final decision as to whether it is advisable to hold a Presidential
event around the release of the report.

Democratic Patients' Bill of Rights Legislation Bill. Next Thursday, the Democratic
leadership is scheduling an event to unveil their patient protections bill. This proposed
legislation will receive a broad-based support among Democrats in the House and less diverse
support in the Senate. However, it includes a number of controversial enforcement provisions
that allow remedies through state courts as well as new benefits requirements which would direct
all health plans to cover all clinical trials, include a mandatory point-of-service option, pay for all
services associated with mastectomies, and breast reconstructive surgery. The business
community will no doubt argue that these provisions will lead to uncontrollable litigation, higher
premiums, and more uninsured Americans. While you will clearly want to be supportive of this
Democratic effort, this legislation stands little chance of passing the Congress and as such we
may want to be careful about our positioning as it is introduced. In particular, too strong a
signal of support may significantly accentuate the business community's opposition to this
legislation and alienate particular Republican members such as Congressman Hastert, Thomas,
Bilirakis, Bliley, and others who have indicated a desire to work with us on the consumer bill of
rights. We will be holding an internal meeting on Monday to develop a recommendation on
how you should respond to this bill.

Update on Kyl Private Contracting Issue. Last week, Nancy-Ann DeParle testified before the
Senate Finance Committee on Senator Kyl's legislation on private contracting. Senator Kyl's
bill makes it much easier for physicians to privately contract out with Medicare beneficiaries,
thus allowing these providers to charge whatever amount they desired to these beneficiaries.
With the exception of Senator Kyl and United Seniors, a right wing aging group, all of the
witnesses in the hearing were extremely critical of this legislation. They particularly focused on
concerns that this legislation has great potential to increase fraud and to limit access to needed
services. Moreover, Chairman Roth castigated the United Seniors Organization for scaring
hundreds of thousands of older Americans into incorrectly believing that they could not obtain a
service or pay for a service that is not covered by Medicare. Most policy and political analysts,
including the AMA -- one of the Kyl amendment's most ardent supporters -- believe that this
legislation is dead at least for this Congress.

Missouri Update. Early next week, the Department of Health and Human Services will be
meeting with Governor Carnahan's staff to get resolution on the approval of their children's
health insurance proposal. This follows Governor Carnahan's request to you and the Vice
President for a rapid response to their proposal. They have previously insisted on retaining a
financing mechanism that HHS interpreted to be illegal. Although this new proposal is
extremely encouraging, HCF A has not finalized its review to ensure that the financing approach
is acceptable. Having said this, this development is extremely encouraging in that it represents
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
Missouri's implicit acknowledgment that its provider taxes are illegal. Of course, they would
never explicitly say this and have made clear that this proposal should have no bearing on how
the Federal government should enforce their past reliance on their provider taxes.
These negotiations are at an extremely delicate phase. As such, we are advising all within the
Administration to remain quiet until they have been resolved.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 073 - FOLDER -007


[03/06/1998 - 03/11/1998]


