RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-MAR-1998 20:40:56.00

SUBJECT:   Speech Idea

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Crime Team:

This needs work and is not an entirely coherent document. Nonetheless, it
represents one day of my racking my brain for next week's proposed crime
speech.  Please let me know your reactions, ideas, comments.  I'll think
about it some more over the weekend.

Jose'

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D89)MAIL40436746H.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043CC040000010A020100000002050000008B450000000200007A8619EC3ClllDE12El140
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


              -DRAFT            CRIME          SPEECH           FOR       NAAG-


I. Intro -- sharply declining crime rates

       -- Phenomenal success over the past 5 years in reducing crime, especially violent crime.

       -- We've all read about New York's wonderful success. Crime is down across the board,
       and murders are down a staggering 66%. But crime rates are falling across the nation,
       too. Two-thirds of American cities w/populations of more than 200,000 have
       experienced double digit drops in their homicide rate.

       -- All in all violent and property crime have reached their lowest levels in a generation
       (since the early 70s).

      -- Other good news: the crack epidemic seems to have run its course; gun and juvenile
      violence -- while still very serious problems -- have started to ebb; domestic violence and
      violence against women is being taken more seriously than ever; and in key cities in the
      West and Midwest meth is being nipped in the bud ..

       -- Most importantly, though, Americans are starting to feel safer ... to have hope ... to work
       together to keep the crime rates dropping.

      -- Certainly the most talked about example of the magnitude of our progress on crime is
      the turnaround that has occurred in New York City. While New York's crime problems
      certainly were never representative of what most cities were experiencing, they became a
      national symbol of our inability to control crime and violence. And in 1990, when more
      than 2,200 persons were murdered in New York City, many Americans began to believe
      that such high levels of crime could never again be reversed.

      -- But by cutting crime for five years in a row -- and in so many parts of the country -- we
      have dramatically reversed the trend of skyrocketing crime rates. And by reducing the
      number of murders in New York from more than 2,200 to less than 770, we have once
      and for all shattered the perception that crime couldn't be reduced or had to be tolerated
      in any community.

II. Ending Washington's dead-end, right-left debate on crime

      -- As a former AG and Governor, I ran for President calling for an end to Washington's
      dead-end debate on crime. For years, as crime reached new heights in the mid-eighties
      and early nineties, Washington continued to argue between the virtues of punishment vs.
      prevention -- between the need for more prisons as opposed to more jobs.

      -- While Washington debated these false choices, crack cocaine and gun-related youth
      violence ravaged our streets, and the murder rate soared all across the country. Those of
      what we could on every front and with the resources we had: first we increased law
      enforcement, then we built more prisons. We tried to stop the flow of guns and drugs to
      the street, but we were overwhelmed.

      -- That's why, when I came to Washington, I reached out to state and local leaders, to law
      enforcement, to community groups, and asked for their input. They wanted help on all
      fronts -- more police, tougher punishments, better prevention and an end to the arms war
      on our streets and in our schools. So we enacted a Crime Bill like no other before it, and
      I believe made a difference. It did not in and of itself solve the crime problem, but it
      gave communities that were fighting back some of the tools and support that they needed.

      -- But less than a year after we had passed historic crime legislation, Washington was all
      too willing to return to its old ways. Immediately there were plans to undo our
      community policing program, to repeal the Brady Bill and Assault Weapons Ban, and to
      gut prevention programs that had already been agreed to.

      -- Fortunately, most of these efforts failed. But it does make clear that Washington
      hasn't changed its ways -- and that it is more interested in partisan politics than declining
      crime rates. Already, the left and right are joining forces to kill important juvenile crime
      legislation before the Congress.

      -- The debate between tough and soft -- between jobs and prisons -- should be over once
      and for all. Over the past 5 year, we've built x number of prison cells and enacted the
      toughest anti-crime laws ever (three strikes). We've also invested in the American
      people and created 15 million more jobs. And even though we've significantly reduced
      crime, crime, drugs and guns and the lethal violence that accompanies them remain
      serious problems -- and at higher levels than through most of our country's history.

III. What Washington should be learning from declining crime rates?

      A. It's not enough to be toughn you've got to be tough and smart

      -- It's not enough to pass tough sentences, hire more police and build more prisons.
      Tough penalties need to be targeted and enforced. They need to be focused on the most
      serious repeat offenders. Studies have shown time and time again that a small
      percentage of criminals commit the most violent acts, and a small percentage of drug
      users consume most of the drugs. We need tough, long sentences; adequate prison
      space; and targeted enforcement to reach these offenders.

      -- But it is also not enough to focus on the worst criminals. We need a whole range of
      smarter punishments for less serious offenders. We can't continue to ignore those
      criminals that bring down the quality oflife in our neighborhoods and make them into
      breeding grounds for more serious crimes. And we can't continue to wait until they
      develop into more serious criminals before we act. Instead, we need to enforce "zero
prostitution, retail drug dealing). This make neighborhoods more crime resistant.

-- Mark Kleiman of UCLA has pointed out to me how smart punishment -- or "targeted
deterrence or zero tolerance" as he calls it -- was a key part of reducing youth violence in
Boston. Let me explain:

       -- The Boston Youth Gun Project identified some 1,300 juveniles in 60 to 70
       gangs that were responsible for virtually all of the youth homicides in Boston.
       These gangs were called in -- one by one -- and given the message that state, local
       and federal law enforcement agencies were working together, knew who the gangs
       were, knew they were engaged in illegal activities, would be watching them and --
       most importantly -- wouldn't tolerate any shootings or stabbings. Anybody who
       broke the rules, would feel the force of law from the combined law enforcement
       effort until they gave up and turned in their guns ..

       ~-Sure enough, two gangs broke the rules and were taken down by law
       enforcement. Afterwards, law enforcement sent the message to every other gang
       that they would meet the same fate. It became possible for the gangs to disarm,
       and most of them did. One gang held out, and they were made an example of.
       They were targeted for stiff federal firearms sentences.

       -- This type of smart, targeted punishment is neither easy nor intuitive, but it is
       very effective. Under this approach in Boston, no juvenile was killed with a
       firearm for two and a half years.

-- Lesson to be learned: the resources of police and the criminal justice system can't
deliver sanctions for every violation of every law by every person. But they can deliver
effective "zero tolerance" for specified violations. That should be our goal with a whole
range of criminal and unacceptable behaviors.

B. It's not enough to simply react to crime -- we need to solve crime problems and
preventing crimes from happening in the first place.

-- More police working with members of the community -- in more and more police
departments -- has made it clear that we can never go back to simply reacting to crime.
The trend must be in the opposite direction: prosecutors, courts, corrections and others in
the criminal justice system must embrace community policing's two central tenets: (1)
community engagement; and (2) problem solving.

(1) Community engagement means much more than simply improving the police
relationship with the community. That's just community or public relations.
Community engagement means actually working with the community to identify and
solve crime problems. That means engaging the public in the co-production of safety.
solutions and evaluating them. This means fundamentally changing the way police and
other criminal justice services are delivered. It requires changing criminal justice
organizations from the inside out -- allowing those nearest to the problem to develop
tailer-made solutions.

-- In New York City, the police developed COM STAT -- a computer mapping program to
help identify crime problems and develop solutions. (more)

-- In Chicago, community police are trained to approach every crime problem by
identifying the victim, the perpetrator and the location -- and then developing lasting
solutions that remove at least two of these from the situation. (more)

-- In San Diego, when police attempts to shut down a prostitution ring were thwarted by
overcrowded jails and insufficient sanctions, community police encouraged local business
owners to seek restraining orders that carried hefty fines if violated. The prostitutes
disappeared. (more)

-- And in Portland, OR, local businesses and community residents from one
neighborhood demanded that the District Attorney dedicate a prosecutor to work in their
neighborhood. As a result of this successful effort, Portland has now established
"Neighborhood DAs" throughout the county. (more)

-- Problem solving sounds simple, but it's nothing less than revolutionary.

C. The real "root cause" of crime is not poverty, race, etc., but community breakdown

-- Last August, a ground breaking study about crime in Chicago neighborhoods was
released. The study -- which has been going on for 8 years, in hundreds of
neighborhoods and is still in the works -- revealed that the single biggest predictor of
violent crime rates was not poverty, unemployment, race, etc., but a strong sense of
community. Neighborhoods -- black or white, rich or poor -- that shared common values
which people were willing to reinforce had crime rates 40 percent below those of other
neighborhoods.

-- This challenges the conventional (liberal) wisdom that crime rates are mainly
attributable to aggregate demographics that can be addressed through government
programs. Rather, it shows that crime is a function informal social controls that are
exercised by members of the community -- and that government programs are a poor
substitute for these controls and shared values.

[- This also comports w/James Q. Wilson's argument that we have an innate "moral
sense," driven in large part by sympathy for our fellow man -- but especially for children.
And that this, too, is an important a social control as anything. ??]

       -- More than thirty years after Kitty Genovese's murder, the American people have tipped
       the scales of justice back in their favor. They have shown that they're once again willing
       to accept the responsibility of making their communities safe -- and we in government
       must make sure we do the same.

       -- We need to work together to promote smart, tough policies that reinforce what's rights
       with laser-like focus. Great potential with respect to drugs and juvenile violence
       (coerced abstinence, Boston -- reducing crime in 5 cities with 25% of juvenile murders).

       -- We need to do more to promote community-based justice that seeks to solve crime
       problems and prevent crimes from happening in the first place. Community policing has
       started this revolution, but need to bring all aspects of the criminal justice system into
       fold -- prosecutors, courts, corrections. Maybe -- just as Bobby Kennedy helped promote
      'committees of young lawyers for civil rights in cities across the country -- we should
       promote the establishment of similar efforts to help communities solve crime problems.

       -- And finally, we need to ask ourselves what can we do to promote shared values in our
       communities. Because if we don't, make no mistake: no government program will be
       able to make up the difference.


