RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-MAR-1998 18:03:11.00

SUBJECT:   AGs

TO: Eleanor S. Parker ( CN=Eleanor S. Parker/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 03/11/98 6:00PM

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS TO THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF ATTORNEYS GENERAL
THE WASHINGTON COURTYARD HILTON
WASHINGTON, DC
March 12, 1998

Acknowledgments: AG Reno; AG Jim Doyle of Wisconsin, Chair of the NAAG.

        ItO,s a privilege to address my former colleagues.  I ran for
attorney general for the same reasons you did--to protect families and
consumers and to enforce the laws of my state.
I want to thank you for being strong allies of this administration on
everything from domestic violence to judicial appointments.  Your
leadership is important on all these fronts, and I applaud you for it.

        In a sense, you and I are still colleagues.  Because of the work
this administration has done, and the work you have done, today we stand
on the verge of one of the greatest public health achievements in
history--a historic triumph in our fight to protect AmericaO,s children
from the deadly threat of tobacco. Together weO,ve waged a great
struggle--in the courts, in the Congress, and anywhere our nationO,s
children have been targets of tobacco companiesC, mass-marketing schemes.
And thatO,s just about everywhere. The attorneys general know this,
because youD,ve been on the front lines.

         WeO,ve made great strides in just a few years.  But when youO,re
in the middle of a great struggle, itO,s difficult, sometimes, to see just
how far youO,ve come.   And thatO,s what IO,d like to do today.  First, to
look back--to consider why we ever took on tobacco companies in the first
place, in a fight so many people said was unwinnable.   And then I want to
look ahead--at what we can do to win that fight, and to ensure a
healthier, stronger America for our children, and all of us, in the 21st
century.

        Our nation is poised to enter the next century stronger than it
has been in decades. This is a great moment for America, a moment full of
opportunities to extend the promise of peace and prosperity, and to widen


the circle of opportunity.  It is a moment to ensure that our deepest
values endure in a century that will bring great change.

        Much of the next century' will belong to our children, and that is
why we have worked so tirelessly, these five years,   to raise them in
safety, health, and security. Our growing economy is lifting families off
the welfare rolls and into work.   Our zero tolerance policy has helped
keep guns and drugs out of schools. The V-chip and educational television
have helped parents strengthen the values and minds of our children.
WeD,ve worked to bring order and discipline to childrenO,s lives by
supporting community efforts like curfews and school uniforms and tougher
truancy laws.  And last year, we helped make sure that millions of
uninsured children get the medical coverage they deserve and the help they
need.

        This is a moment of great opportunity--to ride this powerful
momentum forward into the future.  And that· is why weD,ve challenged the
tobacco industry--one of the most powerful industries in America--to
fundamentally change the way it does business. The opportunity for change
is great. And the stakes could not be higher. At stake is what America
values most--its children. Their health, and their lives.

        Smoking kills more people every day than AIDS, alcohol, auto
accidents, murders, suicides, drugs and fires combined. Nearly 90 percent
of those smokers lit their first cigarette before they turned lB. ThatO,s
why David Kessler, the former FDA commissioner, called smoking a
O&pediatric disease.DB Today--and every day--3,000 children will light
their first cigarette.  1,000 of them will die prematurely because of it.

        This is a national epidemic, and a national tragedy, and for the
sake of our children we will wage this struggle until we win it for good.

        Thirty years ago, we were off to a good start.  In 1965, the
government began regulating tobacco advertisements directed primarily at
young people. We put health warning labels on cigarette packs. We made
it illegal to distribute free cigarettes to children. And in 1971, we
banned the broadcast of tobacco advertisements.

        But by 1979, cigarette companies were spending 50 percent more on
advertising and promotion than they did in 1967--even after the inflation
of the Seventies. The law said they couldnO,t advertise on television or
on the radio, but you couldnO,t escape the advertisements anywhere else.
Cigarette ads in our magazines. Cigarette ads in our sports centers.
Cigarette ads on our billboards--almost half the billboards in the
country. Tobacco became the most heavily advertised product in the
American economy.  In the early 1990s, Joe Camel alone had an advertising
budget of $75 million a year.  Joe Camel, after all this, was recognized
by more third graders than Mickey Mouse was.

         These advertisements have taken a deadly toll. Just last month,
the Journal of the American Medical Association concluded that
advertisements and promotions were even more crucial than peer pressure in
getting teens to start smoking. ThatO,s why tobacco companies spend about
$6 billion dollars a year on advertisements.

        And thatO,s why, more than five years ago, I launched a nationwide
effort to prevent tobacco companies from advertising to children, to
educate kids about the dangers of smoking, and to reduce childrenO,s
access to tobacco products. Working with the FDA, we made the law of the
land what was already the law in everyone of your states--no sale of


tobacco products to anyone under 18. And weD,ll ID anyone under 27 to
make sure teens arenD,t smoking.  ID,m very pleased that the courts last
year upheld the FDAD,s authority.

         The lawsuits you brought were as important or even more so--and
among the most important legal action taken in the history of our
country. Without the foresight of Michael Moore of Mississippi, and the
determination of Grant Woods of Arizona--and so many other attorneys
general who join us here today--the progress weD,ve made would be
unthinkable.   You put big tobacco on the stand in courtrooms across the
land.   You brought them to the bargaining table and extracted important
concessions. You raised awareness of tobaccoD,s tragic costs to our
economy and our children. Your work has been essential, and I applaud you
for it.

        If not for your efforts, we might have waited another thirty years
for the disturbing documents that confirmed our worst suspicions about the
tobacco industry.  For years, weD,ve known that cigarette makers study our
kidsD, habits and tastes, preying on them with targeted marketing. Joe
Camel T-shirts, CDD,s, Virginia Slims rock concerts, toy race-cars
emblazoned with tobacco company logos--the free give-aways tell the tale.
And just last year, some tobacco companies wanted to market what they
called a D&kiddie packD8 containing one or two cigarettes--sort of a
starter kit.

        As more and more documents are released, weD,re learning the whole
story.  In an internal document, one tobacco company proudly described its
brand as O&the brand of choice among teenagers.D8 Another described its
plan to flavor cigarettes with apples, honey, or Coca-Cola, because
D&itD,s a well-known fact that teenagers like sweet products.D8 And
another tobacco company memorandum put it even more bluntly.     D&The 14-24
age group,D8 it says, 0& ... represent tomorrowu, s cigarette business. :J8

        This avalanche of evidence is bringing down the walls of deceit.
Their conclusion is inescapable:  that America needs and Congress must
pass comprehensive tobacco legislation that gets the tobacco industry out
of the business of marketing cigarettes to our children.

        Thirty years of deception--and only Congress can bring it to an
end. Thirty years of manipulation--and only Congress can bring it to an
end.  And thirty years of deception and manipulation cannot be met with
even a day of delay.

        There are scarcely more than 60 days left in this legislative
session. The calendar tells us this is an election year, but the American
people tell us they want this to be a legislating year.  And Congress
should not go home until it passes comprehensive tobacco legislation that
protects our children.

        I have said I would support any comprehensive, bipartisan tobacco
legislation that meets five principles: it must raise the price of
cigarettes by up to $1.50 a pack over the next decade and impose tough
penalties on companies that continue to sell to kids; it must reaffirm the
FDAD,s authority to regulate tobacco products; it must get tobacco
companies out of the business of marketing to children; it must further
our other public health goals; and must protect tobacco farmers and their
communities.

        Today, Senators John Chafee and Tom Harkin are introducing the
first bill that meets these principles, and I strongly support it. The


 evidence is clearer than ever that strong and sweeping legislation will
 save lives. Today I am releasing a Treasury Department report that tells
 us, state by state, how many lives will be saved if Congress acts.    If
 Congress acts, we can cut teen smoking by almost half over the next five
 years.  If Congress acts, we can stop almost three million children from
 taking that first puff.   If Congress acts, we can prevent almost one
 million premature deaths.

         You and I know that in any legislation this important there will
 be many issues to work out, even among allies.  But I am confident that we
 will resolve any budget or spending issues. After all, this thirty-year
 struggle is not about money.  It is not about the size of the prize we can
 extract from the tobacco industry.  It is about fulfilling our
 responsibility to our children--our responsibility as parents, as a
 government, and as a country. The attorneys general have shown great
 courage and foresight in helping us get this far.  Today I urge to join me
 in taking the next, important step toward a healthier, stronger America in
 the 21st century.


