RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-MAR-1998 10:02:43.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D43]MAIL41947307B.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043CC040000010A020100000002050000002A280000000200000C797471FFDDCE27FE7A16
8941E15821ED04AE1F8D8516E1E14A3601D4B760D0772DF64CEC1557F4C88687C318F022B3994B
                                                                                    Hex-Dump ConverslOiI

,
                                             March 12, 1998


    MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

    FROM:          Bruce Reed
                   Elena Kagan
                   Chris Jennings

    SUBJECT:       Needle Exchange


            This memorandum addresses Administration options on needle exchange, with the
    congressional moratorium as needle exchange funding about to expire, the AIDS community will
    soon put increased pressure on the Administration to release federal funds for needle exchange
    programs. Members of your Advisory Council on AIDS are considering the possibility of using
    their meeting next week to take some dramatic action on the issue, such as calling on Secretary
    Shalala to resign unless she makes the certification necessary to allow federal funding. We,
    therefore, think that you should give immediate attention to this issue.

    Background

            For some years, Labor-HHS appropriations bill have allowed the use of federal funds for
    needle exchange programs but only if the Secretary certifies that such programs (1) decrease HIV
    transmission or (2) do not increase drug use. In the last appropriations bill, Congress prohibited
    the Secretary from making this certification until March 31, 1998. On that date, the Secretary
    once again will be able to release federal funds for needle exchange upon making the appropriate
    findings.

           (A separate and even more stringent statutory test governs the use of SAMHSA funds for
    needle exchange programs. These funds may not be used unless the Surgeon General finds that
    needle exchange programs (1) decrease HIV transmission and (2) also decrease drug use.
    Because no one believes that the available evidence can support the latter finding, the release of
    SAMHSA funds is not now at issue.)

            The Secretary already has found that needle exchange programs decrease HIV
    transmission; until now, however, she has not made a formal finding that these programs do not
    increase drug use. HHS scientists have been studying the current data carefully, and probably
    will recommend soon that the Secretary make this finding. Assuming they do so, the Secretary
    would like to issue the formal certification necessary to release federal funds. The ONDCP
    Director adamantly opposes this action, primarily on the ground that it "would weaken the
    anti-drug message." (See separate memo from General MCCaffrey.)
releasing federal funds for needle exchange programs. They believe that current scientific
evidence supports this action, and that only political considerations stand in its way. The law
enforcement community -- and probably a majority of the public -- would oppose the action
strongly. They believe that it would       -- and whatever the scientists say, ultimately increase --
illegal drug use.

Options

There are currently four options on needle exchange.

       1. Maintain the status quo. Under this option, we would continue to say that the
evidence is insufficient to find that needle exchange programs do not increase drug use. This
option would provoke the wrath of the AIDS community and the criticism of elite validators. It
would force us to defend against a change of moral cowardice. The option, however, would
allow us to avoid confrontation with Congress over needle exchange policy -- a          That we
almost certainly would lose and that could        great political cost.

         2. Make the necessary findings, but decline to release funds. Under this option, either
HHS scientists or the Secretary herself would make the            Findings,   The Administration
nonetheless would decline to release federal funds to needle exchange programs. We would
argue that such a change of policy requires the building of public consensus within the political
arena -- that this decision is not, in the end, solely scientific. Again, many in the AIDS and
public health communities will charge the Administration with a kind of moral bankruptcy,
arguing that if we know needle exchange saves lives (as the findings state), then we have no
justification for declining to support these programs. In addition, the option may encourage
Congress to legislate in this area -- for example, by placing a flat prohibition on needle exchange
funding on an appropriations bill or the ONDCP reauthorization. This option at least would
give a scientific      To needle exchange programs (thus encouraging local communities to fund
such programs on their own), and the AIDS community appears to prefer this compromise to any
other.

        3. Release federal funds for needle exchange, but only ifJocallaw enforcement
authorities approve the program. Under this option, HHS would make the requisite findings, but
release funds only to local communities where law enforcement officials sign on to the needle
exchange program. This added condition would         To insulate the Administration from the
charge that its policy will undermine law enforcement. Accordingly, the condition also might
stave off a confrontation with Congress on the needle exchange issue. The AIDS community,
however, would oppose the condition strenuously, believing that few law enforcement officials
would sign on to needle exchange programs and that the Administration's action would signal to
local communities that these programs raise a serious law enforcement issue.

       4. Release federal funds for needle exchange programs, as long as they are combined
with drug treatments. Under this option, the Administration would release funds to all
communities in which needle exchange programs are linked to drug treatment. The AIDS and
give us some answer to the charge that funding needle exchange condones illegal drug use. But
this option would touch off a battle with Congress, which would put many Democratic members
in a difficult position and almost certainly would result in reversal of the policy.

        HHS and the AIDS office strongly favor the fourth option; ONDCP favors the first. As
between the compromise approaches, the AIDS office believes that the AIDS community will
more readily accept the second option (findings without funding) than the third (law enforcement
sign-off). For similar reasons, HHS favors the second approach to the third. ONDCP has
indicated no preference among the compromise approach; General McCaffrey adamantly insists
that he needs to engage in a further review of the scientific evidence relating to needle exchange,
and that nothing should be done until he completes that process.

        DPC believes that both the first and fourth options are untenable. The fourth will subject
us to relentless criticism on law enforcement grounds and lead to the enactment of harmful
legislation (perhaps even prohibiting locally-funded needle exchange). The first would subject
us to equally relentless criticism on public health grounds and could chill the appropriate use
even oflocally-funded needle exchange programs. As between the compromise approaches, we
have a slight policy preference for the law enforcement officials sign-off, which would lead to
some federal financing of needle exchange, while acknowledging the legitimate interest of
law-enforcement officials -- and the potential value of their involvement -- in needle exchange
programs. But we believe that the findings-without-funding approach may have greater appeal
to people on both sides of the issue and thus offer a more stable base for continued dialogue and
compromise. We therefore recommend option two.

Option I:       Maintain the status quo

Option 2:       Make findings, but release no funds

Option 3:       Release funds with law enforcement sign-off

Option 4:       Release funds, assuming drug treatment programs

Let's discuss
,                                                                            Page 1 of 2


