RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-MAR-1998 14:38:57.00

SUBJECT:   Memo w/ BR's 2 edits

TO: Elena Kagan    CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D42]MAIL45253507K.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504307050000010A0201000000020500000096290000000200001C80B2EEBE4DFFAC4F78DA
32FF724518C439FB448B41E19862D3F70F45D923ADAC80908E292FCBEF514FOD57FE050088F149
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion




                                         March 12, 1998

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                      Bruce Reed
                           Elena Kagan
                           Chris Jennings

SUBJECT:                 Needle Exchange

        This memorandum addresses Administration options on needle exchange. With the
congressional moratorium on needle exchange funding about to expire, the AIDS community
will soon put increased pressure on the Administration to release federal funds for needle
exchange programs. Members of your Advisory Council on AIDS are considering the
possibility of using their meeting next week to take some dramatic action on the issue, such as
calling on Secretary Shalala to resign unless she makes the certification necessary to allow
federal funding. We therefore think that you should give immediate attention to this issue.

Background

        For some years, Labor-HHS appropriations bills have allowed the use of federal funds for
needle exchange programs ifbut only if the Secretary certifies that such programs (1) decrease
HIV transmission and (2) do not increase drug use. In the last appropriations bill, Congress
prohibited the Secretary from making this certification until March 31, 1998. On that date, the
Secretary once again will be able to release federal funds for needle exchange programs upon
making the appropriate findings.

       (A separate and even more stringent statutory test governs the use of SAMHSA funds for
needle exchange programs. These funds may not be used unless the Surgeon General finds that
needle exchange programs (1) decrease HIV transmission and (2) also decrease drug use.
Because no one believes that the available evidence can support the latter finding, the release of
SAMHSA funds is not now at issue.)

        The Secretary already has found that needle exchange programs decrease HIV
transmission; until now, however, she has not made a formal finding that these programs do not
increase drug use. HHS scientists have been studying the current data carefully, and probably
will recommend soon that the Secretary make this finding. Assuming they do so, the Secretary
would like to issue the formal certification necessary to release federal funds. The ONDCP
Director adamantly opposes this action, primarily on the ground that it would weaken the
anti-drug message. (See separate memo from General McCaffrey.)

        The AIDS community, public health community, and elite validators strongly support
releasing federal funds for needle exchange programs. They believe that current scientific
evidence supports this action, and that only political considerations stand in its way. The law
enforcement community -- and probably a majority of the public -- would oppose the action
strongly. They believe that it would condone -- and whatever the scientists say, ultimately'
increase -- illegal drug use.

Options

       There are currently four options on needle exchange.

        I. Maintain the status guo. Under this option, we would continue to say that the
evidence is currently insufficient to find that needle exchange programs do not increase drug use.
 This option would provoke the wrath of the AIDS community and the criticism of elite
validators. It would force us to defend against a change of moral cowardice. The optiori,
however, would allow us to avoid a confrontation with Congress over needle exchange policy --
a confrontation that we almost certainly would lose and that could inflict great political cost.

         2. Make the necessary findings, but decline to reiease funds. Under this option, either
HHS scientists or the Secretary herself would make the requisite findings, but the Administration
nonetheless would decline to release federal funds to needle exchange programs. We would
argue that such a change of policy requires the building of public consensus within the political
arena -~ that this decision is not, in the end, solely scientific. Again, many in the AIDS and
public health communities will charge the Administration with a kind of moral bankruptcy,
arguing that if we know needle exchange saves lives (as the findings state), then we have no
justification for declining to provide financial support to these programs. In addition, the option
may encourage Congress to legislate in this area -- for example, by placing a flat prohibition on
needle exchange funding on an appropriations bill or the ONDCP reauthorization. But this
option at least would give a scientific imprimatur to needle exchange programs (thus encouraging
local communities to fund such programs on their own), and the AIDS community appears to
prefer this compromise to any other.

        3. Release federal funds for needle exchange, but only iflocallaw enforcement
authorities approve the program. Under this option, HHS would make the requisite findings, but
release funds only to local communities where law enforcement officials sign on to the needle
exchange program. This added condition would help to insulate the Administration from the
charge that its policy will undermine law enforcement. Accordingly, the condition also might
help stave off a confrontation with Congress on the needle exchange issue. The AIDS
community, however, would oppose the condition strenuously, believing that few law
enforcement officials will sign on to needle exchange programs and that the Administration's
action will signal to local communities that these programs raise a serious law enforcement issue.

                                                                                                          3

                4. Release federal funds for needle exchange programs, as long as they are combined
        with drug treatment. Under this option, the Administration would release funds to all
        communities in which needle exchange programs are linked to drug treatment. The AIDS and
        public health communities would support this approach strongly, and the link to treatment would
        give us some answer to the charge that funding needle exchange condones illegal drug use. But
        this option would touch off a battlc with Congress, which wiIl put many Democratic members in
        a difficult position and almost certainly result in reversal of the policy.

                HHS and the AIDS office strongly favor the fourth option; ONDCP just as strongly
        favors the first. As between the two compromise approaches, the AIDS office believes that the
        AIDS community will more readily accept the second option (findings without funding) than the
        third option (law enforcement sign-off). For similar reasons, HHS favors the second approach
        to the third. ONDCP has indicated no preference among the compromise approaches; General
        McCaffrey adamantly insists that he needs to engage in a further review of the scientific evidence
        relating to needle exchange, and that nothing should be done until he completes that process.

                 DPC believes that both the first and fourth options are untenable. The fourth will subject
        us to relentless criticism on law enforcement grounds and lead to the enactment of harmful
        legislation (perhaps even prohibiting locally-funded needle exchange). The first would subject
        us to equally relentless criticism on public health grounds and could chill the appropriate use of
        even locally-funded needle exchange programs. As between the compromise approaches, we
        have a slight policy preference for the law enforcement sign-off, which would lead to some
        federal financing of needle exchange, while acknowledging the legitimate interest of
        law-enforcement officials -- and the potential value of their involvement -- in these programs.
        But we believe that the findings-without-funding approach may have greater appeal to people on
        both sides of the issue and thus offer a more stable base for continued dialogue and compromise.
         We therefore recommend option two.

        Option 1:       Maintain the status quo

        Option 2:       Make findings, but release no funds

        Option 3:       Release funds with law enforcement sign-off

        Option 4:       Release funds, assuming drug treatment programs

        Let's discuss
