RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:14-MAR-1998 09:57:14.00

SUBJECT:   Press paper

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D73)MAIL438263277.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504359040000010A020100000002050000001A28000000020000373218BI0652198BC95D4E
7C3E3230B177D3087A83D6E5784D5BFDA4BADCOE9C3EA6DACE93D366ADCOC3127F50B371E36801
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Convers,Oi

             PRESIDENT CLINTON CONVENES TOP LEADERS
     CHALLENGES NATION TO IMPROVE MATH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION
                           March 16th, 1998

President Clinton convened leaders from government, business, education, and the scientific
community to discuss how the nation should respond to recent findings from the Third
International Math and Science Study (TIMSS) that while U.S. 4th graders are near the first in
the world in science and above average in math, U.S. 12th graders lagged below the
international average in both subjects. The President called on the nation to move forward on
his bold plan to improve American education and issued new challenges to boost student
achievement in math and science. He also announced new on-line math and science help for
parents, teachers, and students.


A CHALLENGE TO IMPROVE MATH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION Improved math and
science is critical for preparing our students and nation for the 21st century and must be a
national priority. President Clinton challenged Governors, business leaders, universities,
schools, teachers, parents, and students to take the steps necessary to boost student achievement
in math and science.

Reducing out-of-field teaching. The President challenged states to reduce the percentage of
math and science teachers without a major or minor in their subject area. The average K-8th
grade math teacher takes only three undergraduate math courses. Twenty-eight percent of
secondary math teachers lack a major or minor in their subject area, as do 18% of secondary
science teachers and 55% of physics teachers.
Rigorous Tests for New Teachers. To help addr:ess this challenge, the President called on states
to require all new teachers of math and science to pass challenging tests of math or science
knowledge and teaching proficiency. With nearly half of our nation's teaching force to be
replaced over the next several years, raising standards of teaching and learning now can boost
the quality of our schools for decades.

A Call to Action for Schools, Students, and Parcnts. The President also challenged schools to
offer and students to take tough math and science courses for all students in middle school and
high school. Just a quarter of U.S. students take algebra before high school, and only 25% of
U.S. high school students take physics. He called on parents to insist on finding out how their
children are doing compared to national standards and international benchmarks; today, no
parent can find out how his or her son or daughter meets the international standards in TIMSS.
 The President called on the nation to take the steps necessary to boost student achievement in
math and science and encouraged young people with proficiency in math and science to
consider careers in teaching.

PRESIDENT CLINTON'S EDUCATION AGENDA: MAKING OUR ELEMENTARY AND
SECONDARY SCHOOLS THE FINEST IN THE WORLD These findings provide another
clear reminder of the importance of President Clinton's bold plan to improve American education
and boost student achievement in math, science, and other academic subjects.

Voluntary National Standards and Tests in Math and Reading . In his 1997 State of the Union
Address, President Clinton challenged every state to adopt high national standards and to test every
grade math testing can help make sure that middle school students are prepared to succeed in tough
math and science courses in high school. Voluntary national tests are being developed under the
control of the bipartisan, independent National Assessment Governing Board.

Smaller Classes with Well-Prepared Teachers. President Clinton is proposing to help local
schools provide small classes with well-prepared teachers in the early grades. The new initiative
will help hire an additional 100,000 well-prepared teachers and reduce class size in grades 1-3 to a
nationwide average of 18. The President is also proposing support for training teachers in math,
science, and technology and for recruiting quality teachers into poor schools and high-need subjects
like math and science.

Modern School Buildings to Improve Student Learning. In order for students to learn and to
compete in the global economy, schools must be well-equipped and they must be able to
accommodate smaller class sizes. That's why President Clinton is proposing Federal tax credits to
pay interest on nearly $22 billion in bonds to build and renovate public schools.

Education Opportunity Zones: Ending Social Promotion and Fixing Failing Schools. The
President's budget contains support for urban and rural school districts undertaking tough reforms
including ending social promotion and fixing failing schools. This initiative would help students
meet promotion standards at selected grades, help tum around failing schools, and expand parental
choice among public schools.

Technology for Our Schools and Rigorous Math and Science Courses for Our Students. The
President's plan would ensure that all of our children get access to the "information
superhighway". His "High Hopes" plan would support partnerships to get access to rigorous
math and science courses needed to prepare them for college. The President's budget also contains
$60 million to improve math and science curriculum and teaching in middle school.


NEW ON-LINE ASSISTANCE FOR PARENTS, STUDENTS, AND TEACHERS President
Clinton announced two new on-line resources developed by the U.S. Department of Education
and other agencies.

"Federal Resources for Educational Excellence" (FREE) Web-site. A new website is available
today to connect teachers, parents, and students to teaching and learning resources in math,
science, and other subject areas from NASA, the Energy Department, the National Science
Foundation, and other agencies.

The TIMSS on-line challenge. The U.S. Department of Education will launch this fall a website
that puts TIMSS math and science problems on-line. This will enable parents to give a quiz to
their children, learn what their children should know in math and science to be internationally
competitive, and learn how their children are doing compared to students from other countries.


RECENT STUDY SHOWS NEED TO BOOST ACHIEVEMENT IN MATH AND SCIENCE
TIMSS showed that U.S 12th graders scored among the lowest of 21 nations in general math


                                       Automated Records Management System
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

        and science. Performance of U.S. 12th graders in advanced math and physics courses also
        lagged behind their peers from other nations. The 12th grade findings completed a multi-year
        study showing U.S. 4th graders near the first in the world in science and above average in
        math, with U.S. 8th graders slightly above the international average in science and below the
        international average in math.

        While other tests (including the National Assessment of Educational Progress) show that U.S.
        student achievement is improving, TIMSS makes clear these improvements are not rapid
        enough to keep pace with other nations in an increasingly global economy.




                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


