RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Patricia F. Lewis ( CN=Patricia F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]       )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-APR-1997 14:09:40.00

SUBJECT:   Afternoon session transcript

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Pauline M. Abernathy ( CN=Pauline M. Abernathy/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Walker ( CN=Ann F. Walker/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP    [ WHO]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Katharine Button ( CN=Katharine Button/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kris M Balderston ( CN=Kris M Balderston/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]          )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D86]MAIL43201501Y.116 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750437C290000010A0201000000020500000012BA0100000200005DEB64D326D4E5F46CDC60
5520E99D6AA81DF5EB25055125AODBA3214DD9D931AFOCFACF10061BE5B2654131BD8FOC875607
B04652EF89489B21AA386622301BBF9795E89C37089557023FDCD4A3A07E1938890F01C93D99AD
9D221ABOB7F9177BAC5D7A5E872B98FBA537933COC091A8E0269A4B6432ADF8C3E1D58237976D9
2F078391AAB7893EFB80D90C8DC4F5FOF8C2DE89C3DA3B9ACF73C7205991510A7CEB3329591844
B6D4F1FDF6FAC043A4C7CE56D880611A1BAODFA285BA85B50BC83E70CE6EE7871F8E422236B19B
D9DE5A22659DECD12EEE820AD5C97BBOOEF380B0229E9630370BD1A63E91323CFCOF804EFB77F7
F41F8AF7E902CC34911FECD919EC7D55FOC92CAE48F1AD157093773OD3E7DFFCD99BD269D492FA
C8BF23FDF77E6391D903315361894DF1FA80AE26C39BE5017A3C34B4A6F0566A49E06A25F4FCC6
1A081E380EB8459F5EA4222BDOCB9F48E410D57CB978496096616CD1304267Bl156DC7B7D54574
DC5AA2FD4373715AA2039C048F29CE25396D5680BDD72CB97EF80473FC2D195EDAE5C16A282D87
80D819A24ED34A1C7402662289721CA5240F3AE8A8E81A067B57F9105E95701BFDEDB9A7F56D52
C18AC343EB83A929461007B73F8CAAD6E6710C64241256B507D0600450391B965E55C9DA9EFC7C
DB3D9A931D02003400000000000000000000000B30030000007EOO0000D80400000B3003000000
78000000560500000B30030000006BOOOOOOCE0500000B30030000006B000000390600000B3003
0000009AOOOOOOA40600000B30030000007E0000003E0700000B3002000000D1000000BC070000
OB3002000000E40000008D0800000B3003000000A6000000710900000B3002000000F700000017
OAOOOOOB30020000000A0100000EOBOOOOOB30020000001E010000180COOOOOB30020000003101
0000360DOOOOOB300200000043010000670EOOOOOB300200000056010000AAOFOOOOOB30030000
00CF000000001100000B3003000000A4000000CF1100000B3003000000A4000000731200000B30
EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING:
 WHAT NEW RESEARCH ON THE BRAIN TELLS US
       ABOUT OUR YOUNGEST CHILDREN



            Afternoon Session




              The East Room



        Thursday, April 17, 1997
             12:00 P.M. EDT




                                             ds Managemen\ S~s\em
                                AU\Oma\e~~!~~mp Con~ersion

THE PRESIDENT
MRS. CLINTON

DR. DAVID HAMBURG, Carnegie Corporation of New York, New York,
New York

DR. DONALD COHEN, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut

DR. CARLA SHATZ, University of California, Berkeley

DR. PATRICIA KUHL, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

DR. EZRA DAVIDSON, Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and
Science, Los Angeles, California

DR. T. BERRY BRAZELTON,   Harvard Medical School,           Cambridge,
Massachusetts

DR. DEBORAH PHILLIPS, Institute of Medicine, Washington, D.C.




                                         Automated Records Managef!1ent System
                                                 Hex-Dump ConversIon

              AFT ERN 0 0 N         S E S S ION

                                                           (3:16 p.m.)


          MRS. GORE:   Well, hello, everybody.      Good afternoon,

and welcome to the White House Conference on Early Childhood

Development and learning.   We have all gathered today so that

we can share new ways of enhancing our children's lives and to

secure their future and to secure the future of our country.

          This afternoon, we're going to focus on the practical

applications of the latest scientific research on the brain.

As parents and as caregivers, we certainly can get our children

off to a very strong and healthy start by positively impacting

the first three years of their lives.

          As the national spokesperson working with Secretary

Donna Shalala on the Back to Sleep campaign to reduce sudden

infant death syndrome, these first three years are of particular

interest to me.   As you hear many of the experts say today,

remember that, in addition to the miraculous growth and

development that takes place in the first several years of life,




                                         Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion ·

that some of the children in our country are particularly

vulnerable to SIDS      sudden infant death syndrome - - especially

in the first year of life, from four months to 12 months,                  in

particular.

             Each year, Al and I have been able to host and work

with others in making sure that we could have a conference on

families in Tennessee, and this has been a source of great

learning and networking and joy for us.       The conferences have

put several issues on the table, and they allow us to discuss

a lot of topics that people are dealing with in their everyday

lives, and we're concerned about the struggles that families

face in America.

             These concerns, the ones that you are so familiar with,

in conjunction with our commitment to family, are why we

participate in the family conferences, and it's the reason that

we are here today, as well.      This Administration is committed

to children and to families -- very, very committed, unshakably

committed.




                                            Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion ·

             We want to ensure that every child has the opportunity

to prosper and every family has the means and the tools and the

knowledge to make that happen.

             I have been very lucky to raise our four children with

a very supportive and committed husband and father by my side,

so no matter how full his schedule has been, he has often

rearranged it.     There are pro-family policies here in the White

House.     I can tell you that.    He always makes time for his family

and is always there for us when we really, really need him.

             So it is with great love and admiration that I introduce

to you a great husband and, probably even more importantly, a

wonderful father, Al Gore, our Vice President.

             (Applause. )

             THE VICE PRESIDENT:     Thank you.    Well, shucks.           Thank

you.     Thank you very much.      I want to thank the First Lady for

all these pro-family policies here in the White House, too; and

Tipper and I want to thank the First Lady for the opportunity

to participate in today's conference.




                                                  Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion ·

          I want to briefly acknowledge Governor Lawton Chiles,

who is here, and other elected officials.    Of course, Governor

Bob Miller is going to be introduced by the First Lady, along

with Rob Reiner and the others on the program.

          In the audience in addition to Governor Chiles, is

secretary Riley, Secretary Shalala, Representatives Tom Allen

and Frank Riggs and Sheila Jackson-Lee, and Dr. Jack Gibbons,

the President's science advisor.    There may also be others.

If I have overlooked other elected officials, it's unintentional.

          This is an exciting conference for all who have been

following it and participating in it, and it comes at a unique,

spectacular moment in the history of human understanding.               It

is, of course, a new age of discovery that many have labeled

the Age of the Brain.

          Scientists have discovered much about the world that

surrounds us, but the brain inside our skulls remains a source

of mystery and wonder, and is, in a sense, the next frontier

of human understanding.




                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-DiJmp Conversion

            This morning, you had presented some fascinating

findings about what lies on this new frontier.

            We learned from Gail Shatz that a baby's brain is

constantly phoning home, completing a wiring process more

complicated than in any telecommunications system.

            Patricia Kuhl explained that a newborn arrives truly

a citizen of the world, prepared to learn any language under

the sun.

            And Dr. Brazelton informed us that, from birth,

children know who their most important caregivers are -- their

parents.

            Allover the country, often with the help of federal

research funds, scientists and physicians are mapping this new

scientific territory, and each new revelation seems more amazing

than the last.    But, of course, this is not a purely academic

exercise.    Each new discovery also suggests new ways to guide

our lives, both as parents and public officials.          That is why

we are here today.




                                           Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion ·

          Some new knowledge arrives in our brains with an

imperative attached to it.   Once you know it, you have to act.

 When the First Lady wrote in her book, It Takes a Village, about

the emerging discoveries in these fields, many people share with

her the sense of urgency that comes with that knowledge, and

she took the leadership, along with the President, in organizing

today's conference.

          In this afternoon's session, we'll learn how

communities across America are putting this new understanding

from neuroscience into action in the service of our children.

For example, Arnold Langbo, CEO of the Kellogg Company, will

tell us what business can do to support early childhood

development.

          Incidentally, I'm pleased to say that, later this year,

Kaiser Permanente will host a national summit of business leaders

this fall that will explore many of the themes that we're

discussing in this conference, and develop strategies for making

sure that the infants and toddlers of their employees get off




                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conve:sion

to a good start.       Kaiser's CEO, David Lawrence, is in the

audience, and I would like to recognize him.

              We also have in the audience Ralph Larsen, CEO of

Johnson   &   Johnson, a company with one of the most family friendly

policies, as you might expect, investing heavily in child care

and supporting Head Start.

              This afternoon, we will also be hearing from Rob Reiner

about how the media and entertainment industry can spread the

word to parents and caregivers.        Also, Newsweek Magazine will

be distributing copies of a special issue devoted to this topic.

              Then, we'll hear about the early Head Start Program

that the Clinton-Gore Administration launched in President

Clinton's first term, and about the innovative New Haven,

Connecticut Police partnership, which is the foundation for the

Safe Start Initiative that the President announced this morning.

              These efforts and others you will hear about, and

others like them around the country, require a deep commitment,

but they are founded in good, old-fashioned common sense.                  The




                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-DiJmp Conversion

breathtaking discoveries in neuroscience yield to simple,

practical advice.   Read to your kids.    Talk to your kids.            Sing

to your kids.   Dance with your kids.     I've done that.

           (Laughter. )

           MRS. GORE:     They didn't know it.

           (Laughter. )

           THE VICE PRESIDENT:     That joke's getting old.             I'm

still distressed that people laugh at it, however.

           Tipper and I have been working on some of these issues,

for quite some years, and our annual family conference in

Nashville has touched on some of the themes that have been

addressed here today, and I would like to mention just one.

          A few years ago, our family conference focused on

the· issue of fatherhood and the role of fathers in children's

lives.   Now, some of the new research you've been discussing

is revealing that the attachment a child forms with his or her

father is innate and critical to that child's development.

           Children whose fathers are active caregivers tend to




                                            Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                    Hex-DiJmp Conve;sion '

have higher IQs and are less prone to violence.       And, since

fathers usually have different parenting styles from mothers,

children with active fathers develop a richer set of emotions

and a wider, more textured view of their world.

           Incidentally, at this June's family conference, we

will be focusing on the topic of the family and learning, and

we'll be talking about the ways in which families can relate

to schools and the learning process throughout a child's life.

          We are very grateful to the President and First Lady

for playing key roles in the family conferences of the last few

years and, actually, this whole year, with the President's

initiatives unveiled in the State of the Union Address and this

conference, organized primarily by the First Lady, that is filled

with such exciting discoveries,the focus on families and

learning in June, the focus on child care later in the year,

and the other activities related to learning and development

and children, when you put it all together, we have an opportunity

to put in place a set of new approaches and policies based on




                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-DiJmp Conversion

new understandings that can really make a profound difference

for our country.

          But the beginning is today's conference -- the

beginning of what I hope will be an entirely new approach to

how private citizens and public officials fulfill their

responsibilities to America's children.

          You don't have to be a brain surgeon to understand

the importance of these new discoveries, and you don't have to

be a super-parent to make sure your child benefits.          To take

advantage of the new understandings that are being presented

today about the human brain, you just have to use your head.

You may quote that, if you wish.

          (Laughter. )

          THE VICE PRESIDENT:   I want to, in introducing the

First Lady as the moderator of this session, I want to presume

to say, on behalf of all of us who have the privilege of

participating in this conference, how grateful we are for her

leadership.




                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Cunversion

            We've heard a lot about the "bully pulpit" in the

history of the White House.     I think we're seeing a brilliant

use of the bully cradle here today, and the President and the

First Lady have assembled an outstanding group of experts who

are opening our minds to new understandings.    I'm looking forward

to this session, and I want to invite behind this brain

conference, our First Lady, to get us started.

             (Applause. )

            MRS. CLINTON:   Thank you very much, Vice President

Gore.     I can see this will lead to an endless series of bad

puns --

             (Laughter. )

            MRS. CLINTON:   -- the most obvious of which is that

doing what has been suggested here is a no-brainer.

             (Laughter. )

            MRS. CLINTON:   I am delighted to be joined by the Vice

President and Tipper Gore.     I don't know of any two people who

have been more committed, not only to their own family and to




                                               Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                       Hex-Dump COfivarsion .

the wellbeing of their children, but to the wellbeing of all

of America's children.   I am very grateful for their leadership,

friendship, and support.

          We are excited by the people who have joined us on

this panel, because each one is a doer, as we will now hear.

They are people who don't just read an article in Newsweek about

the brain and say,   "Well, that's real interesting."          They're

people who say to themselves, "What can I do about this?              This

is something that has great potential, and I want to be part

of helping as many people as possible learn about this exciting

information."

          Our first speaker, Mr. Arnold Langbo,        is the CEO of

the Kellogg Company, based in Battle Creek Michigan.          As I said

this morning, Kellogg has launched a community-wide effort that

Mr. Langbo will tell us about, which is already making a

difference in the lives of the people of Battle Creek and

particularly the employees of the Kellogg Company.

          I would like to ask him now to tell us what Kellogg




                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-DiJmp Cunversioil

is doing and what the effects of that are.    Mr. Langbo.

          MR. LANGBO:   Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Vice President, and

Mrs. Gore, thank you.

          I speak today on behalf of the group of business and

education leaders that I represent from Kellogg's home town in

Battle Creek, Michigan, and I appreciate this opportunity to

report to the White House Conference how we have been working

together to help make sure that every parent and every caregiver

in our community is aware of this important new information on

early childhood development that you are bringing to the

attention of our nation here today.

          My colleagues and I first became aware of this new

scientific learning on early childhood brain development about

two years ago and, at that time, we were engaged, looking very

hard for ways to help improve student performance in our schools

and, for several months, we researched and debated curriculum

changes, school choice, charter schools, character education,

academic standards, student testing, and many, many others




                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex·Dump Conversion

subjects.

            These are all good ideas, and we are working on many

of them in our community, but they simply won't, by themselves,

result in the improved student performance that we seek.

            The more we explored all of these issues, the more

we realized that we needed to reach deeper into the more

fundamental reasons why some children are succeeding in school

while others, even before they enter school, seem destined for

difficulty.

            In looking deeper, we focused on three conclusions

that led us to develop our program, which we called Learning

Now.

            Now, the first conclusion was based on research

conducted in Michigan, which compared the relative influence

that family, community, and other factors have on student

performance.   Amazingly, it concluded that factors outside of

the school are four times more important in determining a

student's success on standardized tests than are factors within




                                             Automated Records Manc:gement SYstem
                                                     Hex-Dump Converzion .

the school.

           This reaffirmed, for those of us in business, the

importance of becoming partners with educators, parents, and

other institutions in our community dealing with the development

and performance of young people.     What this means is that

businesspeople cannot just sit on the sidelines and criticize

but, rather, we must be involved.

           Secondly, a survey of local kindergarten teachers

revealed that about four of every ten children entering our

schools are not adequately prepared.      When we considered this

information in conj unction wi th child heal th indicators and rates

of abuse and neglect, and other key indicators, it became

painfully aware that far too many of our children are not getting

the start in life that they need.

           Then, we became aware of the powerful new information

about brain development being reported by the scientific

community, and we began to understand that lost learning

opportunities in the first few years of life simply cannot be




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex·Dump Conversion

made up later on.

           With these understandings, the business and education

partnership in Battle Creek became committed to helping ensure

that every parent and every caregiver in our community is aware

of and, indeed has access to easy to understand information about

early child development and brain stimulation.

           Now, to accomplish this, we are using print and

broadcast advertising, direct mail, payroll staffers, and,

importantly, community forums.     We are encouraging parents and

caregivers in our community to call the well-publicized now

Learning Now phone number,    to receive information appropriate

to the age of their child.   Once signed up, parents and caregivers

are mailed additional age-appropriate information at six-month

and one-year intervals, until their child enters kindergarten.

           We have received tremendous cooperation from many

sectors of the community.     Local print and broadcast media are

matching Learning Now advertising expenditures dollar for

dollar.   Every mother who delivers at our community hospital




                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex·DiJmp Conversion

receives Learning Now information before carrying their newborn

home.

          Noted pediatric neurologist, Dr. Harry Chugani, who

is attending this conference today, was in Battle Creek recently

to conduct seminars for child care providers and other early

childhood professionals.    Later this month, Ronald Kotulak,

author of the book,    Inside the Brain, will be in Battle Creek

for two days, conducting seminars again for parents, for

caregivers, educators, and businesspeople, about the brain

development research covered in this morning's session.

          Now, earlier I mentioned to you the use of direct mail

to reach families,    and I mentioned to Mr. Reiner this morning

that, as a part of the Learning Now program, we are sending

postcards to 6,000 households with young children in our

community, encouraging them to watch your April 28th television

special and to attend one of the community forums that Mr. Kotulak

will hold in Battle Creek on April 29 and 30.

          How is it all going?   At this early stage, we couldn't




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex·DiJmp Conve:sion

be more pleased with the response that Learning Now is receiving.

 And I believe that, once you understand what is happening with

brain development during the first years of life, you want every

parent to know, so much so that I have become increasingly

interested in what more Kellogg Company and other major

corporations might do to spread this important information to

parents and caregivers allover America.

          With this in mind, I am sure that most of you here

today recognize that back panels of cereal packages are one of

the most powerful communication vehicles in America.          I'm sure

that everyone here knows all about that because, as a part of

our own early childhood development, you will all remember that

we sent two boxtops to Battle Creek for our free submarine.

           (Laughter. )

          MR. LANGBO:     Because Kellogg products have about 95

percent household penetration among families with children, I

am committing at this important White House conference that

Kellogg Company will begin a program to print at least two special




                                                Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                        HeX-Ol1ir.p ConVt;r:;iJil ·

cereal carton back panels focused on early learning with simple

examples of the kinds of activities that anyone can use to

encourage and enhance a child's development.

             (Applause. )

             MR. LANGBO:     If I can, I would just like to give out

a little more perspective for you.         There are 35 million

households with children in the United States and, with Kellogg's

penetration of about 95 percent, our products are in about 33

million households.         I'm told that this. level of housepold

penetration far exceeds the combined daily circulation of the

25 largest newspapers in the. United States, so this is a powerful

mechanism.

             Our intent is to help make tens of millions of American

families aware of this new information from the scientific

community.     Our commitment is to children, to helping them reach

their full potential.         If our children reach their full

potential, so can our country, and so can our society.

             In a longer-term context,     I think it's all about




                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Convd:-sion

building broad-based community awareness, community by

community, the networking that was discussed this morning, all

across America, as to just how important a child's first years

are.

            I can't even begin to imagine the longer-term positive

impact in our society of this.       Any community in America that

truly understands the importance of this issue will make young

children its first priority.

            Business has, I think, an enormous responsibility and

accountability here.       After all, 95 percent of the parents of

these children that we're talking about are in our workplace,

and we communicate effectively with them every day.

            Again, my business and education colleagues and I

greatly appreciate all that you are doing here today to focus

this nation's attention on this critically important issue for

children.    Thank you very much.

            MRS. CLINTON:     Thank you very much.

            (Applause. )




                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex·Dump Conversion

             MRS. CLINTON:     We are just thrilled to hear what

Kellogg is doing, and I look forward to reading the back of those

cereal boxes, as I still do in the morning.

             If I could, Mr. Langbo, could I ask,      in addition to

the outreach and the community leadership that your company is

providing in partnership with other businesses and educators

in Battle Creek, are there any kind of employment policies that

businesses can adopt to support their employees as parents, so

that this information that you rightly say can be conveyed

effectively in the workplace can perhaps be more readily

available?

             MR. LANGBO:     I think the answer to that is certainly

yes.   We have done a number of things recently in the workplace

environment, certainly in part to provide a more meaningful

maternity benefit for our families that are in this situation,

but also, frankly, in an attempt to relieve some of the workplace

stress situation.       This was touched on briefly, this morning.

             Indeed,   I think workplace stress is increasingly




                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex·Dump Conversion

prevalent in our workplace.     We do provide an opportunity,

rather, for Kellogg employees, either the mother or the father,

to take up to a three-month leave when the child is born.                 We

have recently enhanced our flexible work hours,         I think

meaningfully, so as to allow more flexible work scheduling that

would be helpful during maternity periods.

            This, by the way, included an option for employees

to do a certain number of hour of their work week at home, which

again has been very favorably received, and I think, as I said

earlier, it speaks to both of the issues -- stress, as well.

            We have never, as a company, provided Kellogg day care.

 Rather, we have supported the local community entrepreneurs.

 But we thought it was timely, recently, that we fielded a

questionnaire with all of our employees to ask the question of,

"How well are we doing; is it satisfactory; does it need further

assistance; and are there any other improvements that should

be made?"   Those are some of the things that we've added in the

workplace recently.




                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-D~mp Conve:-sion

          MRS. CLINTON:    Great.   Thank you very much.

          Our next presenter is someone I've known for a number

of years, whom I was privileged to go to France with and visit

their childcare programs, and she has been on the front line

of providing support and services to parents through an

innovative model program known as Avance.     She started it in

San Antonio.   It has now spread much more widely across Texas.

          Dr. Gloria Rodriguez is one of the most articulate

spokespeople that one could find on behalf of the proposition

that providing support for parents, giving them the tools that

they can use to help themselves become better parents, is not

only possible, but essential to be done.

          Dr. Rodriguez, would you describe for us what Avance

does and how it has worked with the parents you've been helping?

          DR. RODRIGUEZ:    Certainly.   Avance is a program for

parents who have young children under the age of three.         We help

them become the best parents they can be.

          I thought I would begin by telling you how I started




                                               Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion .

Avance 24 years ago.    It started, as a very frustrated

schoolteacher, when I saw six-year-old children in my first grade

class being labeled as mentally retarded, as vegetables, as slow

learners.    They were set aside and ignored.

            I also saw parents loving their children, valuing

education, wanting the best for their children, but they did

not know what to do with their children prior to coming to school.

 From a little survey that I took of the parents, their

expectations were very, very low. They thought their children

were only going to go to the seventh grade.

            So, we started Avance,   in many, many neighborhoods,

in schools, housing projects, in churches.    We knocked on doors,

and both mothers and fathers said that they wanted to help their

children, and they wanted to learn what is it that they needed

to do to get their children ready for school.

            These were very, very poor families, many single, on

welfare, and they just wanted the best for their children.                So

they attended a nine-month parenting program, a weekly program,




                                              Automated Records Manc:gement SYstem
                                                      Hex-DiJmp Conve~sioi1 .

where they learned of knowledge and child growth and development,

from a very culturally sensitive Avance parenting curriculum.

             They learned about the importance of talking and

reading and allowing the child to explore and to experiment,

to touch and to cuddle and do all those things that will stimulate

the brain and will help children develop to their fullest

potential.

             In fact,   our Avance curriculum, for 24 years, has

included a section on the brain.     However, at that time, we were

relating rat experiments and what we learned about rats, and

now, with a new technology, we're seeing that the effects are

the same with human beings.

             Parents and children go on field trips to the library,

to the zoo, to the circus, wherever we can get free tickets,

to really stimulate the child's environment.         Avance also

becomes a broker connecting the family to the many social

services, health services, educational services that are in the

community.




                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex·Dump Conve:sion

              In San Antonio alone, we bring about 100 services to

the families.      We connect the Avance children from the Zero to

Three program to the Head Start program.       We make sure they get

immunized.     The parents are then asked and encouraged to further

their education, and we assist them in job training.

              I have to tell you, Avance works.   It certainly does,

because we have seen it work, not only through the lives of people,

but also through empirical research.       From a grant that we

received from the Carnegie Corporation of New York, we found

that parents were changing knowledge, attitudes, and behavior.

              From a 17-year followup study of our participants,

we saw changes thereto.     While 91 percent of the parents dropped

out of school, 60 percent went back to school.        These were women

on welfare.     And half of them were attending college.       But, where

we saw the greatest gains were in those children under the age

of three.     Ninety-four percent of them had graduated from high

school and about half were attending college.

             I have to tell you, I am so happy and proud to introduce




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dilmp Conve~sion

to you one of our first Avance graduates and her mother, Isela

Flores and Esperanza Segura and her husband.        Would you please

stand up?     I have to acknowledge them.

            (Applause. )

            DR. RODRIGUEZ:   Isela was nine months old when she

started Avance.     Her mother was 24 years old, as old as Isela

is today.     However, at that time, Esperanza was a single mother

on welfare, living in a housing project with four children.

Today, Isela is a college graduate.    She is now a school teacher,

teaching in her former school in the barrios of San Antonio.

And that's where we are seeing the difference, and that Avance

is working.

            (Applause. )

            DR. RODRIGUEZ:   Like the Carnegie study, like how it

demonstrated, Esperanza learned knowledge in child growth and

development which she applied to all of her children, and they

all have excelled academically and in sports.         In fact, one of

her sons, also an Avance baby, was one of eight representing




                                             Automated Records ~an~gement SV
                                                                               stem
                                                     Hex-Dump von'le;SIOn

the United States at a track meet in London; and another one

excelled in art and just recently got a state award, but Isela

is one that already completed her college degrees.

          We need to see more success stories like Isela and

Esperanza in poor Hispanic communities and in all communities.

 We need more public-private partnerships to support these kinds

of efforts.

          Avance is funded by foundations.       In fact, we got a

large grant from the Kellogg Foundation and the Carnegie

Foundation.   We get it from corporations, foundations, from the

private sector, but also from the Federal Government and the

state government and city government.

          In fact, 40 percent of our funds come from the Federal

Government, in such programs as Even Start, as Early Head Start.

 We have a Family Preservation Grant.    So, Ms. Shalala, those

programs need to be supported and they need to be expanded.

          Isela credits her mother as the person that set that

foundation,   that helped her learn the important values, such




                                         Automated Records Managel'!lent System
                                                 Hex-DiJmp Conversion

as the work ethic, determination, and the love and value of

education.     We need to replicate programs like Avance allover

the United States to set the foundation for school and for life.

             The word "Avance" is a Spanish word meaning "to advance

and to progress. "   We need to advance and help families progress.

 We need children to progress and we need communities, allover

America, to advance and to progress.

             Thank you very much.

             (Applause. )

             THE VICE PRESIDENT:    Gloria, if I could ask you a brief

question.     I remember meeting with you and hearing about your

program years ago in San Antonio, and I've been very impressed

with it.

             I wonder if you could share some of the things Avance

has done to get fathers involved in caring for and raising their

children.

             DR. RODRIGUEZ:   Since 1988, we have had a fathers

program and,    just like the mothers program, the fathers are




                                               Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                       Hex-DiJmp Conversion

encouraged to participate, to learn about child growth and

development, to get actively involved in the development of their

children, and to establish that warm relationship that we as

mothers have been getting and doing for years.

          It has been working.    We have been hearing comments

from fathers that, for too long, they have been out of the picture

and they have missed so much.    So not only have we related

knowledge in child growth and development, but the           ~esearch


studies that you mentioned, as well as research studies that

they have had on girls where the fathers become involved in their

development, the children are going to be better in math and

science and do better in life.

          The program doesn't end just with the relationship

between the parent and the child.    We also encourage a better

relationship between husband and wife, and strengthening the

marriage, and we encourage the father to be the breadwinner and

the provider by connecting him to adult education courses, as

well as job training programs.




                                            Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

          DR. RODRIGUEZ:     Thank you.

          MRS. CLINTON:     Thank you so much, Gloria.

          We also know how important the parent-teacher

connection is, and how necessary it is for families to support

what goes on in schools.    Our next presenter is Sheila Amaning,

who is the co-president of the Charlotte/ Mecklenburg Early

Childhood PTA in North Carolina.

          She, as an employee of a not-for-profit that provides

information to parents on early learning, is committed to

enhancing childhood development and sees a great opportunity

in doing so by linking this early childhood effort to the

pre-school years, to help prepare a child for what comes when

he or she walks through the door of the school.

          Sheila, could you share with us what you've been doing

and what the results have been?

          MS. AMANING:     Certainly, Mrs. Clinton, Vice President

Gore, Mrs. Gore.   I would like to say I'm just delighted to be

here today.   It is, indeed, an honor to be here and even more




                                             Automated Records Managef!1ent System
                                                     Hex.Dump Conversion

honor to share my experience with Early Childhood PTA with all

of you.

          As Mrs. Clinton said, my name is Sheila Amaning, and

I am from Charlotte, North Carolina, the wife of Samuel Amaning,

who is in the audience, and he's a native of Ghana, West Africa,

and the mother of a very spirited son, Asantei and I am family

involvement coordinator with Childcare Resources, which is

located in Charlotte.

          I feel that involvement in Early Childhood PTA is

extremely valuable, as well as beneficial, to parents, because

it enhances parental knowledge about the needs and development

of pre-schoolers, supports families in their role as parents,

assists families in preparing their children for school

readiness, and encourages future family and public involvement

with the school system.

          When my son was two,      I attended an Early Childhood

PTA workshop on school readiness.     After attending the workshop,

I was convinced that I absolutely had to become a part of the




                                            Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

CharlQtte/Mecklenburg SchQQls' Early ChildhQQd PTA and that I

CQuld definitely benefit fr.om being able t.o meet .other parents

wh.o shared similar c.oncerns as my .own.

           As a result .of attending this wQrkshQP,           I was able

tQ better prepare my child in making the transiti.on frQm

pre-schQQl tQ kindergarten, gained invaluable knQwledge, and

develQped a burning desire tQ get .other parents invQlved in Early

ChildhQQd PTA and tQ make them aware .of ways in which they CQuld

benefit frQm being a part .of the QrganizatiQn.

           In an eff.ort tQ dQ everything that I CQuld tQ empQwer

.other parents,   I became cQ-president .of the

CharlQtte/Mecklenburg SchQQls' Early ChildhQQd PTA, which is

sPQnsQred by the CharlQtte/Mecklenburg schQQl system and

chartered by the NQrth CarQlina NatiQnal PTA.

           The Early ChildhQQd PTA is .open tQ parents,

grandparents, guardians, early childhQQd caregivers, and .others

whQ are resPQnsible fQr children fr.om birth tQ schQQl age.

Quarterly meetings and/Qr wQrkshQPs are held thrQughQut the year




                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Oilmp Conve:-SIOil

at various locations.

            Some of the topics include:   Ask the Principals, which

consists of a roundtable discussion of principals from magnet

schools in Mecklenburg County; Getting Started with Early

Childhood PTA; Holiday Story Hour; Discipline and Sibling

Rivalry; Discipline Without Tears; and The Road to Reading.

            Some of the other activities which have been initiated

by Early Childhood PTA include conducting Saturday transitional

workshops, and this allows parents to attend a half a day of

class with their four-year-old to experience being in a

kindergarten environment and to get a feel for activities which

take place in the classroom.

            We also distribute educational gift packages to

parents of newborns in Mecklenburg County hospitals.               The

packages, we have a pink one for the girls and a blue one for

the boys.    The contents of the package include a letter from

the superintendent of the Charlotte/Mecklenburg Schools, a

congratulatory letter from the coordinator of Early Childhood




                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex·DiJmp Conversion

PTA, a certificate of recognition.

          I would just like to share with you the six educational

booklets which are included in the package, as well.            Very

colorful, and the parents can use these booklets with their

children throughout their school years.

          We have:   Helping Your Child Develop Skills for

Helpful Learning; Helping Your Child Develop Math Skills; Helping

Your Child Develop Skills in Science; Helping Your Child with

Reading and Writing; Helping Your Child Learn Through the Arts;

and Helping Your Child Develop an Interest in Social Studies.

          There is also another booklet which we recently started

including in this package, and it's called Before the Bell Rings.

 This was actually written by a kindergarten teacher in

Mecklenburg County and the book was recently reproduced through

funds of Smart Start, so this is the finished product.

          What it is, it's fun and practical activities to help

your child be ready for school, so this pretty much emphasizes

activities which parents can do with their child at home, as




                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex.Dump Conve:'Slon

well as out in the community.

          As a result of our outreach efforts with these

educational gift packages, we received the Golden Key Award and,

last year alone, 13,000 of the gift packages were distributed

to hospitals in Mecklenburg County, so we were able to reach

13,000 parents of newborns.

          In addition, for our outreach efforts, the

Charlotte/Mecklenburg Schools   I   Early Childhood PTA has also been

recognized for other activities in which they have participated,

as well 'as demonstrating a commitment to the objectives of the

PTA by encouraging and strengthening parent involvement and

advocacy for children.

          As a result of this, we received an award, and it was

the National PTA Advocates for Children Award.

          I strongly feel that the educational process begins

at birth and that, the more parents are empowered to deal with

the development and education of their children, the great

opportunities will be for their children.         Being a part of the




                                              Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                      Hex-Dilmp Conversion

Charlotte/Mecklenburg Schools' Early Childhood PTA has been a

truly wonderful experience for me, and I would like to challenge

everyone involved in the life of a child to become a member of

an Early Childhood PTA chapter.

            Thank you.

            (Applause. )

            MRS. GORE:     Sheila, if I could just ask you one

question.

            Because of your involvement with the parents and with

the teachers, what have you learned or what has been the most

helpful thing to you, as a parent?

            MS. AMANING:    Well, actually,   there are two things.

 I guess the first thing is the assurance that there are other

parents out there who are experiencing some of the same concerns

as I experience, and just being able to see that I am not alone

and that it is a constant battle, and you have to advocate for

the children.

            Another thing which I have learned is that there is




                                               Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                       Hex.Dilmp Conve:"Slon

always opportunity to take advantage of a teachable moment. It's

not that you have to take the child out to a fun fair.              You can

begin at home.    You can begin in your kitchen teaching the child

math skills.     You can go right outside your back door and take

advantage of the opportunity to introduce the child to the

environment.

          I would say those are two of the most important thing

that I've gained.

          MRS. GORE:      Thank you.

          MRS. CLINTON:     That's great.   And, Sheila, I know how

proud you are of your husband and your son, so why don't we ask

them to stand?

           (Applause. )

          MRS. CLINTON:     Thank you.   I hope this is one of those

teachable moment.

           (Laughter. )

          MRS. CLINTON:     I am so pleased that we could have wi th

us this afternoon a Chief of Police who is interested in




                                             Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                     Hex-Dilmp Conv~;'Slon

prevention and involved in a partnership with the Yale Child

Studies Center and other institutions in New Haven, Connecticut,

that is aimed at putting into practice through law enforcement

the information about development that we have been talking about

today.

          It's especially significant, since this program is

serving as a model for the Department of Justice-funded program

that the President announced this morning.

          So I would like very much to hear from Chief Melvin

Wearing what this effort is that is going on in New Haven and

what have been the results of it in terms of law enforcement

and the people in the community you work with.     Chief Wearing?

          CHIEF WEARING:    Thank you very much, Mrs. Clinton,

Vice President Gore, Mrs. Gore.       Children are our most

important resource.

          New Haven is the third largest city in the State of

Connecticut, has a population of approximately 130,000 people,

51 percent minorities.     In 1990, the Police Department began




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex·DiJmp Conve:sion

the department-wide transition from traditional policing to

community-oriented policing.

           Community policing in New Haven integrates police

officers within their communities.     They are known as

individuals, rather than by role.     They know the people they

serve as individuals, because they interact with them on a daily

basis.   Citizens now have a voice in how they are policed and

they now have unprecedented access to the Department.

           We have successfully evolved from a traditional law

enforcement agency responding to crime simply by arresting

people, to an organized organization of skilled professionals

committed to solving neighborhood problems before they escalate

to serious crimes.

           Since police officers are actually the last of a dying

breed of professionals who make house calls 24 hours a day, seven

days a week, we are in a position to direct people to the resources

best suited for their particular problem.      The new approach,

however, requires a new type of police officer, with special




                                             Automated Records ManClge~ent System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conv"!'.)lon

training and special partners.

            To this end, we have instituted a number of

groundbreaking initiatives, including the Department's

partnership with the Yale Child Studies Center.       As public

servants, the police must look to experts to help us, to give

us the resources, and guide us, as we do our job.

            The purpose of the Child Development/Community

Policing Program is to help children who have been traumatized

by violence experienced in their everyday lives and to prevent

new generations from becoming involved in this same cycle of

violence.    As a result of our work together, the program now

includes specialized interventions for families involved in

domestic violence and for young perpetrators who are beginning

to move from the role of victim to the role of perpetrator.

            As applied to officers' daily work, the program

involves several components:

            First, the seminar on child and adolescent

development;




                                            Automated Records Manc:gement System
                                                    Hex·Du,np Conv'i:;;";)ion

           Second, a consultation service where clinicians and

specially trained officers are on call 24 hours a day to make

and direct contact with families referred by officers;

     Third, a clinical fellowship at the Yale Child Studies

Center for veteran police officers;               Fourth, a

community policing fellowship for clinicians, where they learn

basics about police procedures.

they also give them a chance to see streets through the eyes

of police officers;        Finally, a weekly program conference,

which provides a forum for case discussions, collaborative

problem solving, development of monitoring of new approaches

and interventions.         An example:   Six children, the

youngest a toddler of two years, witness a knife stabbing between

two men.   One was stabbed to death, the other wounded.        Clinical

and police service went beyond the event.     The·officers became

figure of stability in the lives of these children as they

continued to stop by the house to check on the kids well after

the crime had occurred.         In New Haven, we have the same




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Convilrsiofl

officers working the same beats on a daily basis, and make sure

that they interact with residents on a daily basis.

        Also, police officers sometimes perpetuate violence, when

we execute search and seizure warrants,      looking for evidence

of a crime.    Sometimes it I s of an illegal nature, and many times

there are children in these homes when we enter.         We no longer

leave those children unattended.     We pay attention to them, now.

 We call in the clinicians to assist and make them aware of what

is going on.           Police were called to the scene of a double

shooting.     Two children, ages four-and-a-half to six had

awakened and found their parents unresponsive and bloody.              They

went back to bed and hoped that their parents would wake up soon.

 After a few hours, the six-year-old dialed 911 and reported

that her parents were dead, and she was alone with her baby

brother.     Police arrived at the scene and did find both parents

dead,    in an apparent murder-suicide.           The Child

Development/Community Policing clinicians were immediately

paged.     In addition to their involvement with the surviving




                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex.Dump COilve:-Slon

family members, officers and the clinicians provided

information, consultation, and support to the children I s school

and helped school officials deal with intrusive media.

     Previously, if a child was the victim of violence, or

witnessed a serious act of violence, he or she would not have

been considered a victim.   They were basically ignored.         Today,

through the Child Development/Community Policing Program, these

children can get the help they so desperately need.

     Under funding from the Office of Juvenile Justice,

Delinquency Prevention, Portland, Oregon; Nashville, Tennessee;

Charlotte, North Carolina; and Buffalo, New York are involved

in replicating the Child Development/Community Policing Program.

 Newark, New Jersey and Baltimore, Maryland are among other

cities that are introducing the program.                 In my

career,   I never thought that I would see police officers and

mental health professionals working together as a team.          In the

past, police officers would essentially fill out a report, fill

out the complaint form, and move on to the next case.




                                              Automated Records Manage~ent system
                                                      Hex.Dump ConverSIon

     In the face of the tragedies that officers encounter on

a regular basis, how-could we expect them to effectively attend

to the needs of children and families left behind without new

partners, new training, and new resources?       How could the

clinicians make their skills and expertise available to those

same children and families,   if they never ventured beyond the

consulting room?           Through the'Child

Development/Community Policing Program partnership, we no longer

work in isolation from each other.     We no longer need to turn

away from the devastated faces of children who have been

traumatized.   Together, clinicians and officers are now able

to affect the lives of children and families who, in the past,

would have been the least likely to receive mental health services

and the most likely to experience police as coming too late,

altering too little, and leaving too soon.                As a result

of this partnership, the police, the mental health professionals

and, most importantly, the children, are not alone in the face

of violent tragedies.   Thank you.         (Applause. )




                                            Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                    Hex-DiJmp Coftve:'SIO!1

     MRS. CLINTON:   Chief, if I could ask you, I know that we're

seeing very positive results around the country from community

policing reducing crime, preventing crime.      Do you think that

this additional effort, through the Child Development/Community

policing Program, will have an additional effect, or is this

something you're doing to try to just take care of the victims?

          CHIEF WEARING:    I feel that, if we are going to make

a difference, or break the cycle of violence in this country,

then we have to deal early on with children.     And again, police

officers make calls 24 hours a day, seven days a week.             We need

to reach out to other agencies, other services, to join in, to

save our children.         MRS. CLINTON:   There is a program that

has been operating for a number of years now, that was started

in Chicago, Illinois, called Ounce of Prevention.                    It was

the brainchild of Irving Harris, who is here with us today, who,

along with his son, Bill, who is also here, have been stalwart

advocates for the proposition that early intervention and

emphasizing early childhood development truly does amount to




                                               I-\utomated Records Manager:'ent System
                                                         Hex-DiJmp Conve:"SIO!\

an ounce of prevention, as opposed to a pound of cure, which

is the usual route that we have taken.            Harriet Meyer is

the executive director of Ounce of Prevention.         I wanted her

to describe what Ounce of Prevention is and what it has done,

and provide perhaps some suggestions or lessons from their

experience in attempting to create an early intervention system.

 Harriet?        MS. MEYER:   Thank you.   I want to thank you and

the Vice President and Mrs. Gore and the President for hosting

this event, and I want to thank you on behalf of my many, many,

many colleagues who are out there working across the country,

struggling to put the pieces of the puzzle together in many

communities.          The Ounce is a public/private partnership

between the State of Illinois, the Federal Government, and the

private ·sector, and it invests in the healthy development of

infants, children, adolescents, and their families in order to

prevent physical, social, and emotional problems later in life.

            We accomplish our work through an innovative cycle

which marries program implementation with research, policy




                                              Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                      Hex·Dump Conversion

analysis, and advocacy.    We chose the name,     the Ounce of

Prevention Fund, because we believe that it is more caring the

cost-effective to promote child development than to treat

problems later in life, and we target the first three years of

life for all the reasons you heard this morning.                    This

period offers a tremendous opportunity to change the trajectory

of a child's life and, while it is not the only moment for

intervention, birth to three truly provides all service providers

a developmental window of opportunity when we can have the

greatest impact.           Perhaps the greatest lesson we have

learned since our inception is the importance of working in

partnership.    The Ounce was originally conceived as a

partnership 15 years ago when Irving Harris and the Pitway

corporation joined forces with Illinois state government,

through its Department of Children and Family Services, to

develop a statewide birth-to-three program for teen parents and

their babies.         Then, 11 years ago, the Ounce partnered with

HHS, our state child welfare agency, and local foundations to




                                                Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                        Hex.Dump Convi:::-slon

develop a comprehensive   birth~to-three   program in a very low

income community in Chicago.    Collaborating with a hospital,

the Chicago Public Housing Authority, and community

organizations like the Chicago Urban League, we now operate one

of the nation's first Early Head Start sites.                       This

program reaches more than 100 families and is comprehensive,

offering home visiting, health care services, full day child

care for children from three months to the age of five, as well

as an array of self-sufficiency activities for parents, and we

do it all in one place at one site.                It is there that

we apply theories of research and practice to the design and

operation of early childhood programs.     Early Head Start really

has ushered in a new era in this nation, by focusing on the first

three years of life.   The funds are non-categorical and provide

us with the glue that we need at the community level to fill

in the gaps in services to truly meet the needs of families.

     Early Head Start is the place the child gets a real head

start.   It is an opportunity to help a mother have a healthy




                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

pregnancy and strengthen family ties.               The program is

now flourishing and, as a part of it, we have just established

our most exciting partnership with the Chicago public schools

to build a brand new child care center that will focus on children

from birth to the age of five,   and will be located on public

school property directly across the street from our Early Head

Start program.        So what happens for us, when the rubber hits

the road, so to speak, and we apply theory to practice in child

care?            Let me tell you about Trevon.       At eight months,

his grandmother came down and enrolled him in our infant child

care program.    Trevon's mother, Nikkaa, disaffected and

depressed, was 16 at the time, and a senior at the DuSabele High

School across the street.    She showed very little interest in

him, held him on her hip facing backwards when she carried him.

At the center, she didn't talk to staff or even say goodbye

to her child.         Initially, the caregiver in our child care

center, Carolyn, held him a lot, because he needed it.                  He was

always crying or, even worse, whimpering.      Over time, he began




                                            . ,uLO;tlstoC: ;,3cords Management System
                                                     Hex·D~mp Conversion

to respond to her care, and she was able to place him between

her knees on the floor and play with him.     Little by little,

she saw his crying diminish.         Nikkaa, the mother, seeing

this response, asked the staff for guidance.       Carolyn,       the

caregiver, had begun to build a trusting relationship with

Nikkaa, by telling her about Trevon and his day.        This started

Nikkaa thinking about her child and watching him more, and Carolyn

and Nikkaa talked through the child's actions, and Nikkaa began

playing with her child, both at the center and at home, with

toys that we sent with her.          Now, when his mother enters

the center, Trevon greets her excitedly, and there is a

corresponding smile and a hug.             This story depicts the

dance that takes place between a parent and a child.            It's a

relationship that stimulates the child's growth.          It was a

caregiver who initially was able to provide what Trevon needed

but because she helped the mother develop the same kind of

relationship with her child, the mother was able to cut in, and

now she also dances with her son.          We can all imagine what




                                             Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                     Hex·Dump Conve:'Slon

would have happened, had staff not engaged his mother and him.

 How can we expect this child to learn from toys and books and

mobiles, if all he can do is lay on his stomach and whimper because

no one is responding to his need to be talked to, touched, held,

and loved?             An infant r s cogni ti ve growth occurs through


emotional and social interactions.       We learned that this

morning.     Child care and Early Head Start are excellent

opportunities to reach children and families at the earliest

possible moments in order to lay the foundation that is the basis

for their ability to learn in school and to get along with others.

             We must view child care as more than just a place for

children to be when their parents are at work or in school.

Developmentally appropriate, high quality child care is

literally brain food for the next generation, but good child

care must provide caring relationships, knowledgeable

caregivers, family connections, and a safe, health environment.

             The most important assessment tool that we have is

our power of observation.     Our staff need to be continuously




                                              Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                      Hex.DiJmp ConverSion

trained and supervised to see with their eyes, but teach with

their heart.   Dr. Sally Province, the great pioneer of infant

development, said, "Don't just do something, stand there."              She

meant that observing how a parent and child interact is critical

to understanding how to reach out and to help them. Sometimes,

we need to leave the parent and the child alone.

     Lastly, relationships matter.     Positive, nurturing

relationships between staff and child, staff and parent and,

of course, most importantly, and parent and child help the brain

to grow, and it is only through these relationships that children

change and develop and build a sense of cooperation,

self-confidence, and a concept of what is expected and what it

takes to feel right in the world.          Thank you.

     (Applause. )           MRS. CLINTON:· Thank you very much,

Harriet.          I wanted to ask you, if you could, to speak a

little bit about another aspect of Ounce of Prevention, and that

is home visits.     What are the advantages of home visiting, and

how does that get carried out through your program?




                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump COi\vi:;;510il

     MS. MEYER:     Voluntary home visiting offers us,          I think,

a unique opportunity to enter the life of a parent just at that

moment when a parent is most open to receiving information,

creating a new relationship, and receiving support.

     The reason we visit them in the home is because that's where

parents are.    Especially after they give birth, they are usually

involved, bound to the home, with more of the more intimate

functions of parenting, which are, in fact, very personalized.

 They include feeding and nursing and bathing and changing and

diapering.     Those aren't activities that feel comfortable taking

place in a large classroom, as an example.                   It's a

wonderful way for us to break down the isolation that every parent

feels when you're presented with this bundle of joy on the first

day, but particularly for our most vulnerable parents.           It offers

us a great time to not only build the relationship, but make

the connection for them as a front door to other community

services that are available to them.               MRS. CLINTON:               I

am very strongly in favor of home visiting, for just all of those




                                              AYIQf11~I()d I\acords Management System
                                                      Hox-Dump Conversion

reasons, because I think that it could help build relationships,

do the kind of modeling that Dr. Brazelton and others talked

about this morning, and create a relationship of trust between

a parent and a responsible adult, which may be the only way to

build up the confidence of that parent over time.                I

think that the more we can consider ways of providing that home

visitor function,   the more likely we are to actually see the

changes that would benefit parents and children.                 We are

all looking forward to the wonderful production that Rob Reiner

and his wife and others have been working on to bring to broad

public attention the information about brain development and

also some of the solutions about what is working around the

country.       Rob has taken this effort on as a crusade, and

those of us who have watched his energy being spent on this are

very grateful that he has, because what he has done is to bring

together not only the resources for a television program, but

for a campaign called I Am Your Child.          It will call upon

the talents and resources of entertainment leaders,




                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex·D~mp Cunvb::3ion

corporations, early childhood experts, community leaders,

business leaders, and on and on and on.               Rob, if you will,

give us maybe a·preview but, more than that, what comes after,

as well as what you hope to see develop from this?

     MR. REINER:   Thank you.   First of all, I just want to say

I am so thrilled to be here today with the First Lady and Vice

President Gore and Tipper Gore and the President this morning.

 It is so thrilling for me, because we have been working so hard,

everybody in this room, for a long, long, long time, and we have

now finally put the issue of early childhood development in front

center, where it belongs.   It is the single most important issue

facing American today.            (Applause. )                 MR. REINER:

We have spent the last 50 years since the Second World War

strengthening our country, from trying to build democracy and

fight communism.   We know communism is virtually eliminated now,

and now we have to look inward.     If we are going to strengthen

this country in ,the future, we must look inward, and the way

to look inward is to strengthen the family, and the way to




                                            Automated Records Man&gef!1ent System
                                                    Hex-Dump Convi;;fSlon

strengthen the family is to strengthen the relationships between

parents and children in the first three years of life.

     Wonderfully, we have new brain science.     We have scientific

research which is pointing us in the right direction and telling

us what to do.   I want to say, if we are going to adopt a slogan,

"It's the brain, stupid."             (Laughter. )                  MR.

REINER:    Ultimately, that's what it comes down to. If we want

to have a real significant impact, not only on children's success

in school and, later on in life, healthy relationships, but also

an impact on reduction in crime, teen pregnancy, drug abuse,

child abuse, welfare, homelessness, and a variety of other

societal ills, we are going to have to address the first three

years of life.   There is no getting around it.       All roads point

to Rome.    It's very simple.         We know what the problems

are, and we were talking about it this morning in this morning's

panel, and we know what the solutions are.      That's the kind of

frustrating thing for everybody in this room.       There are people

in this room that have been wrestling with these problems for




                                            Automated Records Mana9:ment System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conve:slO n

15, 20, 25 years, and we have the solutions.                My job, my

job is to take this information and disseminate it to the public,

because we have to create a public will.   Once we create a public

will, there is a wave that is inescapable, there is a critical

mass that is unavoidable.    And, when that critical mass happens,

we will get the country to change their way of thinking and look

through the prism of zero to three in terms of problem solving

on every level of society.            I talk about, you know,

building a coalition and building up a head of steam.                And I

want to thank Tipper Gore, especially, because -- yes, Tipper,

wake up, you're down there.            (Laughter. )                  MR.

REINER:   I have been thinking about this issue for 20 years,

now.   I don't come as a Johnny-corne-lately here.           I've been

thinking about it for a long time.          I came to my own

realizations through my own analysis, and determined that what

happened to me, in my first two or three years of life, was

critical in terms of how I functioned later on as an adult, good

and bad, and I knew that that realization was not unique to me,




                                                      Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                              Hex·Dump Conversion ·

that this was something that everyone experienced.

       But, at that time, I didn't know about the brain science.

 I think the brain science was just breaking, but I was certainly

not aware of it.     Then, as I became more successful and had a

power base and had the ability to reach out to the powers that

be, I started searching, because I knew that this was the answer.

 I knew this was the answer, but how did I get this information

out?        So I started reaching out, and the first person I called

was Tipper Gore.     I had read, like everybody else, that she was

interested in mental health issues.      I knew she cared deeply

about that.    And I picked up a telephone and I called her, and

she answered the telephone; and I said, "I want to come and talk

to you, because I want to know what I can do.         What can we do

to put this on the front burner and make everybody aware of how

critical this is?"          I went to Washington, with my wife,

Michelle, who is sitting right there, and we met with Tipper

at her house, and there were a couple of members of the Department

of Education, I think, there at that time.                 The




                                               Automated Records Management Svstem
                                                      Hex-Dump Convt';,~ion    ·

Clintons' Goals 2000 had just been released at that time.                   I

looked at the goals.     And, of course, everybody knows the first

goal is, every child must enter school with a readiness to learn.

 And I said, "Hmm.     If we can meet that goal, we don't have to

worry about the rest of these goals.       They will take care of

themselves."    And I believe they will.            So, again, all

roads lead to Rome.      I mean, if we can get our children ready

to learn as they enter school, they will learn.            They will be

good students and they will reach their full potential.

       So my job is to get the word out.   I went back to California

and I met Ellen Gilbert and we started reaching out to every

member of the society.     We talked to people from the Governor's

Office in Vermont, from the Vice President's office, Mayor

Riordan came to the house, and we started talking -- "What can

we do?"           I realize that there is no stomach here for a

federally funded program and, also, there is no one size fits

all.   We certainly can observe that from what we hear today.

There are a lot of ways to "skin the cat" and there are lots




                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex·Dump Conv~;::;iOil

of needs from the various communities.      So I said, "And, by the

way, we don't want a one size fits all."       It has to be from a

grassroots level.      It has to be community basis.                 I do

feel there is a federal component to this, because I do feel

there has to be a national imprimatur on all of this, even

regardless of how large or small that component is, and that

can be worked out by the policy makers, but there needs to be

done.              "But," I said, "I don't do that.     I don't create

programs.     I create television programs, not social programs."

 So what I do is, I know how to put on a show, and that's what

I decided to do.     I'm went to ABC and I said, "Give me an hour.

 Give me one hour.     I'm now in a position where I've done enough

in my community where you must give me an hour to talk about

this.     And they were kind enough.         By the way, before I

get into this, Mr. Langbo, what cereal are we going to be on

here?     Is it going to be Frosted Flakes or Special K?           Because

Special K is going to penetrate a lot more deeply than Frosted

Flakes.            (Laughter. )         MR. REINER:     I watched that




                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex.Dump ConVi::;";J\on

Special K with that guy, you know, Covert Bailey or something.

 But he's kind of fat.        He doesn't lose weight.           I don't know

why.        MR. LANGBO:     It can be any cereal that you would like

it to be.        (Laughter. )                MR. REINER:      Ones that

adults eat, you know.      Don't put it on a sugary cereal.             Anyway,

no, it's terrific.      It's terrific what you're doing.                It's

absolutely terrific what you're doing.                   Anyway, I went to

ABC, and I said, "Give me an hour.            Give me an hour and I will

put on a show, and I will get you some people to be on the show

so that it will not be a dry documentary, it will not be an NBC

White Paper.    It's ABC, first of all, so it couldn't be an NBC

White Paper.              (Laughter. )             MR. REINER:        And I

said, "I will get some people into the tent for you."                 And they

said, "Well, who will you get?"          I said, "I'll get you Tom Hanks. "

 And I went and I got Tom.        He was the first person I went to.

 I got Tom Hanks.    That opened the door, because now we've got

somebody who says,   "Okay, I'm standing up for this."

       Then, it was easy.      I went to Robin Williams, I went to




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex.Dump ConVci:310n

Billy Crystal, I went to Rosie O'Donnell, to Roseanne, to Oprah

Winfrey.     I went to General Colin Powell.     And, when I had all

those people lined up,     I said,   "Maybe I can get the President

and the First Lady to come on."       And they agreed to do it, and

they're terrific in the show.        They're absolutely wonderful.

             So we've got this wonderful forum, where we hope people

will tune in.     Now, we also are disseminating information, as

well.     There's going to be a lot of information about the new

research in brain development.       Barry Brazel ton is on the show,

Dr. Bruce Perry, C. Everett Koop.             We will also examine

the town of Hampton, Virginia and what they are doing, in terms

of early childhood development.        It was a community at risk.

They were facing economic collapse, and they decided to adopt

an Ounce of Prevention preventative approach, and develop some

early childhood development programs as a way of uplifting the

community.             They have done that, and they have been very,

very successful, so we are highlighting them, as well.

        It was one thing to put together a television show and get




                                                    Automated Records Management Systc.
                                                            Hex·Dump Conversion

it out to the public and have this discussed.      But, like so many

things that you put front and center, unless there is some

followup, unless there is a public engagement component to it,

it evaporates into the ether.    We all know what happens when

we all get together.   We're of like mind.     We talk about a lot

of things, and then it disappears.           So, to that end, we put

together quite a coalition.   We started reaching out.             We went

to Johnson & Johnson and we asked them if they would help fund

a video, which they are doing and which will be made available

at the end of May, a parenting video.               We went to IBM and

asked them if they would help us fund a website, which they agreed

to do -- www.lamyourchild.org, which is our website.

     We went to AT&T and we said,      "Would you agree to give us

a toll-free number where we could disseminate some fulfillment

materials?"   They agree to do that.    It's 1-888-447-3400 which,

if you call, you can get either a parenting brochure called The

First Years Last Forever or a brochure which I think is ultimately

going to be much more important, which is a community mobilization




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex.Dump ConVi;;:'Slon

brochure.   It tells people what they can do in their communities

to mobilize around this issue.              The Avance program

that was spoken of earlier by Ms. Rodriguez is talked about in

the brochure, parents as teachers, a number of other programs,

really good programs around the country are mentioned, along

with the Healthy Families America and what they are doing to

help communities mobilize.             So we've done all that and,

on top of it, we've reached out to the National Governors

Association.     Governor Miller, who is the chairman and Governor

Voinovich from Ohio, who is the vice chair, have agreed to meet

with us and agreed to put this issue on the front burner as part

of their agenda, as the Governors' agenda.                 I spoke at

the last NGA meeting in the winter here in Washington, and it

was discussed.     They put together a six-Governor task force,

bipartisan -- three Republicans and three Democrats -- and the

issue of early childhood will be passed on to Governor Voinovich

and I'm sure Governor Miller will speak more about that.

     Newsweek Magazine, yes.     Rick Smith, are you here, sir?




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Convi;:~ion

Yes.   There is Rick Smith.    We called Newsweek up.           Recently,

you might have seen -- Rick, don't get mad at me -- recently,

you've seen the report on Time Magazine about the brain.                  But

Newsweek was on this issue six to eight months before Time

magazine.    They were the first national publication to really

get on the issue of brain development.               We called them up

and said, "we're going to do this campaign.        Would you like to

be an ally to us?"    And they immediately said yes.            They went

ahead and put together a special edition which is going to hit

the stands April 24th.    It's a sensational issue.         Those of you

who have had preview copies of it, it covers just about everything

that we've been discussing today, and it was funded by Johnson

& Johnson, fully funded.      They have been unbelievable for us.

            So we are doing all of these things.      It was mentioned

earlier today about a CEO summit, Kaiser Permanente putting on

a CEO summit.    We are going to be the co-hosts of that summit.

 We are going to help them throw some media spotlight on that

to see what businesses can do around the country.                    Like I




                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex·Dump Conv.:;:-sion

said, I'm not a Johnny-corne-lately, and I'm not a

Johnny-leave-early.        I guess I just made that up.         I'm in for

the long haul, here.        I'm in for the long haul.

     (Applause. )             MR. REINER:   So we are going to

continue.   The Reiner Foundation is going to continue with a

media office in Los Angeles, which we're going to start ramping

up to support all the organizations that have been pulled together

by the Families at Work Institute, the Carnegie Corporation,

the Heinz Foundation, all the people that we've been working

with, to help them get messages out.                 You know, this

brain information has been around for 15 years, but we need to

get it out and we need to continue to get it out and keep the

drumbeat going.               I believe it's going to be the central

issue in the future elections.       I think it is the single issue

to strengthen our country, and that's all we're doing.               And I'm

so thrilled to be here, I can't tell you how thrilling this is.

            (Applause. )           THE VICE PRESIDENT:         Wow.      That

was fabulous.     I just want to say, Rob, that ever since Tipper




                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conv'::fsion

specialized in this issue in graduate school, I've heard her

lectures on zero to three and child development, but I can tell

you that I don't think she has ever had a response to one of

her little talks like this.               MR. REINER:      It was

interesting, because I came to your house, and I said,                 "This

is what I think.       You know, I think that what happens to a child

in the first couple of years of life is the critical time period

in determining how that child is going to function later on in

society. "         And she says, "Oh, you're talking about zero to

three."      I said,   "I am?"   I didn't even know there was a

thing -- I didn't even know there was a thing called zero to

three, but apparently I was on the same wavelength.

     THE VICE PRESIDENT:         Let me ask you a question about the

entertainment media.       You have talked about enlisting all these

great folks who can command the attention of the public, and

they're parents, they care, and they're helping you, and it's

absolutely wonderful.               What about the media's

responsibility in the entertainment they provide?               How do you




                                                Automated Records Mamlgement System
                                                        Hex·Dilmp CWJi:;;sion

see that?        MR. REINER:    Well, there obviously is a

tremendous responsibility.      I mean, there's a lot that the media

can do and we will do.            One of the things that I'm going

to work very hard on in the next couple of months is there is

an organization called the Civitas Initiative, which was started

by a fellow named Jeff Jacobs, who is the executive producer

of the Oprah Winfrey Show.     He runs all of her Harpo Productions.

            He is working very closely with Dr. Bruce Perry, who

many people in this room are familiar with down at the Baylor

College of Medicine, and they are working on trying to find a

model, a working kind of biosphere model, to integrate all of

the child protective services into one area so it can be

disseminated to communities on an at-need basis, and also to

have an ongoing research component connected to it so that we

will have enough data to be able to continue doing these programs.

            One of the problems we have and one of the things I

left out is that we are also funding a Rand Corporation study,

a cost/benefit analysis of the programs that are working and,




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Cunv,,;sion

as many of the people in this room know, the problem we are having

is that there are not longitudinal studies,           there are not

longitudinal cost/benefit studies to prove to people that this

is cost effective.              We know it is.    We all in this room

know it is.     And Bruce Perry has often said, you know, "How many

times do you have to drop an apple from a tree to know that there

is such a thing as gravity."          I mean we know it exists.              But

it is certainly nice to have the good hard data to back it up.

 We've got the science.         The science is in place.         We have got

to get the economics in place.                   Once those two things

are locked in place, it is immutable.       This thing cannot go away.

 We will pursue it.          But to that end, to go back around, you

know, Oprah Winfrey is on the board of the Civitas Initiative.

 And the one thing I am going to try to do, you know, it is enough

for me to be a front for the media in this and I'm, you know,

I'm not unattractive.

              (Laughter. )

          MR. REINER:         But Oprah Winfrey really is attractive,




                                                 Automated Records ManClgement System
                                                         Hex-DiJmp Convi;fsion

you know.    And if I can convince Oprah Winfrey to be a

spokesperson for this issue, I think that is probably the biggest

thing we are going to be able to do.

            THE VICE PRESIDENT:      You're doing pretty well, Rob.

            (Laughter. )

            MR. REINER:    I know.   But, you know, I am not as pretty

as Oprah.

            (Laughter. )

            MR. REINER:    You know?    And I can't sell books the

way she does.

            THE VICE PRESIDENT:      I just wanted to add one other

thing I'll say to the First Lady.        Mr. Langbo, you look like

you wanted to answer Rob's question.

            (Laughter. )

            MR. LANGBO:    Rice Krispies.

            (Laughter. )

            THE VICE PRESIDENT:      Fat free.     Fat free.          Right?

Rice Krispies is fat free.




                                                 Automated Records ManClgament System
                                                         Hex-Dump Cony~;sioil

          MRS. CLINTON:    Oh, my goodness.    You know, one of the

sweetest things I've seen, Rob, in the last couple of weeks,

is your father going around promoting his new movie with Bette

Midler, spending half his time promoting your program.                 So, I

mean it is becoming a generational commitment here.

           I wanted to follow up on one thing that Rob said at

the very end because I think it is something we should pay special

attention to when he was talking about the Civitas Initiative

and the work with Dr. Perry and others.    I think it is important

that we do have some sense of priorities in terms of the challenges

that families face.   And, certainly, children in foster care,

children in abusive situations, children who are most vulnerable

should be our first priority because oftentimes they will not

have the kind of help and their parents won't know where to turn,

and those are the populations the hardest to reach.

          So, we have got to use every means at our disposal

to try to reach into those communities and to make the case that

all of us on this panel are making about the importance of early




                                              Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                      Hex·Dump Culiv'~iSioil .

intervention.

          Now, there are some very difficult challenges that

people like Gloria Rodriguez and others deal with on a daily

basis in trying to deliver these messages.      What works for my

family might not work for one of Gloria's clients or one of

Kellogg's employees and we have got to be very sensitive about

how we not only deliver the primary message, but then deliver

all these sub-messages to different populations.          And I hope

that many of you who are here with us today will really give

all of us advice about how best to do that.

          There's another group of people that I am particularly

concerned about.   Dr.   Cohen mentioned them this morning.             You

know, and that is the parents of children who have some kind

of disability, who have some sort of congenital condition, who

have some kind of illness in the early months and years that

leaves them with some kind of difficulty that has to be dealt

with, whether it is autism or cerebral palsy or Down's       Syndrome,

whatever it might be.    Because if we only talk about the brain




                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex·Dump Conversion

as being something that can be stimulated to create all these

learning opportunities, that will make the task of parenting

a child with disabilities even more painful for many of these

families.    And we have got to be sensitive to that and talk about,

you know, maximizing the potential of every child and using this

information as a means for enhancing parenting, not pointing

fingers or making people feel more anxious than they already

do in whatever situation they find themselves.           So, there is

a lot to be thought about as we try to consider how do we deliver

these messages.    Who are the advocates, the champions, the

spokesmen and women who are best positioned to speak to different

populations so that the information not only is delivered, but

is heard and acted on.

            There is also another element that I think we have

to give some thought to and that is there are behaviors that

parents adopt for realistic reasons that, again, we were talking

about briefly after the session this morning.          If you live in

a dangerous neighborhood in any of our inner cities, one of your




                                               Automated Records Man&gel!1ent System
                                                       He)(.OiJmp Conwrslon

primary goals is to keep your child alive.    And one of the ways

you do that is by conveying a lot of warnings which come across

as negative reenforcement to your child.

          If any of you have, as I have, worked in settings where

you are involved with a lot of families who come from difficult

neighborhoods, from the kind of communities that the chief was

talking about- where, you know,    there is violence that a child

might see on a regular basis, you, I am sure, have seen a lot

of the parenting techniques that have been adopted where children

are told not to do something, stay away from there, don't do

that, get back here.   All of that kind of parental language which

is aimed at protecting a child, but which has the effect, we

know, of sending a very different message.

          And,   so, we have to be very thoughtful about how do

we talk to parents who are most at risk?   How do we enlist people

such as those that Harriet Meyer works wi th or Sheila and others,

how do we enlist the experts,     the parents and the people who

work with the parents, themselves?




                                               Automated Records Mannge'!lent System
                                                       Hex-Dump Convi:):~t()i\

          So, as we think about this and as we review programs

that we hope will work, I hope all of you will lend your expertise.

 Gloria wrote me a note saying that, you know, one of the things

that her program does is to have toy making sessions where in

the course of making the toys, a lot of lessons can be taught

to children.   And there are just lots of ways that we have to

be more creative.

          Well, the people who are really in the public arena

on the front lines of this are governors who have such major

responsibilities for education and child care and, now, a lot

more responsibility for welfare and many of the other functions

that historically were the province of the federal government,

have now been handed over in all or part to the states.                  And

that poses both great opportunities for the states, but also

some very significant challenges.

           I would commend to any of you who is interested in

how one governor sees these challenges to read      Governor Chiles            I




State of the State Address which he delivered a few weeks ago




                                             Automated Records Manc:.gemenl System
                                                     Hex-D~mp Convi;;sioil

in which he talks about his now I think 34 -year career in public

service, and how it goes along with what Rob was saying, after

all of the years he spent in the Senate, 18 years, chaired the

Budget Committee, his second term as governor of one of our most

populous states, what he has concluded is that there isn't

anything more important than what happens with children.                And

that is not what he thought when he started in public life or

when he held many of these important positions, but it is what

he knows now.

          And I hope the message that Governor Chiles gave to

his state legislature will be echoed in many other State Houses

and in our Congress.   And, certainly,   the governors are

attempting to make this issue a front burner issue.        And I would

like, now, to turn to Governor Bob Miller, the Governor of Nevada,

Chair of the National Governors Association, Co-Chair of the

Association's Children's Task Force, to talk about what the

states are doing and the challenges that the states are attempting

to meet and to give us some insight about where the governors




                                              Automated Records Man&gement Sy~tem
                                                      Hex-Dump Cunv'i;;;sion

are going with this issue.

          Governor Miller?

          GOVERNOR MILLER:     Thank you, Ms. Clinton, Mr. Vice

President and Ms. Gore.     And on behalf of my colleagues and

myself, I would like to thank all of you and the President for

leading this country on issues of parenting and families, both

by example and by action.

          I think all of us in life learn from experiences and

perhaps focus our own actions based on those.       I know when our

first two children were born, my wife and I were fortunate to

be living near her parents and both of her sisters and many

lifelong friends who provided the support network ..

          Some twelve years later when our third daughter, third

child was born, not only did we establish that we had flunked

Planned Parenthood, but we also had two teenage siblings that

were providing part of that support network.        They interacted

extensively with her.     And recalling Dr. Brazleton's example

earlier this morning, they decided that the appropriate response




                                           Automated Records Manr.gement System
                                                   Hex·Dump Conv~i~ioil

for their young sister was, in fact,      (noise).

           (Laughter. )

          GOVERNOR MILLER:       The cue, the cue that they chose,

interestingly, was my political opponent's name.

           (Laughter. )

          GOVERNOR MILLER:       Which interrupted a great many

interviews on Election Night several years ago as two teenagers

nearby were howling in appreciation for their sister.                But,

unlike my experience, which is in this day and age the exception,

families are much more mobile.     They infrequently live near their

parents and their siblings.       In many instances, both parents

work; in others, there is but one parent.        The challenges for

raising children are much more intense than they were just a

generation ago, but the desire is just as strong to be a good

parent as it was for our parents or it is for any of us.

          We have heard today extensively the analysis of this

situation and concern and recognition by the private sector and

the action that they have taken.      And, so, I suspect that that




                                               Automated Records Man&gement SY5tem
                                                       Hex·DiJmp Ci;nvi;i~ion

would turn to me as to what role should government play?

          And government should playa role.        Our role needs

to be defined and refined.   This year as Chairman of the National

Governors Association, I have chosen as my initiative to work

on 0 to 3 working with I Am Your Child, receiving a dull

unimpassioned plea from Mr. Reiner as we have heard earlier today

that made that decision a very easy one to make.          But also to

be able to analyze and evaluate what is going on in states and

local communities in terms of recognition of the importance of

these first three years and to build and learn from each other

in a coordinated effort.

          In my own State of Nevada a couple of years ago, we

created family resource centers in each little pockets of

communities and allowed the neighborhood to decide how they would

use the coordinated federal,   state and local resources all in

that facility and establish their own priorities.           In this

session, we are trying to expand into a family-to-family

connection in which with, again, the private sector's




                                               Automated Records ManClgement System
                                                       flex·Dilmp C()nv(;;~ion

involvement, we would bring in through churches and civic groups

and businesses trained volunteers into a hospital setting at

the time of birthing and provide some guidance and assistance

and then on a voluntary basis go to houses to follow up thereon

and see what assistance we can provide in being that extended

family network.   Government should not replace parenting or

families but can be an adjunct thereto.

          Programs like this have existed in Vermont and Hawaii,

Minnesota, and Kansas, already.   And in Hawaii, for example,

the incidence of repeat child abuse dropped from 62 percent to

3.3 percent.   We have seen in Missouri and Alaska efforts to

provide public information on this critical topic.            You have

heard at lunch and, again, a moment ago in the introduction of

the extensive work that Governor Chiles has put forward in

Florida, we have seen similar programs in Colorado.        And I think

our challenge as elected officials is to work together at all

levels of government.   The federal government can and should

have a role.   They already provide funding for many of the




                                            Automated Records Manc:.gal!1ant System
                                                    flax.Dump C()nVi;;~iOil

programs that we have heard about today, but there isn't a

coordinated effort.

           Perhaps the federal government can and should look

into pilot proj ects that we can build upon as we det.ermine how

best to approach this problem.

           State governments should have a role, not just in

working with the federal government, but on their own.                 We're

putting several million dollars into the family,           the family

concept that I've put forth in the State of Nevada.          And I think

more can and should be invested in future years.        We should also

coordinate with local government.

           I believe that all of us working together and through

the recognition of the importance of these first three years

which is now just coming on to the front as far as public awareness

can establish a next generation which will be much more trouble

free than the generation that we deal with day in and day out.

 And I, again, appreciate on behalf of my colleagues the

opportunity to be here and to learn more and more about just




                                              Automated Records Manr.ge,!,ent System
                                                      Hex.Dump CW'~,~lon

how important this issue is.    And as many speakers have said,

this is the most important issue facing the future of our country.

 Thank you.

           (Applause. )

          THE VICE PRESIDENT:    Well, thank you for asking me.

 It did provoke one thought because what you talked about,

Governor Miller, in the description of what has happened in this

family-to-family program, with the effects .on the whole family

of the reinvolvement with the child, 0 to 3, is similar to' what

Harriet Meyer told us about in the dance between the mother and

child and how a mother changes her behavior after the engagement

with the child, if the behavior is modeled or if in some other

way she learns the importance of this involvement.

          I just wanted to add one other piece to this puzzle

from the research done on fathers.   There is a national program

called "Father-to-Father" and a lot of the findings demonstrate

that the deep involvement of a father in the life of his infant

child can and often does have a powerful transforming effect




                                             Automated Records Manuge~ent System
                                                     Hex·Dump CunV~i~IOi1

on that man, so that behaviors change, the whole pattern of life

changes.   It can lead to a rededication to the mother of that

child and some of the Father-to-Father programs in inner cities

and distressed areas where there are lawbreakers, gang members,

young men who have not considered marrying the mother of their

child or their children, are themselves really changed

dramatically.   So, it is just another piece of the whole puzzle

that illustrates, I think, the powerful result for our society

that can come when we look through the lens the First Lady has

put before us here, to look at what happens in the developing

brain of a young child when the right approach is taken and it

effects everything:    the child's future,   the family's future

and present and, obviously, the whole society.

           MRS. CLINTON:   Well, that was a wonderful way to end

this remarkable day.   I want to thank everyone who participated

in the panels this morning and this afternoon.      I want to thank

all of you who were here as members of the audience, both here

in the East Room and in the Old Executive Office Building and




                                              Automated Records Mam:gemant Sy~tcm
                                                      Hex-Quir.~ (;0n"~,JiJn

out around the country.

          When Rob was talking about his commitment to these

issues of 20, 25 years, I   couldn~t   help but look out and see

Bernice and Barry and Ed Zigler and think it's about 50 or 60

years for some of the people in this audience.         (Laughter. )

And we are grateful for that pioneering commitment and work that

you have brought to this issue.    And we are finally catching

up to what you have been advocating for a very long time.

          Now it's time for us to leave this table and consider

all of the ways that each of us can carryon the mission of

enhancing the development of our children.     Many of you are on

the front lines doing that every day.     On this panel, we have

Harriet Meyer, and we have Sheila Amaning, and we have Chief

Wearing, and we have Gloria Rodriguez who are out there day in

and day out working with children and families.       And those are

the people that the rest of us have to support because, for all

of the concern and caring that we may bring to this issue, it

is these people and the people they work with who will actually




                                               Automated Records Mam:gamant Sy~tcm
                                                       Hex·DiJmp C(}ilVi;i~ioi\

be in those homes putting together those programs, making those

connections.

          And we also, I think, are blessed to have with us today

business leaders like Mr. Langbo who understand that there really

isn't any more important bottom line than what we do as parents

of our own children and what we do as citizens of our society

to enhance the potential of all children as future citizens and

as future employees.   And that kind of enlightened leadership

and enlightened self-interest is critical to how we see the next

steps in this effort to bring attention to this important set

of issues, and then to act on what we now know.

          We're also blessed to have public officials here,

starting with the Vice President and Mrs. Gore and Governor Miller

and Governor Chiles, and we have members of Congress and members

of the Cabinet who also appreciate the significance of this new

information.   And I hope that we will be able to think of good

arguments and effective ways of communicating why this is

important and why it should go far beyond partisan politics and




                                             Automated Records Manc:gaf!1ent Sy~tem
                                                     ~hy.i)ilil1r, ConVi:;;SiOn

become an American issue, not an issue of any political party

or ideology, as to how we try to enhance the raising of our

children.

            And then we have members of the media who we are all

reliant upon to convey this information not just for a week,

not just for one show, but as Rob has eloquently expressed, to

really make it an ongoing commitment.   I said this morning that

there are people in the world who ask, how are the children,

and all of us, I hope, will begin asking that as well, because

we have so many opportunities now. As Governor Chiles said at

lunch, the information and research that science is giving us

provides a hook that we have not had before. And it is up to

us to figure out ways of using that in our respective positions.

            I hope that this conference has laid the groundwork

for all of us coming together to be more committed and more

effective in that commitment on behalf of American children.

I thank all of you for being part of what I hope will be looked

back on as a part of a historic moment that involves the research




                                              Automated Records Man&ge~ent System
                                                      Hex-Dump CunVi:r~!Oi\

that has been done, the dissemination and communication of it,

and then the follow-up.     And I thank you all and invite you to

join us and others who will be arriving at a reception in the

tent in the back yard. And, really, I hope you will go away from

this event at the White House as inspired and fired up as Rob

Reiner is.    (Laughter.)

             Thank you all very much.   (Applause. )

                END                           4:59 P.M. EDT




                                                    t t~ct Records Management System
                                               {l..u oma to Hex.Dilmp Con.,r,,;JiDi\ .
 (
 ,
