RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 18-MAR-1998 09:43:23.00

SUBJECT:   Bad news on the education legislation front

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Janet Murguia   CN=Janet Murguia/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
please note the following depressing developments:

1. On the Coverdell/School Construction battle in the Senate: (1) we
clearly will not have the votes to carry the substitute school
construction bill; (2) we now clearly don't have 40 votes to sustain a
filibuster of Coverdell (we have definitely lost Toricellil, Graham,
Breaux, Feinstein, Biden, Cleland and Lieberman) and don't expect to pick
up any R's. That means we only have 38 votes for filibuster--dangerously
close to what we need to override a veto.  Kennedy is trying to get enough
signatures to demonstrate a veto-proof margin--that will tell us how
strong we really are.  My biggest fear is that we lose a few more Senate
votes in the process (e.g., Landrieu may wind up following Breaux if she
sees other Dem. defections), which then triggers Dem. defections in the
House, rendering us unable to sustain a veto in either house.

2. D.C. Vouchers A D.C. voucher bill could come to the floor in the
House as early as next week, though possibly not until later in April.
Dems. want to use class size as an alternative; I think a DC-scale version
of Zones is better (perhaps just for DC rather than a nationally
competitive program). ED staff are setting up a meeting with Gephart's
staff.  I'll make sure that Janet Murguia and I are there. The Zones
legislation is just about drafted and is in OMB clearance review.  If we
decide to go for the Zones as a whole, or if we decide to do a DC-size
version, I'll make sure we figure out a way-formally or informally-- to
get our bill up there.

 If we go with the full Zones proposal, the one outstanding issue is
whether to keep it targeted to high poverty communities or make it more
broadly available. Clay has wanted a less targeted approach, to make it
easier to attract more votes.  Last week I argued we shouldn't give up
targeting this early in the process, unless Clay can trade less targeting
for specific bipartisan support. However, now my view is that we should
design this bill in the fasion that will get us the most votes when it is
put up against vouchers.

Any thoughts on this?

3.  Higher Ed Reauthorization/Title V Goodling is marking up    his
reauthorization proposal at 10:30 this morning; the draft was   closely held
until late yesterday.  A few key concerns for us: Apparantly    the only
teacher preparation piece in here is funding for Gov's to use   to upgrade
teacher certification and testing requirements:  I've told ED   we should be


 supportive of this in principle (and reminded them of POTUS views on
 teacher testing), unless a review of the details when they are available
 causes us some concern. We shouldn't have any problem here.

 There are two big problems however.  First, there is no $ for any teacher
 recruitment and preparation at all--so our version of Title V isn't
 included, and neither are any others that have been floating around.
 (This actually could be a blessing in disguise for us--Dem's are likely to
 be more seriously supportive of our class size proposal if their proposal
 for teacher recruitment aren't going anyplace.)  Second, Goodling pays for
 his teacher certification proposal by killing federal support for the
 National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.

 Democrats are going to try and save the national board funding--though
 unless they can enlist Castle's support; they probably won't get
 anyplace. The Dem. strategy on the rest of Title V is less clear--as of
 last night, they hadn't coalesced around an alternative.

 I've talked to the National Board lobbyist this morning.  They assume they
 will lose the vote today.  Hunt is really pissed and is trying to rally
 Rep. Gov. support. (even Lamar Alexander still supports the board, and led
 the effort as Secretary to provide federal funding).

 I assume Goodling is motivated by at least the following factors:  (1) he
 has never liked the national board, and was pissed when Alexander
 supported it; (2) the far right hates the board and is gearing up an
 attack on the Hunt national commission on teaching and america's future,
 which has been supportive of the board.  I think this continues the far
 right track record of opposing anything in education that has the word
 national in it; (3) if we are for the board, Goodling will be against it.

 At some point we ought to get the President to do a high profile event and
 join the battle over the board. We will get easily get business and
 educators on our side; we should be able to get bipartisan support among
 gov's as well.  And we can be for tough standards and better teachers,
 while Congressional R's are not.

 Below is just an issue to resolve, not another depressing development:

 4. Class size Clay is very anxious to introduce our class size bill, and
 doesn't want to wait until POTUS gets back from Africa.  I don't yet see a
 specific need to rush, since its not going to go any place, and since
 POTUS seems to want to do a big rollout event. On the other hand, with a
 short legislative session it can't really be in our interest to delay
 sending something up there.

 Bruce, is there anything in tobacco world that would impact on timing
 here. What do you think of letting Riley transmit and Clay introduce the
 bill, and then doing a big rollout with ED's white paper, state-by-state
 numbers, etc. --either at a legislature or someplace else?


