RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Peter G. Jacoby ( CN=Peter G. Jacoby/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 18-MAR-1998 21:20:46.00

SUBJECT:   INS reform

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
Here is a draft of the INS reform letter.     It includes edits from Peter,
Scott, Steve and Leanne. Thanks.

Julie

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D87]MAIL45741477E.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BA04DOOOOlOA020l0000000205000000812700000002000074CA06D9A4237FE6FA1AD8
00E285FA12Fl1300D70A1613B80C9BC9ADB6137EF1E7DF8951D77FEA54609ACD47AD95D14244EO
074FC1CF8A175C2l84AEBC78231BC6AOCOD13AE91CD08E21507AB6B871BD764FB840BDCC65DE1B
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


March 31,1998
                                                           DRAFT
Harold Rogers
Chainnan
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, State,
       the Judiciary and Related Agencies
Appropriations Committee
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Mr. Chainnan,

        In the Subcommittee's Report accompanying P.L. 105-119, the Congress directed the
Attorney General to review the recommendations of the United States Commission on
Immigration Refonn (CIR) and develop a restructuring plan that would result in greater
effectiveness and efficiency in the perfonnance of the core functions of the federal immigration
system. That request prompted the President to designate the Domestic Policy Council (DPC) to
coordinate a top-to-bottom review ofthe Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to
detennine how the agency could be restructured to most effectively and efficiently accomplish
the duties that have been delegated to the agency by statute and practice. In conducting this
review, the DPC consulted with the Departments of Justice, Labor and State, the INS, staff of the
CIR, immigration advocacy groups, and other White House offices, including the National
Security Council and the Office of Management and Budget.

        The DPC review concluded that the CIR report correctly diagnosed many of INS's
problems -- insufficient accountability between field offices and headquarters, lack of
consistency and professionalism, overlapping organizational relationships, and significant
management weaknesses_ These problems lie at the core of the INS's inability to
effectively pursue the tasks that Congress and the President expect the INS to perform: the
effective enforcement of our immigration laws both at our borders and in our nation's
workplaces, and the efficient provision of immigration and citizenship benefits and services
to those non-citizens who are here lawfully. Improving the ability of the INS to pursue
these critical priorities must be the guiding principle of any reform plan.

       After careful and thorough consideration and study, the Administration believes
that the most effective way to adhere to this guiding principle is to implement dramatic and
fundamental reforms within the INS. The Administration's reform plan would untangle
the INS's overlapping and frequently confusing organizational structure and replace it
with two clear organizational chains of command -- one for accomplishing its enforcement
mission and one for the provision of services. Additionally, the Administration plan
retains essential integrating functions for supporting and coordinating the enforcement
and service operations. The result will be an INS organization with strengthened
accountability and improved efficiency and effectiveness that allows each operation to
focus on the unique management, knowledge, skills, and abilities of its function.
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

    The key features of the Administration's plan are:

           Effect an operational split between enforcement and services, resulting in two
           distinct, clear lines of authority from the field to headquarters, with an INS
           Commissioner continuing to be responsible for overall agency operations;

           Eliminate the current "district" field structure, and replace it with a functional and
           geography-based organization which allows for the creation of service offices in
           areas convenient to their immigrant "customers" and enforcement sites in the
           border areas or at significant ports of entry;

           Improve the quality of the workforce by creation of separate enforcement and
           service career paths for INS employees to ensure that the best employees can move
           up the ladder and are rewarded for high standards of performance;

           Restructure management and strategic planning operations to ensure the efficient
           delivery of a "shared support" operation that will service both the enforcement side
           and the service side of the agency by providing records and data management,
           technological support, employee relations and administrative support.

    ·      Establish a Chief Financial Officer to address deficiencies in financial, accounting
           and budget execution systems.

           Apart from these primary recommendations on restructuring the INS, the
    Administration will work with the INS and the Departments of Labor and State to address
    concerns about duplication, overlapping responsibilities, and issues of coordination. In
    addition, the Department of Justice has contracted with a conSUlting firm to assist in
    making this plan "operational." A copy of their final report is attached.

             It should be noted that during its review, the DPC carefully evaluated the
    recommendations of the CIR. The CIR concluded that the INS's dual responsibility of
    welcoming immigrants who enter legally and deterring those who attempt to enter or stay
    illegally has resulted in "mission overload." To address this issue, they recommended
    disbanding the INS and reallocating its primary responsibilities to the Department of Justice
    (DOJ) and the State Department. We believe those recommendations would only compound the
    current problems within INS.

            First, such a reallocation would require a six or seven-year transition, exacerbating
    the existing concerns about long delays in processing basic immigration services. Second,
    creating a separate immigration enforcement agency within the Justice Department could
    ultimately result in hindering the coordination and communication necessary to maintain
    the integrity and effectiveness of both immigration enforcement and service operations.
    Moreover, moving immigration service operations to the State Department is inconsistent
    with the Department's foreign policy mission. To be effective, immigration policy and
    management should remain within one agency within the Justice Department. Severing


       the link between immigration enforcement and services serves only to weaken both critical
       functions.

               The Administration's plan is a fundamental change in the way the INS conducts
       business. This restructuring --from top to bottom --will address long-standing concerns
       about the lines of authority and responsibility, consistency of operations, and performance
       within the INS. It will result in improved enforcement coordination, career paths that
       support professionalism and measurable changes in the way INS provides services to the
       immigration community. More importantly, it will greatly improve the ability of the INS
       to effectively and efficiently perform the duties that Congress and the President expect.
       We look forward to working with you and other members of Congress to implement this
       restructuring plan and to ensure successful, long-term improvements in the Nation's
       immigration system.

       Sincerely,


       Franklin Raines
       Director
       Office of Management and Budget



       Bruce Reed
       Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy



       Janet Reno
       Attorney General




                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex·Dump Conversion


