RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Charles Konigsberg ( CN=Charles Konigsberg/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-MAR-1998 10:25:08.00

SUBJECT:   Budget Res. re-cap

TO: Tracey E. Thornton ( CN=Tracey E. Thornton/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Martha Foley ( CN=Martha Foley/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Virginia N. Rustique ( CN=Virginia N. Rustique/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Charles R. Marr ( CN=Charles R. Marr/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Overview

        Domenici plan reported.  The Senate Budget Committee Wednesday evening
voted 12-10 along party lines to report the Domenici budget resolution.
There were a number of Sense of the Senate amendments adopted (summarized
below), but no substantive changes were made to the Domenici mark.

        Democratic substitute defeated.  The Budget Committee defeated 8-14 the
Lautenberg Democratic substitute after only a few minutes of discussion.
The vote was party line except for Hollings and Feingold who joined the
Republicans in opposing the Lautenberg substitute.   The final version of
the Democratic substitute is attached.

Outlook for Floor Action

        Lott has said the Senate will complete action on its version of
the budget resolution prior to the April recess;   therefore, the Domenici
resolution will be on the Floor next week or the following week.   At this
time, DomeniciD,s staff believes next week is more likely, so as to free
up the following week for action on the Supp.


        Under the Budget Act, the budget resolution cannot be filibustered on the
Senate Floor because debate time is limited (50 hours) '.  The b~dget
resolution is also protected by a special germaneness requirement: whereas
most bills are open to all amendments without limitation, the Budget Act
prohibits nongermane amendments to the budget resolution.  Because of
these two limitations -- on debate and amendments -- only a simple
majority is needed to pass a budget resolution, whereas most other
controversial legislation requires 60 votes.


Contrast with last yearD,s budget process

        This yearD,s budget resolution has less practical significance
than last yearD,s resolution, which contained mandatory reconciliation


instructions to the authorizing and tax committees; this yearr"s
resolution contains no instructions.   (An attempt could be made on the
Floor to add reconciliation instructions, but such an attempt would likely
fail. )

        In addition, last yearD,s resolution was written to reflect the
bipartisan balanced budget agreement, so that the assumptions underlying
the functional numbers had significant standing, even though they were
technically non-binding.  By contrast, the non-binding programmatic
assumptions underlying the functional totals in this yearD,s budget
resolution have no particular significance.

        The practical significance of this yearD,s budget resolution is
limited to:

 (1) the amount of the 302(a) allocations which will be made to the
Appropriations Committees in the Conference Report;

 (2) the tobacco reserve fund mechanism which would have the effect of
requiring 60 votes to spend the tobacco receipts on anything other than
Medicare Part A (although any tobacco settlement legislation would require
60 votes anyway);

  (3) the transportation reserve fund which has the practical effect of
dedicating the list of specified mandatory savings to offsetting only
highway and transit spending;    these mandatory offsets would not be
counted as savings for any other purpose;

  (4) the separate environmental allocation which has the effect of
limiting the size of Superfund legislation; and

 (5) a mechanism which permits the Chairman of the Budget Committee to
adjust committee allocations to reflect the outcome in the LIV court case.



Budget Committee Markup Details
[SoS = Sense of the Senate resolution;   SoC   Sense of the Congress
resolution]

Tuesday, 3/17
o Adopted by UC a Hollings/Conrad/Feingold/Boxer/Wyden sense of the Senate
amendment that D&Congress and the President should ... work to balance the
budget without counting Social Security trust fund surpluses
(and) ... should work in a bipartisan way on specific legislation to reform
the Social Security system, 'to ensure that it is financially sound over
the long term and will be available for all future generations.DB

Wednesday 3/1B
o Adopted by UC a Bond SoS that the budget totals and levels in this
resolution assume the PresidentD,s policy with respect to the
School-to-Work program under the Education Reform Account and any such
savings as a result should be applied to local initiatives focusing on
early childhood development.

o Adopted by UC a Bond SoS that a portion of tax relief be set aside for
improvement of taxpayer rights and reform of penalty rules.

o Defeated 10-12 a Conrad amendment to broaden the tobacco reserve by
permitting tobacco receipts to be used for public health and anti-tobacco


programs, in addition to Medicare.

o Defeated 10-12 a Conrad amendment to save part of the tobacco receipts
for Social Security, in addition to Medicare.

o Defeated 10-12 a Conrad amendment to permit the reserve fund to
accommodate childrenO,s health insurance.

o Defeated 9-13 a Conrad amendment to permit the use of tobacco receipts
for tobacco farmers.

o Defeated 10-12 a Conrad (catch-all) amendment to broaden the uses of
tobacco receipts to cover a wide variety of uses.

o Defeated 10-12 a Boxer amendment to expand the tobacco reserve fund to
include NIH funding.

o Defeated 2-20 a Grams amendment to split the surplus between tax cuts
and debt reduction

o Defeated by voice vote a Grams SoS amendment on downsizing the Energy
Dept.

o Defeated 10-12 a Murray amendment on a deficit neutral reserve fund for
class size reduction.

o Defeated 10-12 a Murray amendment on a deficit neutral reserve fund for
child care.
o Adopted by UC a Wyden SoS with respect to the global climate initiative.

o Adopted by UC a Rod Grams SoC with respect to no implementation of Kyoto
prior to Senate ratification.

o Adopted by UC a Feingold SoS on moving toward full funding of the
national guard.

o Adopted by UC a Wyden SoS on Medicare choice.

o Adopted by UC a Wyden SoS that the Medicare Commission should also look
at long-term care.

o Adopted by UC a Durbin SoS amendment to accelerate the health insurance
deduction for self-employed.

o Adopted by UC a Snowe SoS on student loans.

o Adopted by UC a Snowe SoS on child care.

o There was an Informal agreement reached among Domenici, Johnson, and
Conrad to find a way to add additional money for Indian schools.

o (Withdrawn, but will offer on the Floor) Wyden amendment to withhold for
one year amounts equivalent to the inflation windfall unless the President
certifies that itO,s needed.

o Defeated 9-13 a Lautenberg amendment to establish an environmental
reserve fund using the Superfund tax.

o Passed 14-8 a Lautenberg SoS on $1.50 increase in cigarettes to curb
teen smoking.



o Defeated 9-13 a    Lautenberg SoS on FDA authority to regulate tobacco
products.

o Defeated 8-14 the Lautenberg Democratic substitute (Hollings and
Feingold voted no) .


