RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TlME:19-MAR-1998 13:08:30.00

SUBJECT:   INS reorg letter

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
Attached is a slightly revised version of the reorg. letter. The main
change is to the intro paragraph -- making clear that the Pres. was
responding to the CIR recommendations, not to Congress's request.   Thanks.

Julie

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D77]MAIL442985777.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BA040000010A02010000000205000000E42B00000002000069F191AB61A06BAA7361AO
89C068DB4E6BB980DF6DCE20A2F420DA17BA69A4642C5382B633B21C1815A2AC5D39C175E01291
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


March 31,1998
                                                           DRAFT
Harold Rogers
Chainnan
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, State,
       the Judiciary and Related Agencies
Appropriations Committee
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Mr. Chainnan,

        In the Subcommittee's Report accompanying P.L. 105-119, the Congress directed the
Attorney General to review the CIR recommendations and develop a restructuring plan that
would result in greater effectiveness and efficiency in the perfonnance of the core functions of
the federal immigration system. The President, also responding to the Commission's report,
asked the Domestic Policy Council (DPC) to "evaluate carefully the [CIR] proposal and other
refonn options designed to improve the executive branch's administration of the Nation's
immigration laws." In conducting this review, the DPC consulted with the Departments of
Justice, Labor and State, the INS, staff of the CrR, immigration advocacy groups, and other
White House offices, including the National Security Council and the Office of Management and
Budget.

        The DPC review concluded that the CIR report correctly diagnosed many of INS's
problems -- insufficient accountability between field offices and headquarters, lack of
consistency and professionalism, overlapping organizational relationships, and significant
management weaknesses. These problems have hampered the INS's ability to effectively
pursue the tasks that Congress and the President expect the INS to perform: effective
enforcement of our immigration laws both at our borders and in the interior, and the
efficient provision of immigration and citizenship benefits and services. Improving the
ability of the INS to pursue these critical priorities must be the guiding principle of any
reform plan.

       After careful consideration and study, we have concluded that the most effective
way to adhere to this guiding principle is to implement dramatic and fundamental reforms
within the INS. The Administration's reform plan will untangle the INS's overlapping
and frequently confusing organizational structure and replace it with two clear
organizational chains of command -- one for accomplishing its enforcement mission and
one for the provision of services. Additionally, the Administration plan retains essential
integrating functions for supporting and coordinating the enforcement and service
operations. The result will be an INS organization with strengthened accountability and
improved efficiency and effectiveness that allows each operation to focus on the unique
management, knowledge, skills, and abilities of its function.


                                               1
            Hex-Dump Conversion

       Effect an operational split between enforcement and services, resulting in two
       distinct, clear lines of authority from the field to headquarters, with an INS
       Commissioner continuing to be responsible for overall agency operations;

       Eliminate the current "district" field structure, and replace it with a functional and
       geography-based organization which allows for the creation of service offices in
       areas convenient to their immigrant "customers" and enforcement sites in the
       border areas or at significant ports of entry;

       Improve the quality of the workforce by creation of separate enforcement and
       service career paths for INS employees to ensure that the best employees can move
       up the ladder and are rewarded for high performance;

       Restructure management operations to ensure an effective "shared support"
       operation (i.e., records and data management, technological support, employee
       relations and administrative support) that will serve both the enforcement and
       service sides of the agency.

·      Establish a Chief Financial Officer to address deficiencies in financial, accounting
       and budget execution systems.

       Apart from these primary recommendations on restructuring the INS, the
Administration will work with the INS and the Departments of Labor and State to address
concerns about duplication, overlapping responsibilities, and issues of coordination. In
addition, the Department of Justice has contracted with a consulting firm to assist in
making this plan "operational." A copy of its final report is attached.

        It should be noted that during its review, the DPC carefully evaluated the
recommendations of the CIR. The CIR concluded that the INS's dual responsibility of
welcoming legal immigrants and deterring illegal immigration has resulted in "mission
overload." To address this issue, they recommended disbanding the INS and reallocating its
primary responsibilities to the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the State Department. We
believe those recommendations would not only compound the current problems with the nation's
immigration system.

        First, creating a separate immigration enforcement agency within the Justice
Department could ultimately result in hindering the coordination and communication
necessary to maintain the integrity and effectiveness of both immigration enforcement and
service operations. Second, such a substantial reallocation of authority could require a six
or seven-year transition, exacerbating the existing concerns about long delays in processing
basic immigration services. Moreover, moving immigration service operations to the State


                                              3

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
immigration policy and management should remain within one agency within the Justice
Department.

        The Administration's plan is a fundamental change in the way the INS conducts
business. This restructuring --from top to bottom --will address long-standing concerns
about the lines of authority and responsibility, consistency of operations, and performance
within the INS. It will result in improved enforcement coordination, career paths that
support professionalism and measurable changes in the way INS provides services to the
immigration community. More importantly, it will greatly improve the ability ofthe INS
to effectively and efficiently perform the duties that Congress and the President expect.
We look forward to working with you and other members of Congress to implement this
restructuring plan and to ensure successful, long-term improvements in the Nation's
immigration system.

Sincerely,


Franklin Raines
Director
Office of Management and Budget



Bruce Reed
Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy



Janet Reno
Attorney General




                                                            AutQmated Records Management System
                                             4                      Hex-Dump Conversion


