RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-MAR-1998 12:15:21.00

SUBJECT:   Final VP Event Memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D83]MAIL48425487G.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504392050000010A02010000000205000000692E000000020000D1DC4EEA4077C2582EA102
58FE65A58B164A44A36BE4D67517C63C98CC8BFAE5B6084E67A0167787DA6E20EBC9B4F49787D2
D350239D7C8FEDBA07B3FD47832A266B41CC4D5492C4B2414676B99028A986229BD96E79E1EF4A
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion




                                          March 17, 1998

MEMORANDUM TO

FROM:                  Bruce Reed
                       Elena Kagan

RE:                    Possible VP Events for 3/22-4/3


       Education -- Address to the National PTA 3/23: The Vice President is scheduled to
speak to a national PTA conference (in Arlington VS). His message may focus on after-school
programs and on the need to protect kids from on-line smut. I will make a strong push for the
VP to plug the President's education agenda overall, and in particular to make the case for
national standards and tests with this group -- which has long opposed national tests, but which
shouldn't.

        Education -- Visit to a South Carolina Community College 3/24: The Vice President
and Secretary Riley will visit a community college in South Carolina, to address the
Administration's lifelong learning initiatives and to release state-by-state figures on the number
of students who will benefit from HOPE Scholarships, Lifetime Learning Tax Credits, and
possibly Pell Grants, and the level of benefits in each state.

        Education -- Child Care Conference in Iowa 4/1: The VP has been asked to speak to
an annual child care conference in Iowa, and is looking for news on child care or after-school.
His staff is interested in release state-by-state child care figures.

        Education -- On-line resources for math and science: Iftoday's announcement of
new online assistance for math and science does not get any coverage, the VP could do an event
demonstrating a new "Federal Resources for Educational Excellence" (FREE) web-site that
connects teachers, parents, and students to teaching and learning resources in math, science and
other subject areas form NASA, NSF, the Energy Department and other agencies. This
announcement could also include several other action steps to support on-line tutoring in math
and science.

        Education -- Urban Education/Releasing Guide to Fixing Failing Schools: The
Education Department is completing work on a guide to turning around failing schools. lithe
guide is ready, the VP could release this in an urban school district, and at the same time release
figures on how the Administration's initiatives help urban schools.

      Community Empowerment -- Reauthorization of the Community Development
Financial Institutions Fund (CDFI): Treasury has pushed through clearance oflanguage to

        reauthorize the CDFI Fund. The language is ready to go to the Hill at any time. This
        Presidential initiative is one of the core components of the Administration's community
        empowerment strategy. The Administration has proposed an increase in the Fund's FY98
        budget to $125 million, and the Fund will be making additional two additional rounds of grants
        this year.

               Treasury is working with the Vice President's office on a possible event in which the
        VPOTUS would call for enactment of the reauthorization at a CDFI site. One possible twist
        could be for the VPOTUS to open a savings account at a CDFI.

                   Welfare -- Federal welfare-to-work hiring initiative: An event to mark the first year
        anniversary of the federal welfare-to-work hiring initiative is currently pending in the VP
        scheduling process. The event could include: release of the first annual report from the VP,
        announcement of the most recent hiring numbers, and a challenge to cabinet secretaries to reach
        out to federal contractors to get more involved in hiring welfare recipients. The audience would
        include several hundred federal contractors from the Washington area, so we will need a little
        lead time for the agencies to invite them. This was originally submitted by NPR staff on
        2/13/98. Late last week, VP scheduling asked Susan Valaskovic to revise slightly, so apparently
        it's still under consideration.

                Welfare -- Welfare Caseload Numbers_: HHS is working on getting updated caseload
        data through December 1997 (last data released, with SOTU, was September 1997). They hope
        to have them to us early next week. The VP could announce these as part of the above event, or
        in a separate announcement. If separate, we could possibly combine with an announcement of
        DOL approval of more Welfare-to-Work formula grants to states. TN is one of those in the
        pipeline and I know the VP's office is interested in releasing that one. I hope to be able to
        confirm timing on caseloads and WTW approvals at our weekly welfare reform meeting wi
        agencies 3/17.

                Food Safety -- Possible Event on FORCG: The VP could announce an executive order
        that formalizes the Foodbome Outbreak Response Coordinating Group (FORCG). The purpose
        ofFORCG is to improve the coordination and outbreak response to foodbome illness by all
        federal, state, and local agencies involved. HHS, USDA, and EPA have been developing an
        MOU on FORCG. The VP could either announce the MOU, or the MOU could be formalized
        into an executive order. We previously announced the FORCG concept, and the MOU sets forth
        that HHS, USDA, and EPA comprise the membership of the FORCG task force.

        Food Safety -- Possible Event on DNA Fingerprinting: The VP could tour a federal or state
        lab that is equipped with DNA fingerprinting technology. The technology works in the
        following way -- a laboratory isolates E.coli 0157:H7 from food, fingerprints it, and then the
        laboratory receives information on any similar fingerprints found. This technology can identify
        a potential outbreak in humans or the potential food source of an outbreak. This approach
        resembles the FBI national network and database for fingerprinting individuals throughout the
        United States and centrally generating a "rap" sheet where there is a match. . The VP's tour
        would include a demonstration of this new technology. The Administration has provided


                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
        increased funding for this technology in the Food Safety Initiative. CBS News is interested in
        this technology, and USDA is working with them on a possible visit by Secretary Glickman to a
        USDA lab in Athens, Georgia, that is equipped with this DNA fingerprinting technology.

                 Health Care -- Approval California's Children's Health Plan: The Vice President
        could announce the approval of new California's children's health program. This plan will
        likely be approved next week, as HHS's approval time line is running out and there are relatively
        few outstanding issues regarding this plan. Because this program is non-controversial and
        because of its size, this new state proposal would be well worth highlighting to underscore the
        early successes of the new children's health program. There are currently over twenty state
        plans being reviewed at HHS. The Vice President could also reiterate our commitment to
        children's health outreach to enroll the children who are eligible for health care coverage but are
        still uninsured. It is also important to note that in the next week, HHS will likely make a
        decision as to whether or not to approve New York's children's health proposal. New York's
        application has more controversial provisions which potentially will lead to either a disapproval
        of the state's plan or a contentious approval. Because of these controversies, we are doubtful
        that it would be worthwhile to announce their plan even ifit is approved.

                Crime -- Law Enforcement Technology: The Vice President could stand with the
        Secretaries of Energy and Treasury, and the Attorney General as they sign a statement of
        principles to transfer certain technologies from the Federal research labs to the Federal law
        enforcement bureaus (e.g., FBI, Customs). The Federal law enforcement agencies will in turn,
        agree to share the technologies with interested local law enforcement. Some of the technologies
        could be demonstrated at the signing event. The Department of Energy has been drafting the
        statement of principles, and it could potentially be ready over the next 10 days.

               Crime -- Chicago COPS Waiver: The Vice President could unveil with the Attorney
        General and Mayor Daley of Chicago a new COPS waiver pilot project that was recently
        approved by the Justice Department. This new pilot project will waive the 25% local match for
        new officers that are coordinated with existing Federal efforts for distressed areas, such as
        Empowerment Zones, Enterprise Communities, Weed and Seed sites, HIDT As and other
        Administration initiatives. The pilot will allow cities and local law enforcement to target crime
        and drug "hot spots." Justice has set aside $60 million to fund this pilot.




                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


