 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:20-MAR-1998 18:37:31.00

 SUBJECT:   Unz Final

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Phillip Caplan ( CN=Phillip Caplan/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D44)MAIL47309687L.026 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF57504364070000010A020100000002050000004664000000020000FF4D47D140787B67535506
 062EB49C7E06ED4D796FEOB47A15F2138A7B99EFB49004FC171C347C2631C32A53E4F3337619DE


                                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion




                                                  March 19, 1998


         MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

         FROM:                 SECRETARY RILEY
                               BRUCE REED

         SUBJECT:              California Proposition 227 (Unz Initiative) to End Bilingual Education


                  On June 2, California voters will consider Proposition 227, otherwise known as the Unz
         Initiative, which proposes to eliminate all bilingual education. This is California's third
         potentially divisive race-related initiative in four years, following on the heels of Proposition
         187, which barred public benefits for illegal immigrants, and Proposition 209, which ended
         affirmative action.

                   Polls consistently show that the initiative is popular and is likely to pass, although a
         strong opposition campaign could make this election close. Many Latino voters currently favor
         the initiative, although the polls show that Latino support has declined considerably as voters
         become more familiar with the details of the proposal. Latino activists are strongly opposed to
         Unz, and are looking to the White House to support their efforts to defeat it.

                 Over the past several months DPC and Education Department staff worked with Maria
         Echaveste, Mickey Ibarra, Karen Skelton, and Janet Murguia to study the Unz Initiative,
         including extensive outreach to both opponents and supporters in California, in the Congress and
         among the advocacy community. Despite legitimate concerns over the effectiveness of some
         bilingual education programs, your advisors strongly believe that the Unz initiative is bad
         education policy and will harm students who need help the most. We also believe that you
         may be able to tum this issue to your political advantage if you combine opposition to Unz with
         proposals to reform bilingual education programs.

         I.     The Vnz Initiative and Bilingual Education in California

         A. Overview of the Vnz Initiative

                 This initiative, authored and backed by Silicon Valley millionaire Ron Unz, is designed to
         end all bilingual education programs in California. More specifically, it would:

         ·      Require that all public school instruction be conducted in English.


                                                         1
       already knows English, has special needs, or would learn English faster through an
       alternative instructional technique.
·      Provide initial placement for Limited English Proficient (LEP) students in "sheltered
       English immersion" programs for one year. Instruction in these programs would be
       conducted in English, with some accommodations in the curriculum to take into account
       the limited English language skills of the students.
·      Appropriate $50 million per year over 10 years to fund adult education programs
       designed to teach English to LEP adults who in tum pledge to provide English language
       tutoring to LEP students.
·      Make teachers, administrators and school board members subject to suits and personally
       liable for failure to implement the provisions of the initiative.

        Unz and other backers of this initiative regard the existing system of bilingual education
in the state as a complete failure. They argue that because bilingual education relies so heavily
on use of the students' native language and only slowly introduces English, the approach delays
or prevents, rather than promotes, the acquisition of English. Further, they point out that
although California's bilingual education law expired a decade ago, the legislature has been
unable to enact legislation to reform a broken program. This initiative, they argue, will break
the legislative impasse and dramatically change bilingual education policy for the better.

         Opponents criticize the Unz Initiative on a number of counts. Critics argue that the
initiative is harmful to children, because it relies on a single, unproven approach that provides an
unrealistic time period in which to learn English. They argue that this one-size-fits-all approach
eliminates parents' right to chose the best approach for their child (given that the waiver
provisions are very complicated and burdensome). They point out that the Unz initiative
provides no accountability, because it lacks any requirements for assessing students' academic
progress. They also charge that the Unz Initiative undermines local control and the ability of
local school boards to determine important education policies, and wrongly subjects educators to
lawsuits.

B. Bilingual Education in California

       Demographics. There are approximately 1.3 million Limited English Proficient (LEP)
students in California, approximately one quarter of California's K-12 students. This number
has nearly doubled in less than a decade, and represents some 43% of the national total. Seventy
nine percent of California's LEP students are native Spanish speakers. Hispanics have a 50%
dropout rate, and by most indicators their academic performance lags behind most other
population groups in the state.

       Educational Services. LEP students receive a wide variety of services intended to help
them learn English and academic subjects. In 1997, only about 30% received what is
conventionally considered bilingual education -- programs which make significant use of the


                                                 2
                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
language instruction. More than half participate in specially designed instructional programs
that help students learn English through a combination of approaches such as direct instruction in
grammar, vocabulary and communications, while teaching other subjects in a way designed to be
accessible to LEP students. (The Unz Initiative would eliminate these programs as well as
conventional bilingual programs.) Approximately 16% of all LEP students are not receiving any
language instruction services at all.

        Almost no one believes that the services now provided to LEP students are effective on a
large scale basis. While program evaluations have identified some promising efforts, shortages
of qualified teachers and poor implementation has limited the effectiveness of existing programs.
 Of course, the poor academic performance and high dropout rate of Hispanic students reflects a
wide range of school deficiencies, but poor language services for LEP students contribute to this
problem.

        The research on instruction for LEP students does not identify any approach ~
bilingual education, English immersion, English as a Second Language, or dual-language
immersion) as particularly effective. Rather, it suggests that effective programs are those that fit
the needs and resources of the local community; have well-prepared teachers who know how to
teach reading and who are knowledgeable about second-language acquisition; provide students
with a challenging curriculum and high academic standards; and regularly assess student progress
and make adjustments in the instructional program accordingly. Consequently, while much of
the debate about educating LEP students centers on the relative merits of one program over
another, research and experience suggest that attention to program quality regardless of program
type is more important.

        California Legal Framework. The legal framework for providing services to LEP
students in California is murky. California's Bilingual Education Act sunseted in 1987, but the
State Board of Education regulations implementing the act have remained in effect. Under this
framework, school districts are required to help students become fluent in English and competent
in other academic subjects, and are given a significant amount of flexibility in determining how
to achieve these goals. Neither bilingual education nor any other specific approach to teaching
LEP students is required.

         There have been a number of unsuccessful attempts in the past decade to enact new
legislation, but bilingual education reformers and advocates have been unable to agree on an
approach. There has been a fresh attempt over the past month to craft compromise legislation,
partly to take the steam out of Unz and to give Unz opponents something to support. This
effort, however, is likely to end in failure.

        Last week the State Board of Education took the first step toward eliminating the state
bilingual education regulations. This process should be completed shortly before the vote on
Unz. The effect of this action will be to eliminate any state requirement for the provision of
specific services to LEP students, and to give local school districts even greater flexibility in this

                                                  3

                                                                 Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

       Federal Legal Framework. Federal requirements originate in the Due Process and
Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment, and provisions of the Equal Educational
Opportunities Act which require educational agencies to take appropriate action to overcome
language barriers that impede equal participation by students in instructional programs.

       As interpreted by the courts, these provisions do not require any specific form of services,
such as Bilingual Education or English as a Second Language. They instead require the
provision of supplemental language instruction that is based on sound educational theory, is
adequately resourced and implemented, and is evaluated and modified as necessary.

        IfUnz is enacted, many expect that it will be challenged as a violation offederallaw.
Department of Education lawyers believe that the success of such suits will depend on whether
the services mandated by Unz are implemented effectively. Absent implementation problems,
federal law appears to provide sufficient flexibility to allow California to approve this approach.
However, there will be a strong basis for a legal challenge in districts that do not provide help to
students whose limited English proficiency interferes with their ability to master the school
curriculum.

        The federal Bilingual Education program (Title VII of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act) similarly does not preclude the adoption ofthe Unz approach. This competitive
grant program provides local school districts with considerable discretion in the kind of services
provided to students.

II.     Political Context

         The Unz initiative is currently the most serious threat to bilingual education, but it is not
likely to be the last. Earlier this year Speaker Gingrich proposed eliminating bilingual
education, and some conservative education experts (!2,&, Diane Ravitch) have also called for its
elimination. Especially if Unz passes, we are likely to see energized opposition to the federal
program, and increased opposition in other states and localities.

         The Unz initiative presents a political dilemma in California. Ifwe oppose it, we
risk alienating a majority of California Anglo voters. If we fail to oppose it, we risk alienating a
vocal and increasingly influential group of Latino leaders, and possibly Latino voters.

         Current polls show that a large majority of California Anglo voters support Unz. For
Anglos, bilingual education may become a hot button issue similar to immigrant services and
affirmative action. In contrast, Latino voters are split on the issue. While many continue to
support Unz largely out of frustration at the public schools' failure to help their children, polls
show that Latino support is eroding as they become more aware of the particulars of the
initiative. And the polls tended to underestimate Latino opposition to Prop. 187 and Prop. 209.


                                                  4
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex·Dump Conversion
issue, like Propositions 187 and 209. Latino leaders are looking to the White House to become
actively involved in the opposition to Unz, and are fearful that we will choose to sit on the
sidelines.

         More organizations and elected officials are taking positions on Unz. The California
education community -- including the California Teachers Association and the California
School Boards Association -- is strongly opposed to Unz. Key Democratic officeholders
(including Sen. Boxer, Rep. Becerra and most Democrats in the California delegation, State
Superintendent Delaine Eastin, and Speaker Villaraigosa) have also announced their opposition
to the Unz initiative. All three Democratic gubernatorial candidates have come out against Unz.
  Sen. Feinstein has not taken a public stance yet, though she appears likely to support Unz. A
list of organizations, elected officials, and other leaders that have taken positions on Unz is
attached.

        The Republican state party has supported Unz, though many Republican officials,
including Gov. Wilson, have not yet taken a position. Dan Lungren has not taken a position yet,
but has recently said that the recent action by the State Board of Education has eliminated the
need for Unz. There is always a chance that White House opposition to Unz could polarize the
situation and push Gov. Wilson and other Republicans to support Unz, but at least some
Republican leaders are afraid to support another initiative viewed as anti-Hispanic.

        The political dilemma can be resolved with a "Mend it! Don't End it" response.
We believe the best approach to this issue is to strike a middle ground by admitting that bilingual
educ,\tion needs mending, but asserting that Unz is not the way to do it. More specifically, we
can:
it      Start by reiterating the overriding importance of helping every child become proficient in
        English;
·       Oppose Unz on the merits because it is too extreme;
·       Remind voters what we are for, including both our overall approach to public education
        and our Hispanic initiative;
·       Propose to "mend" the federal bilingual education program through steps that will create
        expectations for learning English within a fixed period of time; strengthen accountability
        for students and programs alike by testing for English proficiency; strengthen local
        control and flexibility; and promote our efforts to strengthen program quality by increased
        investments in teacher training.

III.   Specific Recommendations

1. Announce opposition to Unz within next 4 weeks

       We recommend that you or another senior Administration official (the Vice President or
Secretary Riley) announce the Administration's opposition to the uilz initiative within the next


                                                5
                                                             ;utcmated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
constructive tone, rather than get sucked into an already inflammatory debate. We could turn
this initiative into an opportunity to fit bilingual education into our overall framework for
ensuring effective education in the 21 st century.

___.Agree ___Disagree
                                   - - -Discuss Further
2. Specific recommendations for changing federal bilingual education program

        In accord with our recommendation for a "mend, don't end" approach to bilingual
education, we believe that opposition to Unz should be coupled with specific proposals to change
the federal bilingual education program. This approach willlehd credibility to our position, and
give us a basis for framing the debate over bilingual education. Specifically, we recommend the
following changes:

        Strengthen local control by lifting the existing cap on English programs. The current
federal bilingual program contains a ceiling that permits only 25% of all funds to be used to
support English-only programs. In fact, the cap has not prevented local districts from using the
approaches they want, but conservative critics perceive it as having that effect. Lifting the cap
would add credibility to our call for local control (rather than the Unz one-size-fits-all approach),
and would help address the concerns of these critics. This action, however, would be
unpopular with the bilingual advocacy community.

         Create expectations for students to learn English within 3 years.          One of the most
powerful criticisms of bilingual education programs is that they in fact prolong the time it takes
for students to learn English. This criticism resonates with many opponents as well as
supporters ofUnz. We should propose amending the federal bilingual education program to
require that students learn English within 3 years, with additional time and services provided to
students facing unusual circumstances. (Practically, this would mean that individual students
could only participate in the federally funded program for 3 years unless there were unusual
circumstances.) Setting clear expectations for how quickly students will master English (i.e.,
well enough to learn other subjects in English) will appropriately focus the efforts of schools and
students and help more students become proficient in English. This action, however, would be
criticized by Hispanic elected leaders nationally and in Congress, as well as bilingual advocates.
Advocates and researchers will argue that there is no clear researc}1 base to establish a 3-year
time frame--and, indeed that more time is necessary for students to master English and other
subjects.

       Because of these concerns Maria Echaveste feels that learning English within 3 years
should be a goal, rather than a requirement, of federal programs.

       Strengthen testing and accountability for students and programs. Programs should
be required to test students periodically for English proficiency (as well as achievement in other
subjects) to determine if they are making adequate progress toward the 3-year deadline, and to

                                                  6
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
making adequate progress. There should also be additional accountability for school districts
participating in the bilingual education program. Programs are already required to undergo
evaluations; this requirement can be strengthened by establishing consequences, such as possible
withholding of funds, from programs that fail to make adequate progress as measured by student
achievement.

        Underscore efforts to strengthen the quality of programs that provide services to
LEP students. We should highlight your budget request to increase funding for teacher training
within the bilingual education program. The Education Department should also undertake a
vigorous effort, through technical assistance and effective dissemination approaches, to
emphasize that any program for LEP students must be based on fundamental principles of
quality: ensuring well-trained teachers, high standards and a quality curriculum, testing and
accountability measures. The Education Department should also help the programs it funds
work more effectively to engage parents in their children's learning.


___.Agree - - -Disagree - - -Discuss Further




Elected Officials, Associations, Activists are Taking positions on Unz:


                                                7
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex·Dump Conversion
      Senator Barbara Boxer
      Lt. Gov. Grey Davis
      Congressman Xavier Becerra
      Congressman Cal Dooley
     Congressman Bob Filner
     Congressman Lucile Roybal-Allard
     Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren
     Congresswoman Ellen Tauscher
     Congressman Vic Fazio
     Congressman Marty Martinez
     Delaine Eastin, Superintendent of Public Instruction
     Assemblyman Cruz Bustamante (former Speaker)
     Speaker Antonio Villaraigosa
     Senator President John Burton
     Supervisor Gloria Molina
     CTA
     MALDEF
     Republican Assemblyman Bill Leonard
     Republican Assemblyman Rod Pacheco (only R Latino Assemblyman)
     CABE

Support Unz:
      Ron Unz
      Gloria Matta Tuchman
      Jaime Escalante
      Fernando Vega
      Mayor Richard Riordan
      Darrell Issa, Republican Senate Candidate opposing Barbara Boxer




                                     8                Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


