RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Lawrence J. Haas ( CN=Lawrence J. Haas/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-MAR-1998 20:01:45.00

SUBJECT:   Info.

TO: Toby Donenfeld ( CN=Toby Donenfeld/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Lawrence J. Haas ( CN=Lawrence J. Haas/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The attached includes a file that has two D-R-A-F-T fact sheets on our
announcements for Monday (as well as a file of limited Q and A on
tobacco). I haven't edited the fact sheets yet. You can e-mail me your
clearly-identifiable changes, or slide hard paper under' my door, Room 273
1/2, OEOB. Thanks for your help.

---------------------- Forwarded by Lawrence J. Haas/OVP on 03/20/98 07:56
PM ---------------------------




Jodi R. Sakol
03/20/98 07:24:31 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:        Lawrence J. Haas/OVP
cc:
Subj ect :         Info.




My number in NY is   ~m-~ or you can page Chris at I           P6/(b)(6)
Thanks.                                                    ~----------~




==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:


Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D23]MAIL49442787E.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750435C0700000l0A020100000002050000006B330000000200OODE77F9E1E0043B455CD43D
D2E9DAOECDB50416C6C480B44D3BD335COA445C04A5C8592910DBC97C5DDC982138983BA1F53B7
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                           DRAFf
                              Questions and Answers on State
                                Youth Smoking Reductions
                                      March 23, 1998

Q:   What did the Vice President announce today?

A:   The Vice President announced a new Treasury Department analysis that
     demonstrates that the Administration's proposal for comprehensive tobacco
     legislation will have a significant impact in every state and every region in the
     country in reducing youth smoking and preventing premature deaths. A per-pack
     price increase of up to $1.50 over 10 years combined with advertising and access
     restrictions will result in an average reduction of 42 percent in underage teenage
     smoking in the year 2003 in every single state, including the District of Columbia.
     The percentage reductions in underage teen smoking and resulting premature
     deaths range from 33-36 percent in states like Washington, Massachusetts, and
     Michigan, to 47-51 percent in states like Wyoming, Tennessee, and Kentucky.
     Fifteen states will see reductions above 45 percent in the 2003. Over the next five
     years, the number of young people kept from smoking would be about 3 million
     young people for the country as a whole. Individual states will see reductions
     ranging from a few thousand in the smaller states up to about 248,000 in California
     and 205,000 in Texas.

Q:   What is your support for saying that one million lives can be saved over 5 years if
     Congress passes comprehensive legislation?

A:   Last month, the President announced a Treasury department analysis which found that the
      Administration's proposal -- a price increase of $l.l 0 per pack over five years coupled
     with sales and advertising restrictions -- will save a million lives over the next five years.
      This report concludes that underage smoking would be reduced by nearly half. Based
     on new data, we now estimate that cumulatively over the next five years, approximately 3
     million underage teens would be kept from smoking -- an increase from the 2.4 to 2.8
     million previously reported. Because the number of premature deaths from smoking is
     about one-third of actual smokers, the Administration's proposal would prevent almost a
     million premature deaths over the next five years.


Q:   Many legislators and public health officials have said that tobacco legislation must
     not include limits on liability. What is the Administration's position?

A:   The President would prefer legislation without liability limits, but will evaluate tobacco
     legislation as a whole to determine whether it protects public health. In the context of a
     comprehensive bill that meets the President's five principles and advances the public
     health, reasonable limits on liability will not be a dealbreaker. What's important is
     achieving comprehensive legislation that includes a large per-pack price increase, strong
     penalties for marketing to children, and affirmation of FDA's authority to restrict
     advertising aimed at children and prevent children's access to tobacco products.
 things like tobacco use and reading inappropriate material on the Internet," Vice President
 Gore said. "We have an obligation together as parents, teachers, communities and
 government to help families make sense of today's changes--to
[protect our oldest values in new times."


    VICE PRESIDENT GORE ANNOUNCES THAT PRESIDENT'S TOBACCO PLAN

         WILL CUT SMOKING AND PREMATURE DEATHS BY 42 PERCENT


·      Today, Vice President Gore released a new Treasury Department analysis which
       concludes that every state, including the District of Columbia, will have an average
       42-percent reduction in youth smoking and premature deaths under the comprehensive
       tobacco legislation the President has called on Congress to pass.

       These data shows that the cumulative number of teens kept from smoking would be
       approximately 3 million over the next five years --a significant increase over previously
       announced figures, and approximately one million young people would be spared
       diseases or a premature death as a result of tobacco use.

Fact: Every day, 3,000 young people start smoking and 1,000 of them will die prematurely from
a tobacco-related disease. Over three million teenagers -- more than 22 percent of high school
students -- smoke cigarettes on a daily basis. Another 2 million smoke on a casual basis and are
at risk of becoming chronic daily users.

Vice President Announces State by State Impact of Administration's Tobacco Proposal on
Youth Smoking in Every State

       Last month, the President announced a Treasury department analysis which found that the
       Administration's proposal --a price increase of $1.1 0 per pack over five years coupled
       with sales and advertising restrictions --will save a million lives over the next five years.
       New estimates demonstrate that the Administration's proposal would have major effects
       on youth smoking in every state in the Nation:

       Every state, including the District of Columbia, will see an average reduction in youth
       smoking and resulting premature deaths of 42 percent in the year 2003, with reductions
       ranging from 33 percent in Washington to 51 percent in Kentucky;

       Fifteen states will see reductions above 45 percent, including Missouri, Wyoming, and
       Tennessee;



       Over the next five years, the number of young people kept from smoking would be about

                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex·Dump Conversion
      ranging from a few thousand in the smaller states up to about 248,000 in California and
      205,000 in Texas; and

·     Over the next five years, almost one million of to day's young people will be spared from
      premature deaths resulting from smoking-related diseases as the direct result of the
      Administration's policy. More than twenty thousand lives will be saved in over 16
      states, including Florida where 56,000 premature deaths will be prevented and Ohio
      where the number is 57,000.

Vice President Reaffirm Administration's Commitment To Five Key Principles Essential
For Comprehensive Tobacco Legislation

      A comprehensive plan to reduce youth smoking by raising the price of a pack of
      cigarettes by up to $1.50 over ten years;

      Full authority of the Food and Drug Administration to regulate tobacco products;

      Changes in how the tobacco industry does business, including an end to marketing and
      promotion to children;

      Progress towards other public goals, including biomedical and cancer research, a
      reduction of secondhand smoke, promotion of cessation programs, and other urgent
      priorities; and Protection for tobacco farmers and their communities.




                                    Automated Records Management System
                                            Hex-Dump Conversion


    "We must empower parents by giving them the tools to protect their own children from
    things like tobacco use and reading inappropriate material on the Internet," Vice President
    Gore said. "We have an obligation together as parents, teachers, communities and
    government to help families make sense of today's changes--to protect our oldest values in
    new times."

             VICE PRESIDENT ANNOUNCES NEW TOOLS TO ALLOW PARENTS TO

          PROTECT CHILDREN FROM INAPPROPRIATE MATERIAL ON THE INTERNET

    ·      As we connect every school to the Internet, we need to make sure that parents and
           teachers have the tools they need to prevent children from getting access to inappropriate
           material on the Internet, and to guide them towards high-quality educational resources.

    ·      We believe that schools should be empowered to make decisions based on local values
           when deciding how to protect children from inappropriate material while also protecting
           the first amendment values we all hold dear.

    Supporting Local Values -- Not Goyernment Mandated Values

    ·      Requiring Schools to Adopt Internet Use Plans.     Gore announces support for legislation
           that would require every school and library that wishes to receive e-rate support to adopt
           a policy for the use of the Internet that is intended to prevent access by minors to
           inappropriate material. Decisions about what is "inappropriate" would be made at the
           local level, not at the federal level.

    ·     Making Federal Subsidies AvaiJable to Help Protea Our Children On-Line. Gore joins
           members of Congress in seeking clarification that blocking and filtering technologies are
           covered by the "e-rate."

    ·      Applaud Private Seaor Commitments Making Blocking AvaiJable to Parents and Teachers in
           95% of Internet Browsers. Gore announces a giant step forward in giving parents and
          teachers the tools they need to prevent children from getting access to inappropriate
          material. Following up on a commitment they made to the President and the Vice
          President at the "Family Friendly Internet Summit," Netscape will include support for
          filtering technology in the soon-to-be-released version of their browser. By joining
          Microsoft, Netscape's decision will make this technology available to over 95 percent of
          the browser market.




                                       Automated Records Management System
                                               Hex·Dump Conversion


