RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 26-MAR-1998 15:31:05.00

SUBJECT:   INS Reform -- Executive Summary

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
Attached is a draft of the executive summary.   It incorporates INS, DOJ
and Steve Mertens's edits.  Peter and Alan would like to take a draft of
this on the Hill with them tomorrow.  Thanks ..

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D94)MAIL48519548E.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750436A110000010A020100000002050000001A55000000020000D638698BECD9E53C4C7770
2F99FDED02FE18501F0554EEAED5E1CF3B03F757D51F15358AACEE6C81561396099D1919E62D34
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
A FRAMEWORK FOR CHANGE:
The Immigration and Naturalization Service


Background

America has always been a nation of immigrants, and this Administration is proud of the
significant progress we have made toward improving America's immigration system. Over the last
five years, the INS has worked hard to curtail illegal immigration through tougher border
control, strengthened worksite enforcement, and removal of a record numbers of criminal and
other illegal aliens. The agency has also worked to improve and tighten the naturalization
process, and have made needed reforms to our asylum system for refugees fleeing persecution.
While the INS has achieved progress in these areas, the Administration recognizes the need the
restructure the agency in order to improve its administration of the nation's immigration laws.

In its final report to Congress last fall, the United States Commission on Immigration Reform
(eIR) called for significant reform to our nation's immigration system. The eIR criticized that
the INS's dual responsibility of welcoming immigrants who enter legally and deterring those who
enter illegally has resulted in "mission overload" and recommended reallocating responsibilities
both within the Department of Justice (DO]) and outside the agency. The major thrust of the
eIR's proposed reform would move all immigration service functions to the Department of State,
and would consolidate all immigration enforcement into a new federal law enforcement agency
within the Justice Department.

In response to the CIR's recommendation, the President asked the Domestic Policy Council
(DPC) to "evaluate carefully the [CIR] proposal and other reform options designed to improve
the executive branch's administration of the Nation's immigration laws." In conducting this
review, the DPC, working closely with the Office of Management and Budget, consulted with the
Departments of Justice, Labor and State, the INS, staff of the CIR, immigration experts and
advocacy groups, and other White House offices, including the National Security Council. This
review examined organizational and restructuring options including those formulated by the CIR
and members of Congress. After the Administration established a framework for reform,
the Justice Department contracted with a management consulting firm to assist in
developing a plan to make this framework "operational."
                              -
The Administration's Framework fOr Change

The CIR report correctly diagnosed many of INS's problems -- insufficient accountability
between field offices and headquarters, lack of consistency and professionalism,
overlapping organizational relationships, and significant management weaknesses. These
problems have hampered the INS's ability to effectively pursue the tasks that Congress and
the President expect the INS to perform: effective enforcement of our immigration laws

                                              -1-
citizenship benefits and services. Improving the ability of the INS to pursue these critical
priorities must be the guiding principle of any reform plan.

After careful consideration and study, the Administration concluded that the most effective
way to adhere to this guiding principle is to implement dramatic and fundamental reforms
within the INS. The Administration's reform plan untangles the INS's overlapping and
frequently confusing organizational structure and replace it with two clear organizational
chains of command -- one for accomplishing its enforcement mission and one for the
provision of services. Each operation would be headed by and Executive Associate
Commissioner (EAC) who would report directly to the Commissioner or Deputy
Commissioner. This division of responsibility sets up clear lines of authority and
accountability at every functional level.

While the Administration's plan calls for separating enforcement from services operations
within the INS, it also retains essential integrating functions for supporting and
coordinating these operations. The result will be an INS organization with strengthened
accountability and improved efficiency and effectiveness that allows each operation to
focus on the unique management, knowledge, skills, and abilities of its function.

Improyed Customer-Oriented Services

      Creates new local service offices. The new immigration services operation would locate
       new service offices in immigrant communities around the country. These offices would
       focus on providing efficient and effective service, while maintaining the integrity of
       application processing. The offices would provide a range of services including: providing
       information to applicants, taking fingerprints and photographs, testing, and interviewing.
       Depending on community needs, some offices may be configured as full-service centers
       and others could serve as satellite locations to perform specific functions. These new
       service facilities would have a standard "look and feel" with clears signs, comfortable
       waiting rooms, some evening and weekend hours and other customer-friendly features.

      Creates stronger lines of authority and accountability. The heads of the local service offices
       would report to an Service Area Director. The service area director would report
       directly to the Executive Associate Commissioner for Immigration Services. Service area
       directors would have the flexibility to move case processing responsibilities among offices
       within their area to maximize efficiency. Area directors would be held accountable for
       meeting a nationally-established standard for timely processing and courteous service at all
       of the locations throughout the area's jurisdiction.

      Offers high-tech answers. This new framework provides high-tech ways for people to
       receive better service through remote service centers.      As part of this restructuring effort,

                                                -2-

                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex텱ump Conversion
       automated, bulk processing workload of the current district offices. These centers currently
       take applications, create electronic records of them, and conduct the pre-processing
       necessary before the examination is administered. Under the new structure, more clerical
       work would be shifted to the service centers, thus allowing local offices to focus on core
       activities which require interaction with customers.

A Strengthened and Integrated Enforcement Operation

      Establishing a Single, Coordinated Enforcement Function. Creates an operational chain of
       command dedicated to immigration enforcement.         INS can focus comprehensively on
       illegal immigration problems at the border and in the interior, and create a single point of
       accountability for performance. This approach will strengthen professionalism and
       improve results. Also, this structure would ensure priorities are shared and allow close
       coordination of day-to-day operations among each enforcement discipline.

      Integrating Enforcement and Strengthening Accountability. The new enforcement
       operations areas would combine all functions related to the enforcement of immigration
       laws. Each enforcement area would be organized according to these four enforcement
       functions, and led by a single director. The area enforcement director would report
       directly to the Executive Associate Commissioner for Enforcement.

      Four field components Organized by Function.   The enforcement areas would be
       organized around four functional goals: managing the border; inspections and
       management at ports of entry; investigations and removals; and detention.

       1) Border Patrol. The Border Patrol would perform its current border management
       functions of deterring illegal immigration, apprehending illegal aliens, and working to
       dismantle smuggling rings.

       2) Inspectors. The plan recognizes the critical part the ports of entry play in INS'
       border management strategy by putting inspectors in the enforcement chain of command.
         Gives the ports a stronger role on the enforcement side of the agency and a direct
       reporting relationship to the Enforcement Area Director in order to better address illegal
       attempts to enter the country.

       3) Investigations and Removals. This plan would also bring investigators, intelligence
       officers and deportation officers into one multi-disciplinary component in order to focus
       on removals and pursuing cases of fraud, smuggling and illegal employment at the
       workplace. Offices in the field would be located in areas with the greatest demand for
       those functions-- similar to the traditional Special or Resident Agent-in Charge

                                               -3-
                                                             Automated Records Manage~ent System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

       4) Detention and Enforcement Support. This framework would improve the logistical
       coordination of transporting criminal and illegal aliens and detaining them in long-term
       facilities by centralizing the current District Office detention and transportation operations.
       Under the new framework, this component would be better able to track open bed space
       at INS and contract facilities, improve and monitor conditions at these facilities, as well as
       provide appropriate access to them.

Shared Sueport

      Providing the Right Tools.   The "shared support" operation (e.g., records and data
       management, technological support, employee relations, and administrative support)
       serves as the administrative and technological backbone upon which both enforcement
       and service operations depend. The goal of this operation will be to ensure that each side
       of the agency has the appropriate administrative and technological tools to do their jobs.
       These range from ensuring that new computer software systems are designed to be
       "user-friendly" for the enforcement agents and service officers who rely on them, to
       making sure that appropriate training is provided to strengthen professionalism.

      Managing Essential Records.      An important cohesive function of the shared support
       operation is the management of all of INS's files and electronic databases. The INS's
       records are the basis for its work ~- whether law enforcement or the provision of services
       to customers. The information contained in those records tells an INS deportation officer
       that an individual has overstayed his visa and the last address at which he might be found.
       It also tells an adjudicator whether a person has ever entered without inspection, therefore
       jeopardizing his eligibility to become a legal permanent resident.

New "Strategy" Office

      Eliminating Overlapping Functions.    The Administration's proposed structure includes the
       creation of a small, new "strategy" unit that would focus on setting priorities, designing
       the ways in which they can be executed in the field, as well as analyzing the effectiveness
       of their execution. The unit would use staff from headquarters, as well as create subject
       area task forces to draw on the expertise of individuals accountable for each program.

New Chief Financial Officer Role

      Enhancing Accountability and Efficiency.  The new structure also creates a role for a new
       Chief Financial Officer to improve the distribution, control and monitoring of the
       agency's finances. This would enhance accountability for managing the agency's resources

                                                  -4-

                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion



    and ensure that immigrant services and enforcement have clearly separated and defined
    revenue streams.




                                          -5-           Autcmated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
        Other management improvements

        INS recognizes that a profound restructuring is only one aspect of improving its ability to build a
        more effective organization. As part of its reform efforts, the agency is also planning management
        initiatives to reform pay discrepancies, such as the reclassification of inspectors as enforcement
        personnel, fundamentally redesigning outdated business processes, and creation of new training
        opportunities.

        Condusion

        Preserving our country's tradition as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants requires one
        agency with clear, defined operational lines of authority and accountability. This new structure
        will allow our Nation to better control its borders and provide improved service and benefits to
        the immigration community, The Administration's plan is a bold initiative to strengthen the
        INS's capacity and ability to accomplish this critical mission.




        March 29, 2010
        C:\WORK\WP\IMMIGRAT\ANBENDER.6
        3:00pm




                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                       -6-


