RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:31-MAR-1998 11:47:50.00

SUBJECT:   OMB/Commerce draft Privacy entity memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett    CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ]
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:


   We've had prel'iminary meetings with the
NEC/Commerce/Treasury/OMB/Commerce working group on privacy. The issues
were broken down into: evaluating creation of a privacy entity in the
federal government, creating a consumer bill of rights, specific initia
tives on medical records and genetic privacy, internet commerce, medical
records, genetic privacy, creating privacy principles, and E.U.-US trade
issues.

The attached is a draft memo by OMB and Commerce on evaluating creation of
a governmental privacy entity which is being pushed by Sally. The memo
will go out to career agency types for comment from Commerce/OMB.

The memo lists 7 possible functions of the proposed entity and gives a
recommendation.  As you can see, the blander functions -- such as
representing the US in trade matters and coordinating governmental policy
    are the ones the agencies have had an easier time agreeing to.   I
think it needs to be beefed up so that the entity is created with some
explicit goal (even though it is not regulatory) that includes helping to
ensure privacy, and we've asked Treasury to report back on consumer bill
of right principles and their evaluation of the pending legislation in the
area to see if they would support any of it.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D11]MAIL43287498G.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BE040000010A0201000000020500000080370000000200006E8960F4202CF3D3B5DCA7
6B8COD3AA85CCA150F046367389CB7F1BEAEC75F5D2EA317DF279FCF6E715609B515B8677385EB
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion '
Attachment to Memorandum to Privacy Contacts
REPRESENTATIONAL FUNCTION

What is the Representational function? In performing the representational function, a federal
entity would explain and promote the U.S. government position on privacy policy domestically
and internationally, advancing the Administration's privacy message, and providing coherence to
Administration testimony and public positions.

For what areas is there now a representational function for privacy? The Commerce
Department has taken the lead in representing the federal government position on privacy to
private industry and the commercial sector generally. Until it was disbanded in 1997, the
Office of the Assistant to the President for Consumer Affairs fulfilled this role with respect to
consumers and consumer advocacy groups. The Office of Management and Budget is
responsible for giving Federal agencies guidance on implementation of the Federal Privacy Act.
Each of these offices has represented the government's position in testimony before Congress
relevant to its constituent sector. A number of government offices represent the U.S. position
on privacy before our international trading, including NTIAlDOC, ITAlDOC, OMB, the Office
of Policy Development in the White House, and the State Department, although Commerce is
most active in this role.

What were the group's thoughts on the Representation function? Participants agreed that
presentation of Administration views on privacy-related policy matters to industry, to members
of the public, to Congress, and to our international trading partners should be better coordinated
and enhanced.

ADVISORY FUNCTION

What is the Advisory function? The advisory role is one in which experts are available to
respond to privacy policy questions raised by government agencies (e.g., when considering
legislation or drafting regulations) and by private sector entities (e.g., when developing personnel
practices or new information products).

For what areas is there now an advisory role? The OMB provides guidance to federal
agencies as to how to implement their responsibilities under the Privacy Act, resolves disputes
among agencies about data sharing in its traditional neutral mediating role, and responds to
inquiries from the Congress about federal privacy policy when appropriate. The Department of
Commerce is working with the private sector (commercial and public interest representatives) to
develop effective self-regulation for privacy protection pursuant to the President's directive of
July 1, 1997. In conducting their particular regulatory roles, other federal agencies (e.g. HHS)
may occasionally provide privacy policy advice to their constituents on request.

What were the group's thoughts on the Advisory function? There seemed to be agreement
that an available body of expertise is useful, and tentative agreement that an advisory function
might be better coordinated and enhanced.
COORDINATION FUNCTION
government agencies of emerging privacy issues and ensure that these issues are addressed. It
could also ensure that the views of appropriate agencies are represented on privacy policy issues,
both domestically and internationally.

For what areas is there now a coordination role being carried out? OMB coordinates
Administration positions on legislation, testimony, and reports submitted to Congress.
Otherwise, coordination is ad hoc and sporadic.

What were the group's thoughts on the Coordination function?
There was agreement that coordination is an essential function that should be significantly
enhanced.

REGULATORY!ENFORCEMENT FUNCTION

What is the regulatory function? The regulatory function involves the creation and
administration of legally enforceable regimes of fair information practices including the use of
some combination of inspection, registration, reporting, civil or criminal action, adjudication,
and penalties.

For what sectors is there now a regulatory regime for privacy? No omnibus law regulates
private sector use of information. However, certain kinds of information are subject to
sector-specific law. The Federal government's management of records about individuals is
governed by the Privacy Act; the Office of Management and Budget oversees its implementation.
  Consumer credit information is substantially regulated by the Fair Credit Reporting Act with
enforcement authority resting in the Federal Trade Commission. The banking and financial
sector is governed in part by the Right to Financial Privacy Act. Enforcement is by private
right of action. Student records maintained by recipients of federal funding are governed by the
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (Buckley Amendment, FERPA). While the
Department of Education does not directly regulate student records, it does advise educational
institutions about their obligations under FERP A. The Electronic Communications Privacy
Act as well as other wiretap statutes, governs records transmitted electronically, by telephone,
electronic, or wireless communication. The Federal Communication Commission has
regulatory authority over private telephonic communications, and to the extent that these laws
create criminal penalties, the law enforcement community is responsible for their
implementation. There is no comprehensive national legal framework for the protection of
medical records in the hands of private care providers, insurance companies, pharmacies, or
manufacturers of devices or drugs, although such a framework was proposed by the Secretary of
HHS on behalf of the Administration in 1997.

What were the group's thoughts on the Regulatory function? There was general agreement
in the group that, consistent with the President's memorandum of July 1, 1997, a sectoral
approach continues to be appropriate, and a comprehensive regulatory role across all sectors
would be inappropriate.

OMBUDSMAN FUNCTION                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


What is the Ombudsman Role? This role involves providing case-by-case assistance to
consumers or businesses in resolving in response to their particular problems or complaints. An
ombudsman could act on behalf of aggrieved parties whose privacy has been unfairly or
umeasonably compromised, press individual cases, and help individuals navigate the
bureaucracy, either directly or by referral to an appropriate party. It could advise parties on
how to resolve their disputes, or serve as decision-maker in dispute resolution.

For what sectors is there an Ombudsman now? In the federal government, some agencies
have offices that assist citizens, and occasionally citizens seek help from OMB, but no single
agency has authority or resources to pursue individual cases. Although individual companies
may provide ombudsmen, in general the commercial sector does not provide an administrative
avenue of redress for aggrieved parties.

What were the group's thoughts on the Ombudsman function? There was general
agreement that such a function, while commendable, would swamp the resources of any office
that took it on in a centralized way. There was some discussion as to whether it would be
appropriate for each agency to create its own Office of Consumer Affairs to assist its
constituencies.

CONSUMER ADVOCACY FUNCTION

What is the Consumer Advocacy function? This role involves monitoring privacy policies that
affect consumers and promoting improvements through public appearances, media presence,
writing to organizations about whom complaints are received, and involvement in litigation,
either on behalf of groups that have been harmed or as amicus curiae.

Is there any Consumer Advocacy activity now? Within the Federal government, each
agency handles its own privacy policy issues, sometimes with the assistance of OMB. Some
agencies have even created a formal Privacy Advocate, such as at HHS and IRS. Since the
Office of Consumer Affairs was disbanded in 1997, there is no federal office whose mission is to
advocate the interests of consumers in the private sector. Private sector not-for-profit privacy
advocacy organizations promote the cause of consumer privacy rights in the federal government,
private industry, and overseas.

What were the group's thoughts on the Consumer Advocacy function? Participants
disagreed as to whether a consumer-oriented privacy advocate would be useful. Some thought
it would be viewed unfavorably by the business community and therefore counterproductive;
others thought it would enhance credibility for good actors, in a manner similar to the Better
Business Bureau.

EDUCATION FUNCTION
What is the Education function? The entity could provide privacy information (including
model practices and "rights and responsibilities") to citizens, industry, and government. With
respect to business, the entity could publicize new techniques and technologies to promote
privacy as an enhanced customer service. This function would encourage consumers to learn
fund research to support this role.

What types of privacy education are going on now? In the federal sector, a variety of
entities-OMB, Justice, USDA grad school, and each agency individually-works to ensure the
training of agency officials who carry out the dictates of the Privacy Act or privacy-related
statutes. The Congressional subcommittees with responsibility for privacy publish a consumers
guide to the Privacy Act, and the FTC has begun more activity in the area of private sector
consumer issues. Since the Office of Consumer Affairs was disbanded, however, little
privacy-related education is carried out by the federal government. Some private sector public
interest groups have initiated activities in this area.

What were the group's thoughts on the Education function? There seemed to be no strong
feelings about this role-neither objection nor a sense of urgency. This is an area that may
merit further discussion given the importance of educated consumers in creating a "market" for
pnvacy.

EV ALUATION FUNCTION

What is the Evaluation function? This function would be a policy advocacy role (as
contrasted with a consumer advocacy or ombudsman role) to give opinions, promote good ideas
and practices, and scrutinize less good ones. The function would include providing technical
and policy assistance at the early stages of new ideas, products, technologies, or services either
upon request from a government or private sector organization, or independently. A
government imprimatur on the basis of this evaluation could provide an indication of industry
good actors.

Is there any Evaluation being carried out now? Where federal government programs are
concerned, OMB has the authority to review new or revised systems of records (which are also
published for public comment in the Federal Register), oversee new technology development and
purchase: and promote best practices. Depending on the program's size and visibility, OMB
takes a more or less active role. Regulated entities may receive such input from the regulating
entities, but no federal agency comprehensively evaluates private sector or overseas activities.
Private sector industry and advocacy groups are significantly increasing their activities in this
area.

What were the group's thoughts on the Evaluation function? The participants agreed such
a role would be controversial and disagreed whether it would be productive. Although issuing
opinions about private sector products and services might promote good privacy practices in
industry, such a function could also evolve into a quasi-regulatory standards-setting role or be
viewed as "picking winners and losers."




                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


