RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrei H. Cherny ( CN=Andrei H. Cherny/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-APR-1998 11:14:04.00

SUBJECT:   VP Remarks at Kick Butts Day

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
                                Remarks by Vice President Al Gore
Kick Butts Event
Thursday, April 2, 1998

        Hello Panthers!  ltD,s great to be here at Hine Junior High for
Kick Butts Day 1998! Are you ready to Kick Butts? Today, allover the
country -- in 300 cities and alISO states -- kids are uniting in the
stand against tobacco. More than 20 major cities -- from New York to
Chicago to Los Angeles -- have joined up to issue proclamations for Kick
Butts Day. And our Cabinet has spread out all across the country to join
kids in the effort to get tobacco out of their lives.


        Every year, on Kick Butts Day, students like you conduct surveys
in their hometowns, educate public officials, and carry-out undercover
sting operations to keep businesses selling tobacco to young people on
their toes.  But this Kick Butts Day is the most important ever. Last
year, I went to a Kick Butts Day event at another school in the District.
But back then, just one year ago, we didnD,t know the full power of what
we were all up against.

        Last year, we only thought that tobacco companies were preying on
minority groups to get them to smoke.  This year, we know itD,s true.


        Last year, we only suspected that the big tobacco companies were
systematically targeting young people in order to lure them into becoming
smoking addicts.  This year, we know itD,s true -- they were going after
kids as young as five years old. Listen to these words from a secret to
bacco company document that has been unearthed: D&TodayD,s teenager is
tomorrowD,s potential regular customer.DB And as the report that Zila
(ZY-Ia) gave me shows, the tobacco companies are doing all they can to
make you kids into those future customers.

         We also have a report issued today by the Centers for Disease
Control which shows that, since 1991, cigarette smoking among high school
kids has gone up by a third. Tobacco use has gone up among males and
females.
ltD,s up in every grade level.   ltD,s up for whites and blacks and
Hispanics alike. These companies are after all teens -- and we all need
to fight back.

        These companies want your money, they want your mind, and they
want your lives. Are you going to give it to them?! Today -- and every
day -- they will spend $13 million to convince you to start smoking. And


theyD,re not spending all that money for no reason -- so far their dollars
have worked to lure other young people into this deadly addiction.      Today
- - and every day - - 3,000 kids will become regular smokers. And only 6.00
will ever be able to quit.    Today -- and every day -- more than 1,000
Americans will die from smoking.

         But today is no average day.  Today, you are standing up proudly
to say that you know better than to be tricked into smoking. Today, you
are telling all of us adults that you are demanding and deserve a
tobacco-free future.   Today, you are declaring that you are individuals
and that no one is going to lead you off the right path.   President
Clinton and I are standing with you in your fight and we hear your voices
loud and clear. Almost all smokers start while theyD,re still teenagers.
And they set themselves up on a road to disaster. Who here has seen the
movie D&Titanic?D8 Well, listen to this: every single day in this
country, nearly as many Americans die from the effects of smoking as the
number who died when the Titanic sank -- and smoking deaths are a disaster
we know how to avoid.

        ThatD,s why the President and I have unveiled a comprehensive plan
to stop young Americans from smoking before they start and save 1 million
lives over the next five years.  We're very pleased with the Senate
Commerce Committee's bipartisan step forward yesterday on tobacco. We
congratulate Senator McCain and Senator Hollings for putting together a
bill that represents a very good start on the road to passing
comprehensive tobacco legislation this year.  This shows what we can
accomplish when people put politics aside and focus on doing the right
thing.  But we still have work to do. Above all, we need to put in place
tough financial penalties that make reducing teen smoking the tobacco
industryD,s bottom line.

        Real momentum for strong tobacco legislation is building in both
parties, and Congress will have a hard time going home for the year
without getting this done.  President Clinton and I will do everything in
our power to make sure that this does get done.  We will be out there
leading the charge and we will not rest until America is tobacco-free for
all of our young people.

         And it's not just President Clinton and I who want to work with
you.   Today, ID,m pleased to announce that -- as part of Kick Butts Day
a number of organizations have made commitments to do their part in the
fight against teen smoking. The Girl Scouts are making available
resources to kids and adults to show why smoking is so dangerous and
wrong.

And Girl Scouts across America who stand up against smoking will be able
to proudly wear the new Girl Scouts Against Smoking patch on their
uniforms. [Hold up Girl Scout patch) Girls Incorporated will be helping
run teach-ins as part of their Stamp Out Smoking campaign.  Channel One
News will produce and broadcast a series of informational updates about
teen smoking and health. And the National Education Association is
launching the Kids Act to Control Tobacco pilot program to motivate
teachers, students, and parents to do their part to stop teen smoking.
LetD,s give them all a round of applause for doing their part in this
crucial fight.

        ID,m proud that all of you are smart enough to do your own thing
and think for yourselves.
So letD,s go out there and make every day Kick Butts Day -- so that all of
AmericaD,s young people will be able to kick this habit before it starts.


