 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-APR-1998 20:59:44.00

 SUBJECT:   POWERFUL. SEMIAUTOMATIC RIFLES IN JONESBORO KILLERS'

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Very timely ... j c3 ... ls
---------------------- Forwarded by Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP on 04/02/98
08:58 PM ---------------------------



        SHIMABUKUR L @ A1
        04/02/98 08:55:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Jose Cerda III. Leanne A. Shimabukuro
cc:
bcc:
Subject: POWERFUL. SEMIAUTOMATIC RIFLES IN JONESBORO KILLERS'

Date: 04/02/98 Time: 18:04
SPowerful. semiautomatic rifles in Jonesboro killers' arsenal

      JONESBORO. Ark. (AP)   At 100 yards. their seven handguns
  wouldn't be terribly effective. Too hard to hit their moving
  targets.
      But the two boys at the center of the Jonesboro schoolyard
  massacre. no strangers to firearms. had other options at hand ·
. officials say. Evidence indicates most of the bullets that felled
  15 classmates and teachers. killing five of them. were fired from
  two powerful rifles. stolen from the younger boy's grandfather the
  morning of the attack.
      Fifteen shots came from a replica of the M-1 carbine. a famous
  weapon carried by U.S. troops in World War II. Korea and Vietnam.
      Five more were fired from a Remington .30-06 hunting rifle. able
  to take down a 200-pound deer with a single shot from a quarter
  mile away.
      Both are semiautomatic; the only limit on firing speed is how
  fast a shooter can pull the trigger. which ejects the spent shell
  and chambers a new one in an instant.
      Crime lab specialists poring over the guns expect to determine
  which weapons killed which victims at Westside Middle School.
  helping investigators to make their cases against 13-year-old
  Mitchell Johnson and 11-year-old Andrew Golden.
      Yet by one measure. the guns have already been examined     and
. found innocent.
      With their considerable firepower and the carbine's battlefield


origins, such firearms were considered       but rejected    for the
1994 federal ban on assault weapons. The law banned just 19
specific types of guns and their copies       models able to spray
large numbers of bullets at close range, such as the military
AK-47.
     The assault gun ban also outlawed ammunition clips holding more
than 10 rounds, even those that could be affixed to perfectly legal
hunting rifles like the Remington, but that prohibition pertained
only to clips manufactured after September 1994.
     When he was captured, Drew Golden had three fully loaded,
30-shot clips in his pockets.
     This week, Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., and Rep. Diana
DeGette, D-Colo., introduced legislation that would end the federal
exemption for the older clips and ban their import.
     States have taken the lead. Hawaii now bans large-capacity
clips; California and Massachusetts are considering similar
prohibitions. And New Jersey outlaws M-1 style guns as assault
weapons.
     That the schoolyard killers were able to put their hands on such
potent, high-capacity rifles is of little surprise. Millions of M-1
carbines were produced in World War II alone, and their historic
past makes them popular collectors' items.
     Even knockoff versions like the Universal .30-caliber carbine,
which investigators say Drew was carrying when he was arrested, are
in demand. Universal," a Florida company, is now out of business.
     " I t ' s a military-style weapon, definitely a battlefield-type
weapon, " said George Rice, a representative of Handgun Control
Inc. in Washington, D.C. " I can't imagine a hunting authority
allowing someone to hunt with it. ' ,
     In fact, Craighead County game regulations prevent hunting with
powerful rifles like the carbine and the Remington       errant shots
simply travel too far. A hunter has to drive about an hour west of
Jonesboro to reach a zone where they are allowed.
     Sheriff Dale Haas and other investigators are still piecing
together the March 24 shooting. The medical examiner's report,
which Haas said he expected to be filed any day, will help
determine which weapons proved lethal. A number of bullets tore
chunks out of the school gymnasium's cinderblock wall behind the
victims.
     One clue to determining which guns were used are the spent shell
casings recovered at the scene. Haas said 15 were found for the
carbine, five for the Remington and two for a third rifle, a Ruger
.44 Magnum.
    Additionally, two spent shells were found in the chamber of a
.38-caliber Smith & Wesson revolver. Unlike rifle cartridges,
however, revolver casings are not ejected after each shot, so it's
not clear the handgun was fired in the ambush. Investigators
reported no other spent cartridges.
     The rifle casings, along with the Ruger itself, were found on
the patch of ground in woods from which investigators believe the
boys opened up on their classmates and teachers.
     In addition to the unloaded carbine and the 30-shot clips,
authorities say, Drew was carrying three handguns, one a
semiautomatic that uses a clip. At least two of them were loaded.
    From Mitchell, police say they seized the Remington Model 742,
loaded with four rounds, and four handguns, one of them
semiautomatic and at least three of them loaded.
    Between them, the boys had more than 400 rounds of ammunition.
    Doug Golden, Drew's grandfather, said the day after the shooting
that the boys broke into his house by smashing the glass in a


basement door and stole four handguns and the three rifles. They
also stole three handguns from Drew's father, Golden said.
    The senior Golden has refused further questions about his gun
collection and the weapons seized at the shooting scene, citing
advice from his grandson's lawyer.
    Residents say they've seen Mitchell hunting squirrels and
rabbits in woods near his home. A neighbor keeps the boy's beat-up
Mossberg shotgun for him.
    Drew was taught to shoot rifles and shotguns years ago by his
father, a member of the Jonesboro Practical pistol Shooters
Association. Rick Craig, a machinist and fellow member of the gun
club, recalls seeing the boy shooting in the club's gravel pit
where targets are set up.
    "He hadn't done much (pistol) shooting, except for the past
year or so, " Craig said. He had won a competition, but "was the
only kid competitor we had. ' ,
APNP-04-02-98 1817EST


