RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-APR-1998 13:27:08.00

SUBJECT:   Draft Tobacco Background

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is the draft background memo. We've asked USDA to double check this
version and the numbers they sent us.==================== ATTACHMENT  1 ===========
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D48]MAIL420715695.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043C8080000010A020100000002050000000049000000020000C9489C038D927B973D38BC
72484003E9A75A1944D17709C4516CCAE10379D71973312374402FA22051DA58B115EA59356EAE
D7DB0428B9A65278C7A36FFD22579B3B7EF3B46BF2EB8E3BB1EF6D13EFD122D90503FBE0923BE2
                                                                                       ~~~'Oump Conversion



                                      April 7, 1998 (Draft)'


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                   BRUCE REED
                        ELENA KAGAN
                        TOM FREEDMAN

SUBJECT:                KENTUCKY TRIP AND ROUNDTABLE WITH TOBACCO
FARMERS

        On Thursday, April 9, you will travel to Carrollton, Kentucky to meet with tobacco
farmers, community leaders, and children. During this trip, you will reaffirm your commitment
to protect tobacco farmers and their communities, while also emphasizing the need to reduce
youth smoking. The trip will also allow you to express support for a plan to protect tobacco
farmers authored by Senator Ford that is included in Senator McCain's legislation.

Structure of the Trip

        You will first travel to a tobacco warehouse where you will hold a roundtable discussion
on how to protect farmers and their communities. The participants in the discussion are
expected to be a local farmer, a farmer who represents growers statewide and has worked well
with the Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids, a minority farmer who has raised many foster
children using her revenue from tobacco, the owner of the warehouse you are visiting, a student
who wants to be a farmer, the head of the state farm bureau, a local religious leader, and a
community activist who has helped bring farmers and health advocates together. Secretary
Glickman will also participate on the panel, and Governor Patton and Senator Ford will be
present but speak at the second event.

        After the roundtable, you will travel to a school where you will address students and
reinforce the message of reducing youth smoking.


Background on Kentucky Tobacco Farmers

       There are two main types of tobacco, flue-cured and burley. Burley tobacco is the
primary crop in Kentucky, with revenues of more than $1 billion in 1997 for the nearly 700
million pounds grown. In 1997, approximately 70 percent of the burley tobacco produced
in the United States came from Kentucky. The majority of burley tobacco producers in
Kentucky favor continuation of the federal price support program.

       Many Kentucky tobacco farms are very small. The average Kentucky tobacco
farm, and South Carolina averages 25.5 acres per farm. However, large farms dominate
Kentucky's burley tobacco business. Last year, 70 percent ofthe total burley sold"came
from only 26 percent of the farms.

       Tobacco is a major part of the Kentucky economy. Tobacco sales account for
nearly 30 percent ofthe total crop revenue for Kentucky. Nearly $4 billion is generated
annually from the production and sale of tobacco.

       According to USDA, Kentucky experienced an abnormal year for their 1997 burley
tobacco crop. Adverse weather conditions resulted in tobacco with high moisture content
that was of a generally low quality and received a low price.

Tobacco Program Background

         Since the 1930s, tobacco prices have been supported and stabilized by the federal
government's commodity support program. One part of the program involves limiting
supply through a quota program. A quota entitles the owner to grow a certain percentage
of the national supply of tobacco for that year. Under the quota program, the government
determines each year how much tobacco the companies expect to buy, how much will be
sold overseas plus a modest reserve, and then divides up the right to grow that full
amount among the quota holders. The quota can be sold, rented or leased. In addition, the
tobacco program guarantees an acceptable price at which farmers can sell their tobacco.
The price-support system ensures that farmers can sell tobacco at a statutory minimum
price to their cooperatives if companies cease to buy on the open market. In this program,
the government loans funds to the cooperatives to purchase tobacco, funds which are
repaid from the proceeds of future sales.

        Producers of the different kinds of tobacco vote in triennial referenda to determine
if they wish to continue the federal tobacco program for their kind of tobacco. In a
referendum in late February, 97.5 percent of burley producers voted to continue the price
support-production control program.


The AG's Settlement Agreement

        The settlement agreement with the Attorneys General did not outline a plan to
compensate farmers for the diminished domestic tobacco sales that might result from
comprehensive legislation. You, however, made protecting tobacco farmers and their
communities one of the five key elements of your plan for comprehensive tobacco
legislation.

Legislative Background

       Three types of legislative approaches for farmers have been discussed. First,

                                              2
governmental system at approximately $8 a pound. In Senator Lugar's plan, tobacco
prices would then be subject to the free market. Second, Senator Ford proposed
legislation that would maintain the current quota system, while also compensating
farmers (up to $8 per pound) for the difference between the prices they would have enjoyed
without legislation and the diminished prices they may experience. Senator Ford's bill
also includes transition fund for communities. Finally, Senator Robb had proposed
legislation that would combine elements of both of the above approaches. He sought to
buy-out farmers, but replace the quota system with a production control system based on
permits. Unlike quotas, permits would be given only to those who actually grew tobacco
and could not be bought or rented.

        Senator Ford's proposal, the LEAF Act, appealed mostly to burley growers like
those in Kentucky who have small farms and want to continue the quota program.
Senator Robb's approach gained some support from flue-cured farmers (based mainly in
North Carolina, South Carolina and Virginia) who believe the buy-out and license system
better fits more capital-intensive flue-cured production. Senator Lugar's approach has
not attracted widespread support; even tobacco-state senators like McConnell who
philosophically favor this approach probably will not come out for it publicly.

Farmers' Legislation Included in McCain Tobacco Bill

        Senators Ford, Frist, and Hollings, the three members of the Senate Commerce
Committee from tobacco-growing states, joined together to include a generous farmer provision
in the McCain tobacco legislation. While maintaining a production control system for all
tobacco farmers, this package sets up somewhat different systems for burley and flue-cured
tobacco. For burley tobacco (grown mostly in Kentucky), the package includes an optional
buy-out for quota holders at $8 per pound, and retains the quota system for those who do not take
the buyout, but provides payments to both remaining quota holders; lessees, and tenants to the
extent that quota prices decline. For flue-cured tobacco, the plan provides for a mandatory
buyout of existing quota holders, and replaces the quota system with a permit system that gives
the new no-cost permits to active producers, regardless of whether they previously held a quota.
This transferring of quotas from inactive quota holders to actual producers was part of the
Senator Robb's proposal and is intended to make it possible for active farmers to sell tobacco
without incurring the cost of buying or renting quota. The McCain package also provides
approximately $500 million for assistance to tobacco-producing communities. The package
costs $2.1 billion per year for the first ten years and $500 million for years 11-25 for a total of
$28.5 billion. For the most part, tobacco farmers are very pleased with the proposal included in
the McCain legislation.

Below is a table with the major provisions for tobacco farmers in the McCain legislation.


 Payments to Tobacco Farmers Under Proposed Legislation



                                                 3
                                  dark air-cured tobaccos

 Buy-out                          Optional one-time buy-out at     Mandatory buy-out of all
                                  $8/lb over 10 yrs or less        quota holders at $8/lb over 10
                                                                   yrs or less

 Those who remain in              Those who do not take the        Active producers will be
 program --quota or permit        optional buy-out retain their    issued a permit at no cost--
                                  existing quota                   changing the old quota
                                                                   system to a new permit
                                                                   system for flue-cured, and
                                                                   allowing only active
                                                                   producers stay in program

 Payments to remaining            Remaining quota holders get      No remaining quota holders
 quota holders who remain         payments to the extent quota
 in system                        falls equal to $4/1b for every
                                  pound quota drops, with a
                                  lifetime limit of $8/1b times
                                  the entire quota

 Lessees (Burley), Renters        Lessees and tenants get (I)      Renters and tenants get (I)
 (Flu-cured), and tenants         option to acquire relinquished   permits limiting right to
 (essentially sublessees)         quota (if any), and (2)          produce future crops, and (2)
                                  payments to the extent quota     payments to the extent
                                  falls equal to $2/1b for every   national quota falls equal to
                                  pound quota drops, with a        $2/1b for every pound quota
                                  lifetime limit of $4/1b times    drops, with a lifetime limit of
                                  the entire quota                 $4/1b times the entire quota




Other Provisions:

Tobacco Community Economic Development Grants: Block grants to tobacco states will be
made annually for rural business enterprise grants, farm ownership loans, initiatives which create
farm and off-farms employment, expanding infrastructure, long-term business technical
assistance, supplemental agricultural activities, value-added agricultural initiatives, and
compensation to warehouse owners. The program is authorized for $375 million. At least 20
percent of the funds must be spent on agricultural activities, 4 percent on long-term technical
assistance, and 6 percent on warehouse owners.

Benefits for Dislocated Workers: Up to $25 million annually for 10 years will be made

                                                 4




     available to provide benefits based on the NAFTA displaced workers program. This program
     will be administered by the Secretary of Labor.

     Farmer Opportunity Grants: Quota holders and active tobacco producers and their families are
     eligible for higher education grants of up to $1,700 per academic year, adjusted upward every
     five years by $300. Academic eligibility is modeled after Pell grants, and the program is
     administered by the Secretary of Education.

     Costs Incidental to the Program: All USDA costs associated with tobacco are paid out of a
     tobacco growers trust fund, including administrative costs, crop insurance, cooperative extension
     service costs, and any other costs.

     Total Costs: $2.1 billion per year for the first ten years, $500 million for years 11-25, for a total
     of $28.5 billion.
                    Annual payments to tobacco farmers set at $1.65 billion.
                    Economic development grants set at $375 million less administrative costs for
                     first ten years.
                    Assistance for dislocated workers set at $25 million annually for ten years.


     Secretary Glickman's Trip to Kentucky

             Last Friday, on April 3, Secretary Glickman and Tom Freedman traveled to Lexington,
     Kentucky to attend a Farm Forum at Gentry Tobacco Warehouse with 600 to 700 farmers,
     government officials, and agribusiness leaders. The farmers were generally supportive of the
     Administration. Their main concerns were that the tobacco program be kept in place and that
     small farmers not be adversely affected.


     Attachments

           Background on General State of the Tobacco Industry (prepared by USDA)
           Background on Farmer Portion of the McCain Legislation (prepared by USDA)
           Highlights of Kentucky Tobacco Farmer Survey from February 10-19, 1998 (Campaign
            for Tobacco-Free Kids and the Kentucky Health and Agriculture Forum)
           Maps showing the distribution of tobacco production in Kentucky
           Regional Press Clips from Secretary Glickman's Trip to Kentucky




                                                       5


