RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1998 11:01:31.00

SUBJECT:   Draft Q/A'S.

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=E1ena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 Part I. is the Adminstration's position on tobacco farm issues -- an
answer to Lugar's op-ed is included, I think the answer is as far as we go.
  Part II. Are general tobacco background questions -- how much KY grows,
what's in Ford's bill, etc.
 Part III. is the set of Q/A'S on the legislation generally that C.R.
passed on that you have already vetted.  ==================== ATTACHMENT    1 =======
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D57]MAIL46292479J.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043A1070000010A020100000002050000004E550000000200005F8D252A68C24646735DD6
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    (4/8 DRAFT)
                                  TOBACCOQ&A
                            PRESIDENT'S KENTUCKY TRIP
                                    April 9, 1998




I.   ADMINISTRATION POSITIONS ON TOBACCO FARMER ISSUES


Q.   Why is the President going to Kentucky?

A.   The President is going to Kentucky, the heart of burley tobacco country, to discuss the
     need for comprehensive tobacco legislation that reduces youth smoking but provides for
     the future of family farming and rural communities. In his statement last September, the
     President said that protecting farmers and their communities was one of the key five
     principles that must be included in any comprehensive tobacco legislation he would be
     willing to sign. The President is going to Kentucky to discuss the impact of tobacco
     legislation directly with farmers and effected communities, and urge passage of
     legislation that meets the needs of reducing teen smoking and protects farmers and their
     communities. The President will say that legislation authored by Senator Ford and
     introduced as part of the McCain bill meets the goal of protecting farmers and their
     communities.

Q.   What is the President's position on 'programs for tobacco farmers?

A:   The President made protecting farmers and their communities one of the five key
     principles that must be included in any comprehensive tobacco legislation. Senator
     Ford's bill, which provides for compensation for losses to quota owners and producers,
     and makes provision for losses to rural communities where tobacco is grown, meets the
     President's goal of protecting farmers. The President is encouraged that both the
     interests of flue-cured and burley farmers are included in the proposal, and hopes that all
     farmers will continue working together to ensure that legislation is passed this year.

Q.   Aren't the goals of reducing youth smoking and protecting tobacco farmers
     contradictory?

A:   No. The President does not want the tobacco companies to go out of business, only
     out of the business of selling to children. The tobacco farmers have played by the rules,
     and should be protected in any legislation that passes. The President believes that we
     can reduce youth smoking and protect rural communities if we all work together to urge
     Congress to pass bipartisan comprehensive tobacco legislation this year.
        phased out. Does the Administration agree?

A.      The Administration feels that any legislation has to be evaluated in terms of how well it
        meets the President's five principles -- including reducing youth smoking and protecting
        farmers and their communities. Advocates of a free market for tobacco growers will
        need to demonstrate that it is consistent with these principles. Many health groups have
        argued that simply ending the tobacco program may actually increase the amount of
        tobacco that is grown, decrease the cost of tobacco, and provide a windfall for cigarette
        companies. In addition, representatives of family farms have suggested that ending the
        tobacco program would have extremely negative economic effects on them and their
        communities. The President went to Kentucky, in part, to discuss the various legislative
        options with those directly effected by tobacco legislation and hear their opinions
        first-hand


II.     BACKGROUND QUESTIONS RE: TOBACCO FARMERS

Q. How important is tobacco to Kentucky producers and the overall economy?

A. Including sales from fire-cured and dark air-cured tobacco, Kentucky tobacco producers
          received over $800 million from the 1997 crop. Tobacco sales represent over 40
percent of           crop sales receipts and over 20 percent of all agricultural sales in Kentucky.

      In 1997, over 600 million pounds of burley tobacco was produced in the United States - 70
           percent in Kentucky.

Q. Who will be affected by a settlement?

A. The tobacco settlement will have a wide-reaching impact on all segments of the tobacco
      .     industry, but a disproportionate effect on small and minority tobacco quota owners
and                    producers. Of the 338,000 individual quotas, about 66 percent are
considered small farm                  operations. Five percent of all quotas are owned by
minorities, the majority of which are                 small producers.

Q. Why is tobacco so important to small farmers?

A.      Tobacco is a high value crop that generates gross receipts of $4,000 to $5,000 per acre.
        Profits from 1 acre of tobacco are equivalent to between 15 and 20 acres of com or
        soybeans. On small farms in Kentucky, with an average of22 acres of harvested
        cropland in 1992, tobacco is vital to the economic survival of farmers. (source: 1992 Ag
        Census)

Q. How much tobacco is grown in the United States?
        highest production and crop receipts since 1992. Sales of tobacco products reached a
record         $50 billion in 1997.


Q.     How does the tobacco program work?

A.     Since the 1930s, in order to grow tobacco, a farmer must have a quota. The quota allows
       the farmer to grow a certain amount of tobacco for that year. Thus, the amount of tobacco
       grown in the United States is controlled by law. In addition, the price of tobacco is set
       statutorily. If a private company chooses not to purchase tobacco at or above the
       statutory minimum price, the regional cooperative of tobacco farmers will purchase the
       tobacco and store it, putting the tobacco back on the market when the price is more
       favorable.

 Q.    What are the provisions of the Ford bill which is included in the McCain
       legislation?

A:     Senators Ford, Frist, and Hollings, the three members of the Senate Commerce
       Committee from tobacco-growing states, joined together to include a farmer
       provision in the McCain tobacco legislation. While maintaining a production
       control system for all tobacco farmers, this package sets up somewhat different
       systems for burley and flue-cured tobacco. For burley tobacco (grown mostly in
       Kentucky), the package includes an optional buy-out for quota holders at $8 per
       pound, and retains the quota system for those who do not take the buyout, but
       provides payments to both remaining quota holders, lessees, and tenants to the
       extent that base quota declines. For flue-cured tobacco, the plan provides for a
       mandatory buyout of existing quota holders, and replaces the quota system with a
       permit system that gives the new permits at no cost to active producers, regardless
       of whether they previously held a quota. This transferring of quotas from inactive
       quota holders to actual producers is intended to make it possible for active farmers
       to sell tobacco without incurring the cost of buying or renting quota.

       The provision authored by Senator Ford and included in McCain's legislation also
       provides approximately $500 million for assistance to tobacco-producing
       communities. The package costs $2.1 billion per year for the first ten years and
       $500 million for years 11-25 for a total of $28.5 billion. For the most part, tobacco
       farm leaders have been pleased with the proposal included in the McCain
       legislation.



II.    GENERAL BACKGROUND ON TOBACCO LEGISLATION

Q:     Has the President endorsed the McCain bill?
     the price of cigarettes, give the FDA full authority to regulate tobacco products, ban
     advertising aimed at children, and protect tobacco farmers.
     But he also said we still have work to do on this legislation. Above all, we need to put in
     place tough penalties that will cost the tobacco industry ifit continues to sell cigarettes to
     young people. We're not trying to put the tobacco companies out of business; we want to
     put them out of the business of selling cigarettes to kids. This week's progress in the
     Senate shows we have real momentum in both parties to do just that.

Q:   The President says we need stronger penalties on companies that continue to sell to
     our children. What does he mean by that?

A:   The McCain bill's penalty provisions are deficient for two reasons. First, the bill has a
     cap of$3.5 billion per year on industry-wide penalties, no matter how much the industry
     misses youth targets by. Second, the McCain bill contains no penalties on individual
     companies for failing to meet youth smoking targets. Reducing youth smoking is our
     bottom line, and we must make it each and every company's bottom line.

Q:   Does the Administration have concerns about provisions of the McCain bill besides
     the penalties?

A:   We have serious concerns about this bill's provision which would allow individual States
     to "opt out" of the national smoke-free environment policy. This provision creates a
     patchwork system in which states could decide to adopt weaker laws or decide against
     taking any action at all, leaving people with little or no protection from the hazards of
     environmental tobacco smoke. In addition, there is no need to exempt the tobacco
     industry from antitrust rules in order to reduce youth smoking. We strongly oppose any
     exemptions that would allow price fixing agreements. Third, we believe it is critical that
     tobacco legislation fund efforts to promote public health and assist children.

Q:   What does the President want the tobacco funds to be spent on?

A:   The President strongly believes that tobacco revenues should go toward protecting public
     health and assisting children. His budget provides for funds for anti-smoking programs
     that will help us meet the goals of reducing youth smoking rates and for a dramatic
     expansion of health-related research to help us cure smoking-related disease. Finally, in
     recognition of the states' role in bringing suit against tobacco companies, the President's
     budget provides for a substantial amount of money to revert to the states. Some of this
     money can be used for any purpose. Other funds must be used on state-administered
     programs to assist children (specifically, for child care, Medicaid child outreach, and
     class size reduction).

Q:   What is your view of the liability protections for the tobacco industry contained in
     Senator McCain's legislation?
      without liability limits, but in the context oflegislation that meets all of the President's
      principles and dramatically reduces youth smoking, reasonable limits on liability will not
      be a dealbreaker. Right now, we're going to focus on the aspects of the McCain
      legislation that we think fall short of what the President has demanded: particularly, on
      the penalties in the bill to reduce youth smoking. Until we get those right, we won't
      address liability protections.

Q:    The tobacco industry has said that it will not agree to national tobacco legislation
      that increases the price of a pack of cigarettes by $1.10 over five years, as proposed
      by the President's budget and the McCain bill. Does that doom the President's
      proposal?

A:    No. We have always expected the tobacco companies to fight hard for their economic
      interests, but needless to say we will not always agree, nor we think will the US
      Congress. This price increase called for in the President's budget is necessary to meet
      his youth smoking targets, and he will continue to demand it. What the companies do is
      up to them, but we will not back off such necessary measures to reduce youth smoking.

Q:    What are the five principles that the President has said tobacco legislation must
      meet?

A:   . President Clinton has said he will only support tobacco legislation that:

            Raises the price of cigarettes by up to $1.10 a pack over 5 years and $1.50 a pack
             over the next ten years, and imposes tough penalties on companies that continue
             to sell to kids;

            Affirms the FDA's full authority to regulate tobacco products;

            Gets companies out ofthe business of marketing and selling tobacco to minors;

            Promotes public health research and public health goals; and

            Protects our tobacco farmers and their communities.

Q:    How does the McCain bill compare to the Attorneys General proposed settlement
      and the President's proposal?

A:    See chart below.

                              Comparison of Tobacco Proposals
                                       April 7, 1998



                                            Attorneys            McCain   President
                                            General

        Substantial Price Increase          No                   Yes      Yes

        Strong Industry and                 No                   No       Yes
        Company Penalties

        Full FDA Authority                  No                   Yes      Yes

        Strong Advertising and              Yes                  Yes      Yes
        Access Provisions

    Protections of Tobacco                  No                   Yes      Yes
    Farmers

    Comprehensive Plan to Use               Yes                  No*      Yes
    Tobacco Revenue to Protect
    Public Health and Assist
    Children

    Strong Environmental                    Yes                  No       Yes
    Tobacco Smoke Provision

    Liability Protections for
    Industry:
       1. Liability Cap                     Yes                  Yes      Only ifbill meets
                                                                          President's public
                                                                          health principles.

          2. Bar on Class Actions           Yes                  No       Only ifbill meets
                                                                          President's public
                                                                          health principles.

      3. Bar on Punitive                    Yes                  No       Only if bill meets
    Damages                                                               President's public
                                                                          health principles.




    *        Does not attempt to address most spending issues.




    Q:    Is teen smoking going up or down?
          On April 2, the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta released a new study
    ("Tobacco Use Among High School Students -- United States, 1997") which found that
..

         cigarette smoking rates among high school students rose by nearly a third between 1991
         and 1997, from 27.5 percent to 36.4 percent, with the sharpest increase among African
         American students. Cigarette smoking was highest among white students (40 percent),
         rising by 28 percent from 1991 (31 percent). While the level of cigarette smoking among
         African-American students was lower than for white students, the rate increased by 80
         percent between 1991 and 1997 (from 12.6 percent to 22.7 percent). OveraU, the study
         found that nearly half of male students and more than a third of female students used
         cigarettes, cigars, or smokeless tobacco during the previous month. This 1997 data was
         derived from a survey of over 16,000 students in grades 9-12.


