RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1998 21:10:29.00

SUBJECT:   Q&A'S for press office and president

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Ernrnett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here are versions of Q&A for the press office and the President, with the
previously reviewed Q&A inserted re: the R.J. Reynold's announcement.  =============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D11]MAIL45968779Q.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043A1070000010A02010000000205000000D0610000000200009294DBC990586164713C39
7B4ACF99AC8B6BOCDC8C1F0602FE962E4806C25975E9F5CBC4CE6274ECA1A78A16D5A6B080C4C5
                                                                        Hex-Dump COIlVeib,OII

                                  (4/8 DRAFT)
     TOBACCO QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS FOR THE PRESIDENT'S
               KENTUCKY TRIP OF APRIL 9, 1998


Q:   What's your reaction to RJR Nabisco CEO Steven Goldstone's remarks
     today at the National Press Club?

A:   It is no surprise that the tobacco industry would protest the legislation
     moving through the Congress --it is in their interest to object to the bill now
     to prevent it from getting even tougher. In the end, the companies will have
     a strong incentive to participate, and we're convinced that they'll recognize
     this.

     So we don't think the companies will walk away --and we hope they do not
     do so. We would prefer that the companies join, rather than fight, our
     efforts to reduce smoking.

     But make no mistake: I will continue to work to reduce youth smoking no
     matter what the companies do. I have worked on this effort for two years;
     members of Congress from both parties are now joining me; and we will get
     strong legislation on youth smoking whether or not the companies join us.

Q:   Will this deal drive RJR and/or other tobacco companies into bankruptcy?

A:   No. We're not trying to put the tobacco companies out of business; we want
     to put them out of the business of selling cigarettes to kids. We've done
     some careful financial analysis of the McCain bill, and we do not believe that
     it will drive companies into bankruptcy. There's just no reason to think
     that this legislation would increase the companies' exposure to a financial
     loss of the kind that would send them into bankruptcy. Stopping companies
     from selling cigarettes to kids will not put them out of business.

Q:   But don't you need industry cooperation to enact tobacco legislation?

A:   We would like the tobacco industry to willingly join us in this effort to reduce
     youth smoking. And we still believe that the tobacco industry will have
     every incentive to agree to legislation in the end, so that they can end this
     chapter in their history. But if they refuse to join us, we will still make
     progress. We will continue our efforts to pass comprehensive legislation to
     dramatically reduce youth smoking.


Q:   What is your position on protecting tobacco farmers and their communities

A:    Tobacco farmers and their communities were not considered as part of the
      settlement agreement reached by the Attorneys' General. In my statement
      last September, I said that protecting farmers and their communities was one
      of the key five principles that must be included in any comprehensive tobacco
      legislation that I would be willing to sign. I believe that the legislation
      authored by Senator Ford (D-KY) as part of the McCain bill, a $2.1 billion
      a year package that continues a government production control system,
      meets the goal of protecting farmers and their communities.


Q:    Aren't the goals of reducing youth smoking and protecting tobacco farmers
      contradictory?

A:    No. I don't want the tobacco companies to go out of business, only out of the
      business of selling to children. The tobacco farmers have played by the rules, and
      should be protected in any legislation that passes. I believe that we can reduce
      youth smoking and protect rural communities if we all work together to urge
      Congress to pass bipartisan comprehensive tobacco legislation this year.

Q:     Senator Lugar recently suggested in an op-ed that the tobacco program
should be    phased out. Do you agree?

A:    I believe that any legislation has to be evaluated in terms of how well it meets the
      the five principles I laid out last September --including reducing youth smoking
      and protecting farmers and their communities. Advocates of a free market for
      tobacco growers will need to demonstrate that it is consistent with these
      principles. Many health groups have argued that simply ending the tobacco
      program may actually increase the amount of tobacco that is grown, decrease the
      cost of tobacco, and provide a windfall for cigarette companies. In addition,
      representatives of family farms have suggested that ending the tobacco program
      would have extremely negative economic effects on them and their communities.
      I traveled to Kentucky, in part, to discuss the various legislative options with those
      directly effected by tobacco legislation and hear their opinions first-hand


BACKGROUND QUESTIONS RE: TOBACCO FARMERS


Q:    How does the tobacco program work?

A:    Since the 1930s, in order to grow tobacco, a farmer must have a quota. The
      quota allows the farmer to grow a certain amount of tobacco for that year.
      Thus, the amount of tobacco grown in the United States is controlled by law;
      chooses not to purchase tobacco at or above the statutory minimum price, the
      regional cooperative of tobacco farmers will purchase the tobacco and store
      it, putting the tobacco back on the market when the price is more favorable.

 Q:   What are the provisions for farmers are induded in the McCain legislation?

A:    Senators Ford, Frist, and Hollings, the three members of the Senate Commerce
      Committee from tobacco-growing states, joined together to include a broad farmer
      provision in the McCain tobacco legislation. While maintaining a production
      control system for all tobacco farmers, the measure sets up somewhat different
      systems for burley and flue-cured tobacco. For burley tobacco (grown mostly in
      Kentucky), the package includes an optional buy-out for quota holders at $8 per
      pound, and retains the quota system for those who do not take the buyout, but
      provides payments to both remaining quota holders, lessees, and tenants to the
      extent that base quota declines. For flue-cured tobacco, the plan provides for a
      mandatory buyout of existing quota holders, and replaces the quota system with a
      permit system that gives the new permits at no cost to active producers, regardless
      of whether they previously owned a quota. This transferring of quotas from
      inactive quota holders to actual producers is intended to make it possible for active
      farmers to sell tobacco without incurring the cost of buying or renting quota.

      The provision authored by Senator Ford and included in McCain's legislation also
      provides approximately $500 million for assistance to tobacco-producing
      commumtJes. The package costs $2.1 billion per year for the first ten years and
      $500 million for years 11-25 for a total of $28.5 billion. For the most part,
      tobacco farm leaders have been pleased with the proposal included in the McCain
      legislation.


Q:    How important is tobacco to Kentucky producers and the overall economy?

A:    Including sales from fire-cured and dark air-cured tobacco, Kentucky tobacco
      producers       received over $800 million from the 1997 crop. Tobacco sales
      represent over 40 percent of crop sales receipts and over 20 percent of all
      agricultural sales in Kentucky.

      In 1997, over 600 million pounds of burley tobacco was produced in the United
      States -- 70 percent in Kentucky.             .

Q:    Which farmers will be affected by the legislation?

A:    The tobacco settlement will have a wide-reaching impact on all segments of the
     quota owners and         producers. Of the 338,000 individual quotas, about 66
     percent are considered small farm operations. Five percent of all quotas are
     owned by minorities, the majority of which are small producers.

Q:   Why is tobacco so important to small farmers?

A:   Tobacco is a high value crop that generates gross receipts of $4,000 to $5,000 per
     acre. Profits from 1 acre of tobacco are equivalent to between 15 and 20 acres of
     com or soybeans. On small farms in Kentucky, with an average of 22 acres of
     harvested cropland in 1992, tobacco is vital to the economic survival of farmers.
     (source: 1992 Ag Census)

Q:   How much tobacco is grown in the United States?

A:   In 1997, tobacco production totaled 1.7 billion pounds with a value of over $3
     billion, the highest production and crop receipts since 1992. Sales of tobacco
     products reached a record $50 billion in 1997.

GENERAL BACKGROUND ON TOBACCO LEGISLATION

Q:   Has you endorsed the McCain bill?

A:   I believe that this bill represents a dramatic step forward. It would raise the
     price of cigarettes, give the FDA full authority to regulate tobacco products,
     ban advertising aimed at children, and protect tobacco farmers.

     But I also said we still have work to do on this legislation. Above all, we
     need to put in place tough penalties that will cost the tobacco industry if it
     continues to sell cigarettes to young people. We're not trying to put the
     tobacco companies out of business; we want to put them out of the business
     of selling cigarettes to kids. This week's progress in the Senate shows we
     have real momentum in both parties to do just that.

Q:   You've said we need stronger penalties on companies that continue to sell to
     our children. What do you mean by that?

A:   The McCain bill's penalty provisions are deficient for two reasons. First,
     the bill has a cap of $3.5 billion per year on industry-wide penalties, no
     matter how much the industry misses youth targets by. Second, the McCain
     bill contains no penalties on individual companies for failing to meet youth
     smoking targets. Reducing youth smoking is our bottom line, and we must
     make it each and every company's bottom line.

Q:   Does you have concerns about provisions of the McCain biII besides the

A:   I have serious concerns about this bill's provIsion which would allow
     individual States to "opt out" of the national smoke-free environment policy.
       This provision creates a patchwork system in which states could decide to
     adopt weaker laws or decide against taking any action at all, leaving people
     with little or no protection from the hazards of environmental tobacco
     smoke. In addition, there is no need to exempt the tobacco industry from
     antitrust rules in order to reduce youth smoking. I strongly oppose any
     exemptions that would allow price fixing agreements. Third, I believe it is
     critical that tobacco legislation fund efforts to promote public health and
     assist children.

Q:   What do you want the tobacco funds to be spent on?

A:   I strongly believe that tobacco revenues should go toward protecting public
     health and assisting children. My Fiscal Year 1999 budget provides for
     funds for anti-smoking programs that will help us meet the goals of reducing
     youth smoking rates and for a dramatic expansion of health-related research
     to help us cure smoking-related disease. Finally, in recognition of the states'
     role in bringing suit against tobacco companies, my budget provides for a
     substantial amount of money to revert to the states. Some of this money can
     be used for any purpose. Other funds must be used on state-administered
     programs to assist children (specifically, for child care, Medicaid child
     outreach, and class size reduction).

Q:   What is your view of the liability protections for the tobacco industry
     contained in Senator McCain's legislation?

A:   As we have said on many occasions, I would prefer comprehensive tobacco
     legislation without liability limits, but in the context of legislation that meets
     all of my principles and dramatically reduces youth smoking, reasonable
     limits on liability will not be a dealbreaker. Right now, I'm going to focus
     on the aspects of the McCain legislation that I think fall short of what the I
     have demanded: particularly, on the penalties in the bill to reduce youth
     smoking. Until we get those right, we won't address liability protections.

Q:   The tobacco industry has said that it will not agree to national tobacco
     legislation that increases the price of a pack of cigarettes by $1.10 over five
     years, as proposed by your budget and the McCain bill. Does that doom
     your proposal?

A:   No. We have always expected the tobacco companies to fight hard for their
     economic interests, but needless to say we will not always agree, nor we think
     will the US Congress. This price increase called for in my Fiscal Year 1999
        demand it. What the companies do is up to them, but we will not back off
        such necessary measures to reduce youth smoking.

Q:      What are the five principles that you have said tobacco legislation must
        meet?

A:      I have said that I will only support tobacco legislation that:

               Raises the price of cigarettes by up to $1.10 a pack over 5 years and
               $1.50 a pack over the next ten years, and imposes tough penalties on
               companies that continue to sell to kids;

               Affirms the FDA's full authority to regulate tobacco products;

               Gets companies out of the business of marketing and selling tobacco
               to minors;

               Promotes public health research and public health goals; and

               Protects our tobacco farmers and their communities.

Q:     How does the McCain bill compare to the Attorneys General proposed
       settlement and the President's proposal?

A:     See chart below.

                           Comparison of Tobacco Proposals
                                    April 7, 1998

                                     Attorneys      McCain               President
                                     General
     Substantial Price Increase      No             Yes                  Yes
     Strong Industry and             No             No                   Yes
     Company Penalties
     Full FDA Authority              No             Yes                  Yes
     Strong Advertising and          Yes            Yes                  Yes
     Access Provisions
     Protections of Tobacco          No             Yes                  Yes
     Farmers
     Comprehensive Plan to Use       Yes            No*                  Yes
     Tobacco Revenue to Protect
     Public Health and Assist
     Strong Environmental               Yes                No                Yes
     Tobacco Smoke Provision
     Liability Protections for
     Industry:
        1. Liability Cap                Yes                Yes               Only if bill meets
                                                                             President's public
                                                                             health principles.

        2. Bar on Class Actions         Yes                No                Only if bill meets
                                                                             President's public
                                                                             health principles.

       3. Bar on Punitive               Yes                No                Only if bill meets
     Damages                                                                 President's public
                                                                             health principles.




*      Does not attempt to address most spending issues.


Q:      Is teen smoking going up or down?

A:      On April 2, the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta released a new study
        ("Tobacco Use Among High School Students --United States, 1997") which
        found that cigarette smoking rates among high school students rose by nearly a
        third between 1991 and 1997, from 27.5 percent to 36.4 percent, with the sharpest
        increase among African American students. Cigarette smoking was highest
        among white students (40 percent), rising by 28 percent from 1991 (31 percent).
        While the level of cigarette smoking among African-American students was lower
        than for white students, the rate increased by 80 percent between 1991 and 1997
        (from 12.6 percent to 22.7 percent). Overall, the study found that nearly half of
        male students and more than a third of female students used cigarettes, cigars, or
        smokeless tobacco during the previous month. This 1997 data was derived from
        a survey of over 16,000 students in grades 9-12.
                                  TOBACCOQ&A
                            PRESIDENT'S KENTUCKY TRIP
                                    April 9, 1998




I.   ADMINISTRATION POSITIONS ON TOBACCO FARMER ISSUES


Q.   Why is the President going to Kentucky?

A.   The President is going to Kentucky, the heart of burley tobacco country, to discuss the
     need for comprehensive tobacco legislation that reduces youth smoking but provides for
     the future of family farming and rural communities. In his statement last September, the
     President said that protecting farmers and their communities was one of the key five
     principles that must be included in any comprehensive tobacco legislation he would be
     willing to sign. The President is going to Kentucky to discuss the impact of tobacco
     legislation directly with farmers and effected communities, and urge passage of
     legislation that meets the needs of reducing teen smoking and protects farmers and their
     communities. The President will say that legislation authored by Senator Ford and
     introduced as part of the McCain bill meets the goal of protecting farmers and their
     communities.

Q.   What is the President's position on programs for tobacco farmers?

A:   The President made protecting farmers and their communities one of the five key
     principles that must be included in any comprehensive tobacco legislation. Senator
     Ford's bill, which provides for compensation for losses to quota owners and producers,
     and makes provision for losses to rural communities where tobacco is grown, meets the
     President's goal of protecting farmers. The President is encouraged that both the
     interests of flue-cured and burley farmers are included in the proposal, and hopes that all
     farmers will continue working together to ensure that legislation is passed this year.

Q.   Aren't the goals of reducing youth smoking and protecting tobacco farmers
     contradictory?

A:   No. The President does not want the tobacco companies to go out of business, only
     out of the business of selling to children. The tobacco farmers have played by the rules,
     and should be protected in any legislation that passes. The President believes that we
     can reduce youth smoking and protect rural communities if we all work together to urge
     Congress to pass bipartisan comprehensive tobacco legislation this year.
        phased out. Does the Administration agree?

A.      The Administration feels that any legislation has to be evaluated in terms of how well it
        meets the President's five principles -- including reducing youth smoking and protecting
        farmers and their communities. Advocates of a free market for tobacco growers will
        need to demonstrate that it is consistent with these principles. Many health groups have
        argued that simply ending the tobacco program may actually increase the amount of
        tobacco that is grown, decrease the cost of tobacco, and provide a windfall for cigarette
        companies. In addition, representatives of family farms have suggested that ending the
        tobacco program would have extremely negative economic effects on them and their
        communities. The President went to Kentucky, in part, to discuss the various legislative
        options with those directly effected by tobacco legislation and hear their opinions
        first-hand


II.     BACKGROUND QUESTIONS RE: TOBACCO FARMERS

Q. How important is tobacco to Kentucky producers and the overall economy?

A. Including sales from fire-cured and dark air-cured tobacco, Kentucky tobacco producers
          received over $800 million from the 1997 crop. Tobacco sales represent over 40
percent of           crop sales receipts and over 20 percent of all agricultural sales in Kentucky.

      In 1997, over 600 million pounds of burley tobacco was produced in the United States - 70
           percent in Kentucky.

Q. Who will be affected by a settlement?

A. The tobacco settlement will have a wide-reaching impact on all segments of the tobacco
            industry, but a disproportionate effect on small and minority tobacco quota owners
and                    producers. Ofthe 338,000 individual quotas, about 66 percent are
considered small farm                  operations. Five percent of all quotas are owned by
minorities, the majority of which are                 small producers.

Q. Why is tobacco so important to small farmers?

A.      Tobacco is a high value crop that generates gross receipts of $4,000 to $5,000 per acre.
        Profits from 1 acre of tobacco are equivalent to between 15 and 20 acres of com or
        soybeans. On small farms in Kentucky, with an average of22 acres of harvested
        cropland in 1992, tobacco is vital to the economic survival of farmers. (source: 1992 Ag
        Census)

Q. How much tobacco is grown in the United States?
        highest production and crop receipts since 1992. Sales of tobacco products reached a
record         $50 billion in 1997.


Q.     How does the tobacco program work?

A.     Since the 1930s, in order to grow tobacco, a fanner must have a quota. The quota allows
       the fanner to grow a certain amount of tobacco for that year. Thus, the amount of tobacco
       grown in the United States is controlled by law. In addition, the price of tobacco is set
       statutorily. If a private company chooses not to purchase tobacco at or above the
       statutory minimum price, the regional cooperative of tobacco fanners will purchase the
       tobacco and store it, putting the tobacco back on the market when the price is more
       favorable.

 Q.    What are the provisions of the Ford bill which is included in the McCain
       legislation?

A:     Senators Ford, Frist, and Hollings, the three members of the Senate Commerce
       Committee from tobacco-growing states, joined together to include a farmer
       provision in the McCain tobacco legislation. While maintaining a production
       control system for all tobacco farmers, this package sets up somewhat different
       systems for burley and flue-cured tobacco. For burley tobacco (grown mostly in
       Kentucky), the package includes an optional buy-out for quota holders at $8 per
       pound, and retains the quota system for those who do not take the buyout, but
       provides payments to both remaining quota holders, lessees, and tenants to the
       extent that base quota declines. For flue-cured tobacco, the plan provides for a
       mandatory buyout of existing quota holders, and replaces the quota system with a
       permit system that gives the new permits at no cost to active producers, regardless
       of whether they previously held a quota. This transferring of quotas from inactive
       quota holders to actual producers is intended to make it possible for active farmers
       to sell tobacco without incurring the cost of buying or renting quota.

       The provision authored by Senator Ford and included in McCain's legislation also
       provides approximately $500 million for assistance to tobacco-producing
       communities. The package costs $2.1 billion per year for the first ten years and
       $500 million for years 11-25 for a total of $28.5 billion. For the most part, tobacco
       farm leaders have been pleased with the proposal included in the McCain
       legislation.



II.    GENERAL BACKGROUND ON TOBACCO LEGISLATION
     today at the National Press Club?

A:   It is no surprise that the tobacco industry would protest the legislation
     moving through the Congress --it is in their interest to object to the bill now
     to prevent it from getting even tougher. In the end, the companies will have
     a strong incentive to participate, and we're convinced that they'll recognize
     this.

     So we don't think the companies will walk away --and we hope they do not
     do so. We would prefer that the companies join, rather than fight, our
     efforts to reduce smoking.

     But make no mistake: The President will continue to work to reduce youth
     smoking no matter what the companies do. He has worked on this effort for
     two years; members of Congress from both parties are now joining him; and
     we will get strong legislation on youth smoking whether or not the companies
     join us.

Q:   Will this deal drive RJR and/or other tobacco companies into bankruptcy?

A:   No. We're not trying to put the tobacco companies out of business; we want
     to put them out of the business of selling cigarettes to kids. We've done
     some careful financial analysis of the McCain bill, and we do not believe that
     it will drive companies into bankruptcy. There's just no reason to think
     that this legislation would increase the companies' exposure to a financial
     loss of the kind that would send them into bankruptcy. Stopping companies
     from selling cigarettes to kids will not put them out of business.

Q:   But don't you need industry cooperation to enact tobacco legislation?

A:   We would like the tobacco industry to willingly join us in this effort to reduce
     youth smoking. And we still believe that the tobacco industry will have
     every incentive to agree to legislation in the end, so that they can end this
     chapter in their history. But if they refuse to join us, we will still make
     progress. We will continue our efforts to pass comprehensive legislation to
     dramatically reduce youth smoking.


Q:   Has the President endorsed the McCain bill?

A:   The President believes that this bill represents a dramatic step forward. It would
     raise the price of cigarettes, give the FDA full authority to regulate tobacco
     products, ban advertising aimed at children, and protect tobacco farmers.
         to put in place tough penalties that will cost the tobacco industry if it continues to
         sell cigarettes to young people. We're not trying to put the tobacco companies
         out of business; we want to put them out of the business of selling cigarettes to
         kids. This week's progress in the Senate shows we have real momentum in both
         parties to do just that.
Q:       The President says we need stronger penalties on companies that continue to
         sell to our children. What does he mean by that?

A:       The McCain bill's penalty provisions are deficient for two reasons. First, the bill
     has a cap of $3.5 billion per year on industry-wide penalties, no matter how much the
     industry misses youth targets by. Second, the McCain bill contains no penalties on
     individual companies for failing to meet youth smoking targets. Reducing youth
     smoking is our bottom line, and we must make it each and every company's bottom
     line.

Q:      Does the Administration have concerns about provisions of the McCain bill
     besides the penalties?

A:       We have serious concerns about this bill's provision which would allow
     individual States to "opt out" of the national smoke-free environment policy. This
     provision creates a patchwork system in which states could decide to adopt weaker
     laws or decide against taking any action at all, leaving people with little or no
     protection from the hazards of environmental tobacco smoke. In addition, there is no
     need to exempt the tobacco industry from antitrust rules in order to reduce youth
     smoking. We strongly oppose any exemptions that would allow price fixing
     agreements. Third, we believe it is critical that tobacco legislation fund efforts to
     promote public health and assist children.

Q:      What does the President want the tobacco funds to be spent on?

A:       The President strongly believes that tobacco revenues should go toward protecting
     public health and assisting children. His budget provides for funds for anti-smoking
     programs that will help us meet the goals of reducing youth smoking rates and for a
     dramatic expansion of health-related research to help us cure smoking-related disease.
      Finally, in recognition of the states' role in bringing suit against tobacco companies,
     the President's budget provides for a substantial amount of money to revert to the
     states. Some of this money can be used for any purpose. Other funds must be used
     on state-administered programs to assist children (specifically, for child care,
     Medicaid child outreach, and class size reduction).

Q:      What is your view of the liability protections for the tobacco industry
     contained in Senator McCain's legislation?
     legislation without liability limits, but in the context of legislation that meets all of the
     President's principles and dramatically reduces youth smoking, reasonable limits on
     liability will not be a dealbreaker. Right now, we're going to focus on the aspects of
     the McCain legislation that we think fall short of what the President has demanded:
     particularly, on the penalties in the bill to reduce youth smoking. Until we get those
     right, we won't address liability protections.

Q:       The tobacco industry has said that it will not agree to national tobacco
     legislation that increases the price of a pack of cigarettes by $1.10 over five
     years, as proposed by the President's budget and the McCain bill. Does that
     doom the President's proposal?

A:      No. We have always expected the tobacco companies to fight hard for their
     economic interests, but needless to say we will not always agree, nor we think will the
     US Congress. This price increase called for in the President's budget is necessary to
     meet his youth smoking targets, and he will continue to demand it. What the
     companies do is up to them, but we will not back off such necessary measures to
     reduce youth smoking.

Q:     What are the five principles that the President has said tobacco legislation
     must meet?

A:       President Clinton has said he will only support tobacco legislation that:

               Raises the price of cigarettes by up to $1.10 a pack over 5 years and $1.50
                a pack over the next ten years, and imposes tough penalties on companies
                that continue to sell to kids;

                Affirms the FDA's full authority to regulate tobacco products;

                Gets companies out of the business of marketing and selling tobacco to
                 minors;

                Promotes public health research and public health goals; and

                Protects our tobacco farmers and their communities.

Q:       How does the McCain bill compare to the Attorneys General proposed
     settlement and the President's proposal?

A:       See chart below.

                             Comparison of Tobacco Proposals
                                      April 7, 1998
                                          General

     Substantial Price Increase          No               Yes         Yes

     Strong Industry and                  No               No          Yes
     Company Penalties

     Full FDA Authority                   No               Yes         Yes

     Strong Advertising and               Yes              Yes         Yes
     Access Provisions

     Protections of Tobacco               No               Yes         Yes
     Farmers

     Comprehensive Plan to Use            Yes              No*         Yes
     Tobacco Revenue to Protect
     Public Health and Assist
     Children

     Strong Environmental                 Yes              No          Yes
     Tobacco Smoke Provision

     Liability Protections for
     Industry:
        1. Liability Cap                  Yes              Yes         Only if bill meets
                                                                       President's public
                                                                       health principles.

        2. Bar on Class Actions           Yes              No          Only if bill meets
                                                                       President's public
                                                                       health principles.

       3. Bar on Punitive                 Yes              No          Only if bill meets
     Damages                                                           President's public
                                                                       health principles.




       Does not attempt to address most spending issues.




Q:     Is teen smoking going up or down?'
       On April 2, the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta released a new study
that cigarette smoking rates among high school students rose by nearly a third
between 1991 and 1997, from 27.5 percent to 36.4 percent, with the sharpest
increase among African American students. Cigarette smoking was highest among
white students (40 percent), rising by 28 percent from 1991 (31 percent). While the
level of cigarette smoking among African-American students was lower than for
white students, the rate increased by 80 percent between 1991 and 1997 (from 12.6
percent to 22.7 percent). Overall, the study found that nearly half of male students
and more than a third of female students used cigarettes, cigars, or smokeless
tobacco during the previous month. This 1997 data was derived from a survey of
over 16,000 students in grades 9-12.


