RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1998 17:57:04.00

SUBJECT:   Draft Q/A for POTUS

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  In case you want to include a Q and A for the President we took the
internal press q and a, and tinkered with it. We put a very draft RJR Q
& A at the top, and we should should have something for him to say when he
is coming and going and they shout at him.==================== ATTACHMENT      1 ======
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D4]MAIL465817790.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504319060000010A020100000002050000005E5B000000020000A667B459B35B5CED3DBOFO
632545B1116AAC29863E4714FD7349FBFF94E8D3A515F6E9F20405338E589841DC702F2D71B4A8
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

                           (4/8 DRAFf)
        TOBACCO QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS FOR THE PRESIDENT'S
                  KENTUCKY TRIP OF APRIL 9, 1998


Q:   How does R.J. Reynolds' announcement that it is pulling out of the settlement affect
     the chance of getting comprehensive legislation passed this year?

A:   I would have liked R.J. Reynolds to continue to negotiate with us over the legislation
     currently be drafted in Congress. I don't know whether their announcement
     means that they are going to go back to their old ways of marketing to children. I
     think that we must all work together to get legislation passed this year. However, I
     will continue my efforts of working with Congress to make sure that this legislation
     gets passed this year. Their announcement will not stop my efforts, and I fully
     believe that we will see comprehensive bipartisan legislation this year.


Q:   What is your position on protecting tobacco farmers and their communities as part
     of comprehensive tobacco legislation?

A:   Tobacco farmers and their communities were not considered as part of the
     settlement agreement reached by the Attorneys' General. In my statement last
     September, I said that protecting farmers and their communities was one of the key
     five principles that must be included in any comprehensive tobacco legislation that I
     would be willing to sign. I believe that the legislation authored by Senator Ford
     (D-KY) as part ofthe McCain bill, a $2.1 billion a year package that continues a
     government production control system, meets the goal of protecting farmers and
     their communities.


Q:   Aren't the goals of reducing youth smoking and protecting tobacco farmers
     contradictory?

A:   No. I don't want the tobacco companies to go out of business, only out of the business
     of selling to children. The tobacco farmers have played by the rules, and should be
     protected in any legislation that passes. I believe that we can reduce youth smoking and
     protect rural communities if we all work together to urge Congress to pass bipartisan
     comprehensive tobacco legislation this year.

Q:   Senator Lugar recently suggested in an op-ed that the tobacco program should be                 phased out.

A:   I believe that any legislation has to be evaluated in terms of how well it meets the the five
     principles I laid out last September --including reducing youth smoking and protecting
     farmers and their communities. Advocates of a free market for tobacco growers will
      argued that simply ending the tobacco program may actually increase the amount of
      tobacco that is grown, decrease the cost of tobacco, and provide a windfall for cigarette
      companies. In addition, representatives offamily farms have suggested that ending the
      tobacco program would have extremely negative economic effects on them and their
      communities. I traveled to Kentucky, in part, to discuss the various legislative options
      with those directly effected by tobacco legislation and hear their opinions first-hand


BACKGROUND QUESTIONS RE: TOBACCO FARMERS


Q:    How does the tobacco program work?

A:    Since the 1930s, in order to grow tobacco, a farmer must have a quota. The quota
      allows the farmer to grow a certain amount of tobacco for that year. Thus, the
      amount of tobacco grown in .the United States is controlled by law. In addition, the
      price of tobacco is set statutorily. If a private company chooses not to purchase
      tobacco at or above the statutory minimum price, the regional cooperative of
      tobacco farmers will purchase the tobacco and store it, putting the tobacco back on
      the market when the price is more favorable.

 Q:   What are the provisions for farmers are included in the McCain legislation?

A:    Senators Ford, Frist, and Hollings, the three members of the Senate Commerce
      Committee from tobacco-growing states, joined together to include a broad farmer
      provision in the McCain tobacco legislation. While maintaining a production control
      system for all tobacco farmers, the measure sets up somewhat different systems for burley
      and flue-cured tobacco. For burley tobacco (grown mostly in Kentucky), the package
      includes an optional buy-out for quota holders at $8 per pound, and retains the quota
      system for those who do not take the buyout, but provides payments to both remaining
      quota holders, lessees, and tenants to the extent that base quota declines. For flue-cured
      tobacco, the plan pr~vides for a mandatory buyout of existing quota holders, and replaces
      the quota system with a permit system that gives the new permits at no cost to active
      producers, regardless of whether they previously owned a quota. This transferring of
      quotas from inactive quota holders to actual producers is intended to make it possible for
      active farmers to sell tobacco without incurring the cost of buying or renting quota.

      The provision authored by Senator Ford and included in McCain's legislation also
      provides approximately $500 million for assistance to tobacco-producing communities.
      The package costs $2.1 billion per year for the first ten years and $500 million for years
      11-25 for a total of $28.5 billion. For the most part, tobacco farm leaders have been
      pleased with the proposal included in the McCain legislation.

A:   Including sales from fire-cured and dark air-cured tobacco, Kentucky tobacco producers
       received over $800 million from the 1997 crop. Tobacco sales represent over 40
     percent of crop sales receipts and over 20 percent of all agricultural sales in Kentucky.

     In 1997, over 600 million pounds of burley tobacco was produced in the United States --
     70 percent in Kentucky.

Q:   Which farmers will be affected by the legislation?

A:   The tobacco settlement will have a wide-reaching impact on all segments ofthe tobacco
       industry, but a disproportionate effect on small and minority tobacco quota owners and
          producers. Of the 338,000 individual quotas, about 66 percent are considered small
     farm operations. Five percent of all quotas are owned by minorities, the majority of
     which are small producers.

Q:   Why is tobacco so important to small farmers?

A:   Tobacco is a high value crop that generates gross receipts of $4,000 to $5,000 per acre.
     Profits from 1 acre of tobacco are equivalent to between 15 and 20 acres of com or
     soybeans. On small farms in Kentucky, with an average of 22 acres of harvested
     cropland in 1992, tobacco is vital to the economic survival offarmers. (source: 1992 Ag
     Census)

Q:   How much tobacco is grown in the United States?

A:   In 1997, tobacco production totaled 1.7 billion pounds with a value of over $3 billion, the
      highest production and crop receipts since 1992. Sales of tobacco products reached a
     record $50 billion in 1997.

GENERAL BACKGROUND ON TOBACCO LEGISLATION

Q:   Has you endorsed the McCain bill?

A:   I believe that this bill represents a dramatic step forward. It would raise the price
     of cigarettes, give the FDA full authority to regulate tobacco products, ban
     advertising aimed at children, and protect tobacco farmers.

     But I also said we still have work to do on this legislation. Above all, we need to put
     in place tough penalties that will cost the tobacco industry if it continues to sell
     cigarettes to young people. We're not trying to put the tobacco companies out of
     business; we want to put them out of the business of selling cigarettes to kids. This
     week's progress in the Senate shows we have real momentum in both parties to do

Q:   You've said we need stronger penalties on companies that continue to sell to our
     children. What do you mean by that?

A:   The McCain bill's penalty provisions are deficient for two reasons. First, the bill
     has a cap of $3.5 billion per year on industry-wide penalties, no matter how much
     the industry misses youth targets by. Second, the McCain bill contains no penalties
     on individual companies for failing to meet youth smoking targets. Reducing youth
     smoking is our bottom line, and we must make it each and every company's bottom
     line.

Q:   Does you have concerns about provisions of the McCain bill besides the penalties?

A:   I have serious concerns about this bill's provision which would allow individual
     States to "opt out" of the national smoke-free environment policy. This provision
     creates a patchwork system in which states could decide to adopt weaker laws or
     decide against taking any action at all, leaving people with little or no protection
     from the hazards of environmental tobacco smoke. In addition, there is no need to
     exempt the tobacco industry from antitrust rules in order to reduce youth smoking.
     I strongly oppose any exemptions that would allow price fixing agreements. Third,
     I believe it is critical that tobacco legislation fund efforts to promote public health
     and assist children.

Q:   What do you want the tobacco funds to be spent on?

A:   I strongly believe that tobacco revenues should go toward protecting public health
     and assisting children. My Fiscal Year 1999 budget provides for funds for
     anti-smoking programs that will help us meet the goals of reducing youth smoking
     rates and for a dramatic expansion of health-related research to help us cure
     smoking-related disease. Finally, in recognition of the states' role in bringing suit
     against tobacco companies, my budget provides for a substantial amount of money
     to revert to the states. Some of this money can be used for any purpose. Other
     funds must be used on state-administered programs to assist children (specifically,
     for child care, Medicaid child outreach, and class size reduction).

Q:   What is your view of the liability protections for the tobacco industry contained in
     Senator McCain's legislation?

A:   As we have said on many occasions, I would prefer comprehensive tobacco
     legislation without liability limits, but in the context of legislation that meets all of
     my principles and dramatically reduces youth smoking, reasonable limits on
     liability will not be a dealbreaker. Right now, I'm going to focus on the aspects of
     the McCain legislation that I think fall short of what the I have demanded:
     particularly, on the penalties in the bill to reduce youth smoking. Until we get

Q:    The tobacco industry has said that it will not agree to national tobacco legislation
      that increases the price of a pack of cigarettes by $1.10 over five years, as proposed
      by your budget and the McCain bill. Does that doom your proposal?

A:    No. We have always expected the tobacco companies to fight hard for their
      economic interests, but needless to say we will not always agree, nor we think will
      the US Congress. This price increase called for in my Fiscal Year 1999 budget is
      necessary to meet my youth smoking targets, and I will continue to demand it.
      What the companies do is up to them, but we will not back off such necessary
      measures to reduce youth smoking.

Q:    What are the five principles that you have said tobacco legislation must meet?

A:    I have said that I will only support tobacco legislation that:

             Raises the price of cigarettes by up to $1.10 a pack over 5 years and $1.50 a
             pack over the next ten years, and imposes tough penalties on companies that
             continue to sell to kids;

             Affirms the FDA's full authority to regulate tobacco products;

             Gets companies out of the business of marketing and selling tobacco to
             minors;

             Promotes public health research and public health goals; and

             Protects our tobacco farmers and their communities.

Q:    How does the McCain bill compare to the Attorneys General proposed settlement
      and the President's proposal?

A:    See chart below.

                             Comparison of Tobacco Proposals
                                      April 7, 1998

                               Attorneys       McCain                  President
                               General
Substantial Price Increase     No              Yes                     Yes
Strong Industry and            No              No                      Yes
Company Penalties
Full FDA Authority             No              Yes                     Yes


    Strong Advertising and               Yes              Yes              Yes
    Access Provisions
    Protections of Tobacco              No                Yes              Yes
    Farmers
    Comprehensive Plan to Use            Yes              No*              Yes
    Tobacco Revenue to Protect
    Public Health and Assist
    Children
    Strong Environmental                Yes               No               Yes·
    Tobacco Smoke Provision
    Liability Protections for
    Industry:
       1. Liability Cap                 Yes               Yes              Only if bill meets
                                                                           President's public
                                                                           health principles.

         2. Bar on Class Actions        Yes               No               Only if bill meets
                                                                           President's public
                                                                           health principles.

      3. Bar on Punitive                Yes               No               Only if bill meets
    Damages                                                                President's public
                                                                           health principles.




    *       Does not attempt to address most spending issues.


    Q:      Is teen smoking going up or down?

    A:      On April 2, the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta released a new study ("Tobacco
            Use Among High School Students --United States, 1997") which found that cigarette
            smoking rates among high school students rose by nearly a third between 1991 and 1997,
            from 27.5 percent to 36.4 percent, with the sharpest increase among African American
            students. Cigarette smoking was highest among white students (40 percent), rising by
            28 percent from 1991 (31 percent). While the level of cigarette smoking among
            African-American students was lower than for white students, the rate increased by 80
            percent between 1991 and 1997 (from 12.6 percent to 22.7 percent). Overall, the study
            found that nearly half of male students and more than a third of female students used
            cigarettes, cigars, or smokeless tobacco during the previous month. This 1997 data was
            derived from a survey of over 16,000 students in grades 9-12.


