RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Todd A. Summers ( CN=Todd A. Summers/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-APR-1998 09:45:45.00

SUBJECT:   SF Chronicle article

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sandra Thurman ( CN=Sandra Thurman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Ban on Funding For Needle Swap Expected to End
White House decision is imminent, sources say
Louis Freedberg, Chronicle Washington Bureau     Saturday, April 11, 1998




Under intense pressure from scientists, public health experts, activists
and
its own AIDS advisers, the Clinton aOministration is moving to lift a
10-year-
old ban on using federal funds for needle exchange programs, according to
key
individuals close to the issue.

Although the administration's official stand is that it is still studying
the
matter, a range of AIDS organizations and key individuals say they have
been
assured a decision is imminent -- and they are anticipating that the ban
will
be lifted.

"We have reason to be optimistic that the administration will lift the
ban,
because it will fit comfortably within their perspective of research,
prevention and care of people with AIDS, " said Representative Nancy
Pelosi,
D-San Francisco. " I know they are committed to stop the spread of AIDS,
and I
am confident they won't let politics stand in the way of that."

Dr. Scott Hitt, a Los Angeles physician and the chairman of President
Clinton's advisory council on AIDS, said he believes an announcement could
be
made within a week.

About 100 communities -- approximately 30 of them in California -- run
needle


exchange programs without federal funds. The San Francisco AIDS Foundation
runs the largest in the nation, using a combination of city and private
funds
to hand out 2.2 million needles a year.

State and federal laws require a public health emergency to operate a
needle
exchange program, forcing the Board of Supervisors to make such a
declaration
every two weeks since the program started in 1993.

Lifting the ban would allow San Francisco to spend federal AIDS prevention
funds on needle exchanges and free up funds for other programs. It would
also
allow many other communities that do not have a needle exchange program to
initiate one.

"There could certainly be a financial benefit to San Francisco, and it
would
certainly benefit hundreds of other programs around the country that do not
have the kind of support that San Francisco has, " said Regina Aragon,
policy
director of ' the San Francisco AIDS Foundation.

According to authoritative estimates, more than half of new cases of HIV
infection are related to drug use. Some experts argue that at least 14,000
new
cases of HIV could be prevented each year if needle exchange programs were
widely in place across the nation.

The congressional ban imposed in 1988 gives the secretary of health and
human
services the authority to lift the ban if there is sufficient scientific
evidence to meet two criteria: needle exchange programs reduce the spread
of
HIV, and they do not encourage drug use.

As late as this week, a spokesman for Health and Human Services Secretary
Donna Shalala said the administration is not yet convinced that needle
exchange programs do not promote drug use.

PRESSURE ON SHALALA

As frustration at the administration's inaction mounted, the president'S
advisory council approved a resolution of "no confidence"   last month in
the
administration, marking an embarrassing rebuke to a president who has
prided
himself on his efforts to fight the AIDS epidemic. Hitt sent a sharply
worded
letter to Shalala saying that her failure to lift the ban represented an
"abdication"   of her responsibilities.

On Thursday, council members held a conference call to decide whether to
approve an even tougher resolution calling on Shalala to resign. But they
decided to hold off after administration officials said a decision on the
ban
was imminent    although they didn't provide details about what the
decision
would be.



But those close to the controversy believe the administration will lift the
ban in light of the mountain of scientific evidence demonstrating the
efficacy
of needle exchange programs. Scientific panels and reports commissioned by
the
National Institutes of Health, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention,
the National Academy of Sciences, as well as the American Medical
Association
and the American Public Health Association have come to similar
conclusions.

Within the administration, the emotional debate among Clinton's top
advisers
on AIDS and drug policy has led some officials to wryly refer to the
conflict
as "czar wars.    I   I




On the one side is Clinton's "drug czar,"   retired General Barry
McCaffrey,
who insists that handing out clean needles to drug users would send the
message that the government is condoning drug use. He has been supported in
that view by a combination of conservative Republicans and some Democratic
representatives of cities with large African American populations.

THE 'AIDS CZAR'

On the other side is "AIDS czar"   Sandra Thurman, head of Clinton's
Office of
National AIDS Policy, although she downplayed her differences with
McCaffrey.

"We are not warring,"   said Thurman. "General McCaffrey is every bit as
committed to stopping the AIDS epidemic as I am.' ,

At the same time, she said ':We have convincing evidence that the criteria
(needed to lift the ban) have been met. ' , .

On Wednesday, a major obstacle appeared to be removed when the authors of
the
only major study suggesting that needle exchange programs lead to increased
drug use contended that their research in Montreal and Vancouver had been
misinterpreted by McCaffrey and others.

Some AIDS advocates say they are skeptical of administration assurances
that
it is moving on the issue, saying they have heard the same thing too many
times before.

"Until the decision is made, it is premature to say we have a victory
here, I'
said San Francisco's Aragon. "This is not an easy thing for the
administration to do, and I would caution my colleagues not to be overly
optimistic. ' ,

But others believe the administration is finally ready to act. " I don't
think
it will be much longer now, " said Daniel Zingale, executive director of
AIDS


  Action in washington, D.C.   "They understand where the science comes down
  on
  this issue."


