RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-APR-1998 11:53:45.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly Report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D95)MAIL450174606.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750433AOF0000010A02010000000205000000365C00000002000065BF458DA032FC6FD07653
AB030A6697777E061C68EEE844B2322555F34D1C59EE5B3B129A7D543E58279058097F48B2EA79
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion




                                           April 17, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report


         Crime -- School Safety: The Department of Education is preparing to release a report
on the impact of the Gun-Free Schools Act (GFSA) during the 1996-97 school year. As you
know, the GFSA generally requires all states receiving funds under the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act to expel students who bring a firearm to school for a period of at least
one year. . The report found that 7,326 students were expelled during the 1996-97 school year
for bringing a firearm to school, an increase of about 10%. Colorado reported the highest
number (1,873) and rate (2.573 per 1,000 students) of expulsions. Other high-expulsion states
include: by overall number, Ohio (937), California (723), Texas (532), Missouri (318) and
Illinois (250); and by rate, Ohio (.449 per 1,000), Missouri (.310 per 1,000) and New Mexico
(.195 per 1,000). DC, Hawaii, Guam, Puerto Rico and Wyoming reported no expulsions. The
lowest rates were reported by North Dakota (.008 per 1,000), Minnesota (.019 per 1,000),
Mississippi (.020 per 1,000) and New Jersey (.028).

       Of the 3,246 expUlsions where the type of firearms was identified, 58% involved
handguns, 7% involved rifles and the remaining 35% involved some other type of firearms
(bombs, grenades, starter pistols, rockets). The report also found that High Schools students
were the most likely to carry a firearm: Of the 5,352 expulsions where the student's school
level was reported, 57% were in high school, 35% were in junior high and 8% were in
elementary school.

        Crime -- Missing Children: On Thursday, the Justice Department launched a missing
and exploited children web site. The site tells kids where to go if they are lost or need help, and
provides tips on how to they can avoid being exploited on the Internet. The site provides
information to parents on how to best protect their children, and steps they can take if their child
is missing. In addition, the site includes information on available law enforcement training for
investigating child kidnaping and abduction cases, and links to missing children web sites in
other countries.
transmit a report prepared in response to your March 3 directive to promote the adoption of .08
BAC as the legal limit for impaired driving. The Transportation report recommends that the
National Park Service, Defense Department, and U.S. Coast Guard begin rulemakings to lower
the legal limit to .08 BAC on military installations, national parks, and waterways. It also
reports that Defense will transmit legislation to Congress to amend the Uniform Code of Military
Justice to provide for the punishments for violating a .08 limit on military bases.

        Education -- Mayor Daley's Proposed Tax Breaks for After School Programs:
During your recent trip to Chicago Mayor Daley raised with you his idea of tax-credits for
after school programs. We have followed up with his office to learn more about his
program. Currently, the after school programs in the Chicago public schools (which are
an essential part of the city's efforts to end social promotions) are financed solely with
public funds provided to the schools offering the after school programs. There are no fees
charged to parents, and no tax breaks of any kind. However, in the context of the national
debate on vouchers and tax savings for private school tuition, last year the Mayor asked his
staff to explore whether some form of tax credits to help parents cover the cost of
after-school programs could be developed as a reasonable middle-ground position.
However, his staff reports that they were unable to fashion an approach that worked in the
Chicago context, particularly since there are no fees to parents for participating in the
programs. Clearly the Mayor remains interested in this idea, but there are no plans for
proceeding with it locally.

        We believe there are several problems with the Mayor's suggestion that tax savings
for after school programs be incorporated into the Coverdell proposal. First, this
approach could undermine your request for a $200 million appropriation for after-school
programs. Second, even if we were convinced this was a sound approach, as you may
recall, our strategy for Coverdell has been to urge Democrats to resist adding amendments
that would make the bill more attractive, in light of an expected veto. Further, Sens. Lott
and Daschle have already agreed to a specific set of amendments to be considered when
Coverdell comes to the floor; it would be almost impossible to gain Democratic support for
reopening those negotiations in order to add Mayor Daley's idea as an additional
amendment.

         Education -- National Board for Professional Teaching Standards: We have been
working closely with the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards and our
allies in Congress to ensure that Goodling's provision to end federal funding for the Board
is stripped from the Higher Education Act before Congress completes action on that bill.
The bill reported by the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee contains no such
provision, and we believe there is little chance that a similar provision will be added on the
Senate floor. The House is likely to take up the Higher Education Act in late April or
early May; when it comes for a vote it is expected to pass by a wide margin. The National
Board is eager to avoid a floor fight in the House, and has urged that you hold off on a veto


                                               2




    threat until the bill goes to conference. We lack the votes to defeat Goodling on the floor,
    and the Board does not want to precipitate a recorded vote against it in the House. We
    believe that you should use the April 24 National Teacher of the Year Event to express your
    deep concern over this provision and pledge to work with Congress to remove it before the
    bill crosses your desk.

            Civil Rights -- Fair Lending: Treasury is encouraged by the Federal Reserve Bank's
    issuance of an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking that asks for comment on whether
    Regulation B (which carries out the provisions of the ECOA) should be amended to permit
    lenders voluntarily to collect information about the race and gender of applicants for
    non-mortgage credit. The prohibition on collection of this data inhibits monitoring by regulators,
    self-testing by the financial services industry, and enforcement by the Department of Justice and
    the Federal Trade Commission, with respect to discrimination in the non-mortgage lending
    markets. Comments are due to the Fed by May 29. 1998.


            Kennedy Employer Mandate Legislation. Next Wednesday, Senator Kennedy is
    scheduled to introduce a health care employer mandate bill. This bill, which has the
    strong support of the Labor community, would require that all firms with 50 or more
    employees provide coverage that is equivalent to the Federal Employees Health Benefit
    Blue CrosslBlue Shield standard plan. Employers would be required to contribute
    approximately 75 percent of the cost of coverage with the remainder coming from the
    employee. This legislation clearly will not go anywhere in this Congress. However,
    Senator Kennedy would like to force a Senate vote on this bill sometime this year.
    Although any employer mandate would significantly expand coverage, this legislation
    would not affect the over 20 million uninsured Americans who have workers in firms with
    less than fifty employees. As a consequence, if enacted, this legislation could create
    incentives for firms to split or subcontract out in order to avoid the mandate. Moreover,
    the absence of subsidies may make it difficult for some employees to afford the premiums,
    even though employers would have to contribute 75 percent. Senator Kennedy's office
    had initially requested that the First Lady or some representative from the Administration
    consider attending this event, but subsequently has seemed willing to accept a generally
    positive statement from the White House instead. We would advise that we respond to
    this bill by commending Senator Kennedy and his longstanding commitment to coverage
    expansion without giving an all-out endorsement. Implicit in our comments will be the
    suggestion that we primarily focus on the issues this year that have a chance of passing a
    Republican Congress.


           Tobacco --Senate Strategy: As you know, the Commerce Committee vote two weeks
    ago brought new momentum to our effort to enact a strong, comprehensive tobacco bill,
    and the industry's response should only add to that momentum, by making it even harder



                                                    3
industry's bidding.

       Given these new developments, we thought it made sense for Erskine, Larry and I to
meet with key Senators when they return to town next week. We will meet first with
Daschle and then, separately, with McCain, to discuss how to negotiate improvements to
the McCain bill, hopefully before it goes to the floor, and to devise an amendment strategy.
 We will also meet individually with Senators Breaux, Conrad, Durbin, Lautenberg and
Kennedy, to address their concerns and enlist their help in advancing the key
improvements we seek in the bill. We will stress to all our commitment to enacting
comprehensive tobacco legislation this year, and will try to impress upon them that we
should be reasonable in our demands, lest the entire legislative effort should fall apart.
We also plan to meet with key public health leaders --we met with Dr. Koop on Thursday,
and plan to meet soon with Dr. Kessler, and with members of the coalition of public health
groups working hardest to enact legislation (American Cancer Society, American Heart
Association, and Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids).

       Welfare Reform --New York Results: You asked whether we had any explanation for the
recent report that only 29 percent of the cases who left the rolls in New York State in
March of 1997 were working in the next quarter. As you know, other states have found
about 50 to 60 percent leave welfare for work (other leave due to marriage, their young~st
child turning 18, an increase in child support, receipt of SSI, increase in earnings by
another family member, or sanctions).

        In fact, we found out that there are several problems with these data, which were
gathered from the state's wage reporting system. First, the data were incomplete --not all
employers had reported for this quarter at the time the data were compiled. Looking at
data from March of 1996 --which found 39 percent showed earnings in at least one of the
three quarters after leaving welfare --produces figures that are somewhat closer to the
experience in other states. In general, there appear to be lags in reporting new employees
and employer reporting may also be worse in New York because the state's wage reporting
system is not directly linked to the unemployment insurance system the way it is in most
places.

       Also, this system undercounts employment, though we do not know by how much.
It ignores some self-employment, "off the books" wages, and work in other states. The
statewide figure also masks variation within the state: for cases closed in March 1996, 31
percent had wages reported in a subsequent quarter in New York City, compared to 47
percent in the rest of the state. Apparently NYC historically has a high level of
"administrative churning", i.e. cases closed due to various errors then reopened, which we
wouldn't expect to have earnings in a later quarter.




                                             4
Subcommittee on Immigration, has made an offer to Rep. Mel Watt (ranking member) to develop
a bipartisan bill to temporarily raise the cap on HIB visas for highly skilled temporary foreign
workers that, unlike the Abraham-Hatch bill in the Senate, includes reforms to the HIB
program that target their use to employers that are experiencing genuine skill shortages. We are
having discussions with members of Congress to develop reform language that is consistent with
the Administration's objectives. Rep. Smith is holding a hearing on this issue on Tuesday, April
21st.

        Child Care Event Next Week. We are planning a Rose Garden event on Thursday,
April 23 with you and the First Lady to continue to put pressure on the Congress to take action
on child care. That day, Secretary Rubin is convening his Working Group on Child Care, which
you had asked him to lead at the White House Conference on Child Care; the group will issue a
final report on private sector investment in child care and best practices. Also, the Department
of Labor will issue a report on child· care, focusing on corporate models gleaned from the
Women's Bureau's Honor Roll.




                                               5


