RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-APR-1998 19:35:21.00

SUBJECT:   Q&A for story on food safety for juice

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Wendy A. Taylor ( CN=Wendy A. Taylor/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joseph P. Lockhart ( CN=Joseph P. Lockhart/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here are some Q&A for a story regarding food safety for fruit and
vegetable juices we expect will run in the Washington Post on Monday.   =============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D11]MAIL41311780M.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043B2120000010A020100000002050000009D5800000002000006CCBD1FED84398A2084FD
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


      QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON PROPOSED JUICE REGULATIONS
                          April 20, 1997


Q:   What is the Administration announcing with regard to food safety?

A:   The Clinton Administration will announce two proposed regulations by the Food and
     Drug Administration (FDA) to improve the safety of fruit and vegetable juices. The first
     would require that all fruit and vegetable juice processors implement a Hazard Analysis
     and Critical Control Point (HACCP) system for their products to protect the public from
     health hazards. Retailers of packaged juice, including processors who sell less than
     40,000 gallons of fresh juice per year, would be exempt from HACCP but would instead
     be required to place warning labels on their products. The second proposed rule would
     require packaged untreated juice to be labeled with a warning statement advising
     consumers of the potential risks of juice that has not been processed to eliminate
     dangerous bacteria. Retail sellers of juice for consumption on-site -- such as restaurants,
     juice bars, and children's lemonade stands -- will be exempt from this labeling
     requirement. However, retailer processors who package untreated juice for consumption
     off-site -- such as grocery stores that squeeze and bottle juice for home use -- will be
     required to label.

Q:   What effect will these regulations have?

A:   Processors of fresh,.unpasteurized juices would be required to take extra steps to reduce
     the numbers of microorganisms that may be in their products to an amount roughly
     equivalent to that achieved by pasteurization. The proposed HACCP regulation does not
     prescribe what these steps must be, allowing the processor the flexibility to choose a
     technique that fits into his process and is effective. Prior to having a HACCP program in
     place, processors who do not pasteurize or use a comparable process would be required to
     include a warning statement on their label. Retailers of packaged fresh juice, including
     those who sell less than 40,000 gallons offresh juice per year, would be exempt from
     HACCP but would instead be required to place warning labels on their products. Retail
     processors selling juice that is consumed on-site would be exempt from this labeling
     requirement. Examples of these types of processors include restaurants, juice bars, and
     children's lemonade stands.

     Consumers would expect to see labels on juice products that give them important
     information about the product. If the juice has not undergone pasteurization or a
     comparable treatment, a consumer would see a warning statement such as: "WARNING:
     This product has not been pasteurized and, therefore, may contain harmful bacteria that
     can cause serious illness in children, the elderly; and persons with weakened immune
     systems."



                                              1
     this juice season?

A:   It is proposed that the HACCP regulation become effective one year after publication of
     the final rule with a two or three year phase-in period for small and very small businesses.
      FDA is asking for comment on the appropriate length ofth~ phase-in period. Under the
     proposal, these processors would be required to label until they implement HACCP.
     Implementing a HACCP program requires planning, training of personnel, and possibly
     the purchase of new equipment by producers. For these reasons, it is not feasible to
     make the rules effective for the next cider season.

     FDA plans to have the labeling regulation in place by September of this year, in time for
     the 1998 cider season. Because of the short effective date, FDA has proposed allowing
     flexibility in how the warning statement appears. While FDA intends to require that the
     warning statement appear on the label of the product itself, we are proposing a phase-in
     period until January 1, 2000 (January 1,2001 for small businesses) during which the
     statement can appear on placards, signs, or other point-of-purchase materials so long as
     such labeling is prominent enough to effectively inform consumers.

Q:   How much juice is expected to be pasteurized as a result of the proposed rules?

A:   Currently, about 98 percent of all juice sold in the United States is pasteurized.
     However, it is expected that up to 40 million additional gallons of juice will be
     pasteurized as the result of these proposed rules.

Q:   What is HACCP?

A:   HACCP stands for Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point system. It is a
     systematic approach to the identification, assessment, and prevention of all types of risk --
     biological, chemical, and physical -- that may occur in a food production process or
     practice. When implementing a HACCP system, a food producer develops a plan that
     anticipates and identifies the points in the production process where a failure to control
     the process would likely result in contamination of the food. HACCP is regarded as the
     state-of-the-art means to ensure the safety and integrity of the food supply.

Q:   Has HACCP been successfully implemented for other foods?

A:   Yes, HACCP is currently being implemented in the seafood, meat and poultry production
     industries. Also FDA's low-acid canned food regulations, which have been in place
     since the 1970s, are HACCP-based regulations.

Q:   Are juices safe?



                                               2
     juice sold in the United States is pasteurized. However, the growing record of consumer
     illness in recent years demonstrates that a problem exists that must be dealt with,
     particularly in unpasteurized products. FDA's proposals are developed to reduce the
     potential for foodbome illness and assure that consumers can continue to rely on safe
     juice products. Unfortunately, we do not know the actual number of juice-related
     illnesses because these types of illness are underreported. Individuals may not
     experience all of the symptoms or have severe enough symptoms to seek medical
     attention. Additionally, medical personnel may simply treat the symptoms without
     determining the underlying cause. FDA expects that these proposals, when
     implemented, will reduce the number of illnesses significantly.

Q:   What are the problems with juices that are being addressed in the proposed
     regulations?

A:   The proposed regulations will cover a wide range of hazards that may result in foodbome
     illness, including microbial, chemical, and physical contamination. During the past
     several years, outbreaks offoodbome illness have been associated with the consumption
     of juice and beverages containing juice that have not been pasteurized or otherwise
     treated to destroy pathogens. In the Fall of 1996, an outbreak of E. coli 0157:H7 from
     fresh apple juice resulted in 66 illnesses and the death of one child in the western United
     States and Canada. Other pathogens have also been associated with outbreaks. These
     include Salmonella and Cryptosporidium in apple cider, Bacillus in orange juice,
     Salmonella in unpasteurized orange juice and in orange drink, andVibrio cholerae in
     coconut milk.

     Illnesses have also been caused by other substances present in juices. Examples include
     tin leached from the can lining, use of poisonous parts of plants to make the juice, the
     undeclared presence of food ingredients such as sulfites and FD&C Yellow No.5,
     residues from improper sanitation procedures, and the presence of glass, or other
     hazardous materials. Other types of chemical and physical hazards have the potential to
     cause illness, such as patulin, a toxin that can occur in juice when excessive levels of
     moldy apples are used in processing, and toxic elements (e.g., lead). The HACCP
     proposal will cover these types of hazards, as well as microbial contamination.

Q:   Have the problems with juice increased in recent years?

A:   Yes, the incidence of illness associated with consumption of fresh juice products has
     increased in recent years. Some of the microorganisms involved are newly emerging
     strains such as E. coli 0157:H7 which has adapted to acidic conditions in foods such as
     juices and Cryptosporidium .

Q:   How risky is juice compared to other foods?


                                              3
     hazard that can cause illness or injury, so, it is impossible to make this comparison.
     Food producers and manufacturers are aware of this and take steps to minimize the
     opportunity for contamination to occur. Juices, particularly those not treated to destroy
     pathogens, provide a potentially favorable environment for supporting the growth of
     pathogens. However, juices treated to destroy pathogens are generally safe and
     nutritious.

Q:   Should children drink unpasteurized juice?

A:   FDA advises consumers that, due to the increased risk of illness from pathogens,
     unpasteurized juice not be given to children, the elderly, or anyone who has a
     significantly weakened immune system.

Q:   How much juice is consumed in the United States?

A:   Americans consume approximately 2.3 billion gallons of juice every year. Juice
     consumption at both ends of the age spectrum is high. Children under 6 years of age
     drink 16% of the juice consumed and this amount accounts for 50% of their fruit intake.
     Adults over 59 consume 20% of the juice. Orange juice is by far the most-consumed
     juice at 1.4 billion gallons annually. Other popular juices with American consumers are
     apple juice (166 million gallons), grapefruit juice (166 million), pineapple juice (91
     million), tomato and other vegetable juices (78 miJIion), and grape juice (75 million).

Q:   How many juice processors are there?

A:   There are approximately 3,000 juice processors in the U.S.

Q:   Are all juices covered by the regulations?

A:   The labeling proposal affects only those packaged juices that have not been pasteurized or
     otherwise treated to eliminate pathogens. In other words, only packaged, untreated
     juices will have to bear a warning statement. Juices processed, sold, and consumed in
     restaurants and similar retail establishments do not require this labeling. All retailers,
     however, including restaurants as well as producers who sell less than 40,000 gallons of
     fresh juice per year, would be exempt from HACCP.

Q:   Would the proposed rules apply to imported juice products?

A:   The rules would apply to all juice products sold in interstate commerce, including all
     imported juice products.

Q:   How do the juice regulations fit into the President's Food Safety Initiative?


                                              4
     and for meat and poultry were highlighted as an important part of improving the food
     safety system in this country. Expanding HACCP to other appropriate foods, particularly
     juice, was one of the key goals. In fact, the President noted when introducing the Food
     Safety Initiative in his radio address on January 25,1997, that no parent should have to be
     concerned about the juice they pour for their child at breakfast.

Q:   What steps is the Administration taking to improve food safety?

A:   Last year we launched a new Presidential food safety initiative, and added more than $40
     million to the FY '98 budget. With that money we started putting in place new
     science-based preventive systems to improve the safety of seafood, meat and poultry and
     began work on a new early warning system to help detect and respond to outbreaks of
     foodborne illness. This year, our budget seeks an even more substantial increase in
     resources, $101 million, to improve food safety. The President's initiative includes:
     giving FDA authority to prevent the import of produce from countries without safety
     precautions equivalent to our own; hiring FDA inspectors to improve the safety of our
     nation's fruits and vegetables, both domestic and imported; developing new ways for
     federal inspectors to detect food-borne illnesses in meat and poultry and determine the
     source of contamination; improving educational outreach on proper food handling; and
     further expanding our early warning system and strengthening state surveillance activities
     for foodborne illnesses.

Q:   How will FDA enforce these rules?

A:   As proposed, FDA will have authority to conduct official reviews of aU of the records
     associated with maintaining a HACCP system to ensure that producers are in compliance
     with the proposed requirements. If a producer is out of compliance or does not have a
     HACCP program, any product offered for sale by that establishment would be considered
     adulterated and subject to seizure. If a fiim fails to meet the labeling requirement, FDA
     can take any of several kinds of enforcement actions, including seizing the food.

Q:   What are the costs of the rules?

A:   The benefits and costs of the rules will be specified in ajoint regulatory impact analysis
     to be published in the Federal Register. However, the benefits overaU greatly exceed the
     costs of the rules.

Q:   Will there be an additional cost to consumers?

A:   Whether an individual producer chooses to pass on any additional costs is up to that
     producer. However, an additional cost for juice is a small price to pay for the large


                                              5



    margin of safety gained.




                               6


