     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:21-APR-1998 16:20:17.00

     SUBJECT:   Paper on service and progress since service summit

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena   Kagan/OU=OPD/O~EOP   @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett   ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     FYI, here's a 1-pager I did on what we've accomplished since the service
     summit, followed by a 2-page summary of what the federal agencies have
     done.

     I had heard this message would be featured as part of the Earth Day
     speech, but now I hear we'll just get a paragraph on how great volunteers
     are in national parks, and we won't release any paper on service.   Maybe
     that's not so bad, since there's no AmeriCorps or Corporation component to
     the Harpers' Ferry event anyway.  Powell is still doing his one-year
     report to the Mayors in Chicago on Monday.   His report will include what
     federal agencies have done, but not a broader Administration message, of
     course. Not sure if it's worth it to push for a venue to get this message
     out in anticipation of Powell -- Steve Silverman would have thrown a fit,
     but I don't feel like that's warranted since there doesn't seem to be any
     press interest out there, and we're don't have much news here.


     The Service Summit One Year Later -- Promoting Service and Reaching
     At-Risk Youth

     At the PresidentsO, Summit for AmericaO,s Future, held one year ago in
     Philadelphia, hundreds of organizations and communities pledged to serve
     on behalf on behalf of AmericaO,s children, especially at-risk children.
     Since then, the Administration has worked to increase the ethic of citizen
     service, and to ensure that children have access to the summitO,s five key
     resources -- a caring adult, a safe place, a healthy start, an effective
     education, and a chance to serve.

      Today, the President signed a memorandum to all federal agencies asking
     them to explore additional ways to expand service opportunities for
     federal employees.  Federal employees are generous with their time and
     talents in their communities even as they fulfill their responsibilities.
     The President is asking each department to report within 90 days on
     actions to support employees who volunteer.

      AmericaO,s Promise, led by General Colin Powell, has worked to ensure
     that promises made last year by corporations and nonprofits are being
     kept, and has garnered many new commitments in the past year.  Hundreds of
     local communities and states have expanded the work begun at the summit.
     On Monday, April 27, in Chicago, General Powell will unveil a one-year
     progress report at a meeting of the U.S. Conference of Mayors.


      The President has made the summitO,s goals a top priority in the past
     year.   For example, the President proposed the new High Hopes Mentoring
     Program to link colleges and universities to public schools and give
     at-risk children more opportunities in higher education (summit goal 1);
     launched a major new Child Care Initiative, including increases in
     after-school options (summit goal 2); signed into law the ChildrenO,s
     Health Insurance Program, the single largest investment in health care for
     children since the passage of Medicaid in 1965 (summit goal 3); created
     the America Reads program, using AmeriCorps members, college work-study
     students, and volunteer tutors to help children learn to read (summit goal
     4) .


      The Administration has added new opportunities for young people to serve
     their communities to further summit goal 5.  At the summit, the President
     challenged service and religious organizations to offer young people the
     chance to serve and agreed to provide 50,000 new AmeriCorps scholarships
     for this purpose over the next 5 years.  The response has exceeded our
     expectations, with over 8,900 scholarships approved, ahead of our
     first-year plan for 5,000 scholarships. The Corporation for National
     Service also awarded scholarships to 1,600 high school students with
     exemplary service records in the first year of the National Service
     Scholars program, which will grow to as many as 10,000 high schools this
     year.  The President served on Martin Luther King Day as part of an effort
     to make that holiday a day of service -- O&a day on, not a day off.08

      Federal agencies are keeping the commitments they made one year ago at
     the summi t.  Led by the Social Security Adminis.tration and the Departments
     of Transportation and Treasury, federal agencies have established new
     partnerships with more than 250 schools since the summit, with federal
     employees offering mentoring, tutoring, career education, and computer
     donations.   The attached highlights other agency accomplishments.

     Federal Agencies Are Taking Action on Service to Children at Risk

     Federal agencies have reached out to O&adopt08 or establish partnerships
     with more tqan 250 schools since the service summit one year ago.   The
     Social Security Administration has led the pack with 147 new school
     partnerships, while Transportation, Treasury, and Defense have added about
     25 partnerships each.  Federal agencies and their employees assist their
     partner schools in a variety of ways, such as mentoring, tutoring, career
     education, and computer donations.  The following are highlights of other
     agency actions.

     Agriculture -- Sponsored the first-ever National Summit on Food Recovery
     and Gleaning.  Increased Natural Resource Conservation Service Earth
     TeamD,s volunteer hours by 18%.

     Commerce -- The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration trained 20
     teachers from D.C. schools on how students can use the Internet to study
     and report scientific data.

     Corporation for National Service -- Recruited more than 900 colleges and
     universities to help secure 100,000 work-study students as reading
     tutors. Launched Seniors in Schools in nine cities for America Reads.
     Added 15,000 new AmeriCorps positions through community and faith-based
     organization with emphasis on 5 summit goals.  Awarded 1,600 National
     Service Scholarships for outstanding service, and secured funding for
     10,000 scholarships ..

     Defense -- The Army identified 30,000 volunteers in 49 commands reaching


    over 1,200 schools through a new policy to expand opportunities for
    military personnel to volunteer in local schools.  The Navy tutored or
    mentored over 100,000 youth in the 96-97 school year, and reached 50,000
    youth through Campaign Drug Free. The Air Force served an additional 700
    at-risk youth through the Air Force Reserve Command's STARBASE programs,
    with more growth planned next year. The Office of the Secretary of
    Defense increased enrollment in Junior ROTC academies from 1,500 to 4,000
    students; and mobilized children of active duty personnel to volunteer,
    with 10,000 Army youth serving 52,000 hours in January and February of
    1998.

    Environmental Protection -- will deploy senior citizen volunteers to make
    presentations on protecting public health and the environment to more than
    13,000 youngsters in 10 states by the end of 1998. Many projects are
    intergenerational, with students and senior volunteers going out into the
    field together to conduct drinking water protection activities.

    Federal Emergency Management Agency -- Instituted new Spring Break program
    this spring, when high school students served in five communities cleaning
    up debris from hurricanes and repairing damage from flooding.  Program
    will grow to over 50 communities in spring of 1999.

    General Services Administration -- Worked in partnership with the National
    Children's Museum on a program to provide tutoring, mentoring, and
    academic skills for children at risk.

    Health and Human Services    Awarded almost $1 million in GirlPower grants
    to communities to prevent teen pregnancy and drug abuse and promote
    healthy behavior in young girls.

    Housing and Urban Development -- Added more than 200 Neighborhood Networks
    computer learning centers in assisted/ insured housing.     Partnered with
    the NCAA on education camps for 200 youth from public housing in four
    EZ/ECll, s last summer; expanding to 30 cities this summer.

    Interior -- Soon to launch the National Park Service's Public Land Corps,
    to provide service opportunities and outdoor education for young people
    ages 16-24, while improving resource protection in national parks. The
    Internet-based National Junior Ranger program will be on-line this fall,
    for children who are unable to visit our national parks.

    Justice -- Funded 52 new Juvenile Mentoring (JUMP) sites; joined with the
    Army and Navy to expand the Drug Education for Youth (DEFY) program from 3
    to 24 sites, which will grow to 42 DEFY camps in 1998 and 60 camps in
    1999.

    Labor -- Ran a summer enrichment program for 50 elementary and middle
    school students; most students improved by at least a half grade level
    after three weeks of math and reading tutoring.

    Office of National Drug Control Policy -- Launched National Youth
    Anti-Drug Media Campaign now running in 12 cities and to be expanded
    nation-wide in July.

    Office of Personnel Management    Will issue guidance this month on how to
    support employee participation in community service.

    Peace Corps -- Organized more than 5,000 current and returned Peace Corps
    volunteers to take part in a global education initiative on Peace Corps
    Day.  In just one day, the Peace Corps World Wise Schools program reached


 thousands of teachers and hundreds of thousands of students.

 School to Work Office -- Organized National Groundhog Shadow Day on
 February 2, 1998, when 5,000 businesses offered job shadowing
 opportunities to 125,000 students.

 Selective Service System -- Provided its 1.6 million registrants with
 toll-free numbers on service and volunteering.

Small Business Administration -- Educated more than 35,000 high school and
some college students about small business opportunities in partnership
with the Senior Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE) and others.

Social Security Administration -- Created 147 new partnerships with
schools. Book drive now underway to place books for K-3rd grade children
in SSA's 1,300 field offices.

Transportation -- Launched Garrett A. Morgan Technology and Transportation
Futures Program to reach one million students through the year 2000 to
educate them about careers in technology and transportation.  Recruited
over 400 education, employee, and transportation organization to be
partners in the Morgan program. During National Transportation Week in
May, partners will visit at least 1,000 classrooms to talk about
transportation careers. As a result of myriad activities, DOT expects to
reach 250,000 students by the end of the academic year.

Treasury -- Through February of FY1998, law enforcement officers gave over
200,000 students anti-gang, anti-drug training as part of the "Gang
Resistance Education and Training" (GREAT) program, exceeding summit
commitment.

Veterans Affairs -- Added service opportunities for over 2,000 students
and youth in VA facilities, through volunteer managers who work with
school districts to establish partnerships, achieving 40% of its year 2000
summit goal.


