RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-APR-1998 19:36:03.00

SUBJECT:   H1B meeting with Members

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
Peter is setting up a meeting between himself, you, Sally and
Representatives Lamar Smith, Mel Watt and Zoe Lofgren to discuss what the
Administration wants to be included in H1B visa legislation. They are not
interested in getting specific language from us; rather, they want our
positions on (1) size and duration of the increase in the cap; (2)
training; (3) H1B reforms; and (4) the application fee.  This meeting will
li·kely take place on Thursday. Once the date/time is firm, Peter will
call Laura to coordinate with your schedule.

As you know, our objective is to get strong reform language in the House
bill. with the exception of the Department of Commerce, all of the
agencies have agreed on both recruit & retain and no lay-off language.   In
general, Commerce is uncomfortable with too much discretion being given to
the Secretary of Labor to "second-guess" the recruitment and the lay-off
decisions of employers. We are working with Labor and Commerce on a
compromise.

Attached is a version of where we are with the language as of today.  As
you will see, we include a proposal for a new visa category that applies
only to very highly skilled science, engineering and math grads.  All
agreed that this is an alternative that we could present.  I will update
you on the rest as we go. Thanks.

Julie

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D77]MAIL44090801V.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX·DUMP:

FF575043C8040000010A020100000002050000006731000000020000C2441214107410BB720960
1AF3034D2E74BA7799826F97DEE5BD70502AB8562B47B792B5AEF42FC8478D9BB58CD9C2DB187E
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                               April 20, 1998

                     Administration Position Regarding H-IB Legislation
                    (based on DPCfNEC Deputies Meeting, April 17, 1998)

The Administration has committed to pursuing both reforms to the H-1 B visa program and
increased training opportunities for U ,S, workers as part of any legislation that would temporarily
raise the annual cap on H-IB visas, The following rcpresents the Administration's position on
major reforms and training initiatives (with the Department of Commerce dissenting on Sections
I and II),

I.      Recruitment of United States Workers Prior to Seeking Nonimmigrant Workers

        (a) IN GENERAL -- Section 212(n)(I)ofthe Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U,S,C.
I 182(n)(1 » is amended by inserting at the end the following new subparagraph:

        (E)(i) The employer, prior to filing the application, has taken timely and significant steps
to recruit and retain sufficient U.S. workers in the specialty occupation in which the
non-immigrant whose services are being sought will be employed. Such steps shall include
good faith recruitment in the United States using procedures that are standard practice within the
industry (e.g., wide-spread advertising of all job openings (such as through America's Job Bank,
the Internet, general circulation publications, professional journals and magazines, or job fairs),
or providing meaningful monetary incentives (such as paying above the prevailing wage or
paying bonuses and training subsidies not included in the base compensation package», and
offering compensation as required by subparagraph (A) and such good faith recruitment must be
unsuccessful.

        (ii) The recruitment requirements of this subparagraph shall not apply to aliens with
extraordinary ability, aliens who are outstanding professors and researchers, and certain
multinational executives and managers described in section 203(b)(1). The recruitment
requirements of this subparagraph shall also not apply to a scientist, mathematician, or engineer
who has attained at least a master's degree or its equivalent in a scientific discipline, and who is
coming temporarily to the United States to participate in a cooperative joint scientific activity
carried out under an Agreementbetween the Federal Government and the alien's Government.

(b)     WAGE COMPARABILITY -- Section 212(n)(l )(A)(I) of such Act is amended by
inserting "(including the value of benefits and additional compensation)" after "wages." Section
212(n)(I)(A)(I)(I) is amended by inserting "(including the value of benefits and additional
compensation)" after "actual wage level."

II.    Non-displacement of United States Workers

Section 212(n) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(n», as amended by
section 5, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:

        (I) has not, within the 6-month period prior to the filing of the application, laid off or
otherwise displaced any United States worker (as defined in subparagraph (B)), including a
worker obtained by contract, employee leasing, temporary help agreement, or other similar basis,
who has substantially equivalent qualifications and experience [CHECK with BILL M.] in the
specialty occupation in which the nonimmigrant is intended to be (or is) employed; and

         (ii) will not layoff or otherwise knowingly displace, during the 90-day period following
the filing of the application, or during the 90-day period immediately preceding and following the
filing of any visa petition supported by the application, any United States worker, including any
worker obtained by contract, employee leasing, temporary help agreement, or other similar basis
who has substantially equivalent qualifications and experience in the specialty occupation in
which the nonimmigrant is intended to be (or is) employed.

(B) For purposes of this subsection, the term "United States worker" means --

       (I)     a citizen or national of the United States
       (ii)    an alien lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence; or
       (iii)   an alien authorized to be employed by this Act or by the Attorney General.

(C) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term "laid off," with respect to an employee, means
the employee's loss of employment, other than a discharge for cause or a voluntary departure or
voluntary retirement. The term "laid off' does not apply to any case in which employment is
relocated to a different geographic area and the affected employee is offered a chance to move to
the new location with the same wages and benefits, but elects not to move to the new location.

(D) If during the six month period prior to filing an application for an H-l B worker an employer
of more than 100 U.S. employees lays-off more than 10% of its U.S. workforce or 500 people
(whichever is fewer), the employer will not be eligible to apply for H-l B workers unless it
demonstrates to the Department of Labor that it is not seeking employees through the H-l B
program in the same specialty occupation(s) as those U.S. workers laid-off.

III.   Job Contractors

         In the case of an employer that is a job contractor (within the meaning of regulations
promulgated by the Secretary of Labor to carry out this subsection), the contractor will not place
any H-l B employee with another employer unless such other employer has executed an
attestation that the employer is complying and will continue to comply with the requirements of
this paragraph in the same manner as they apply to the job contractor.

IV.    Enforcement

(a)    Independent Authority to Investigate
       Section 212(n) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.c. 1182(n» is amended
"The Secretary shall conduct an investigation where there is reasonable cause to believe
that an employer has made a misrepresentation of a material fact on a labor condition
attestation or has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of an application
submitted under paragraph (1) or with the provisions of this section or any rule or
regulation pertaining to this section. The Secretary shall establish a process for the
receipt, investigation, and disposition of complaints or other cases of noncompliance with
this section."

       (2) in paragraph (2)(C), by inserting "or that the employer failed to cooperate in the
conduct of the Secretary's investigation or has intimidated, discharged, or otherwise
discriminated against any person because that person has asserted a right or has
cooperated in an investigation under this paragraph" after "a material fact in an
application. "

(b)    Subpoena Authority

       (5) in paragraph (2), by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:

       "(E) The Secretary may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of
witnesses or the production of any records, books, papers, or documents in connection with
any investigation or hearing, conducted under this paragraph. In conducting a hearing,
the Secretary may administer oaths, examine witnesses, and receive evidence. For the
purpose of any hearing or investigation provided for in this paragraph, the authority
contained in sections 9 and 10 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.c. 49 and 50),
relating to the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and
documents, shall apply."

V.     Application Fee

       "(3)(A) The Secretary of Labor shall require payment of a fee by the employer for
each position for which an application is filed under this subsection. The fee shall be in an
amount prescribed by the Secretary of Labor, and shall be paid to the Department of
Labor.

       "(U) During the period ending September 30, 2001, such a fee shall not exceed $250
for each position."

       "(v) It shall be unlawful for an employee to require, as a condition of employment
by such employer, that the fee prescribed under this paragraph or any part of the fee, be
paid directly or indirectly by the alien whose services are being sought."

VI.    Training
expansion of the National Science Foundation (NSF)'s advanced technical education programs.
The Administration does not support providing scholarships or loans to individuals, including the
expansion of the State Student Incentive Grant (SSIG) program.

VII.   New Visa Category Proposal

       A new program (H-IC) that creates temporary visas for use only by non-immigrants
with very high skill levels. In particular:

       ·      The program would be authorized for four years beginning in FY1998.

       ·      There would be a maximum of 25,000 visas for FY1998, FY1999, and
              FY2000, and a maximum of 15,000 visas for FY2001.

       ·      Only employers whose number of H-IB and "H-IC" employees in the prior
              year constitutes no greater than one-half of their U.S. based workforce are
              eligible to apply.

       ·      Only individuals with a minimum of a master's degree (or equivalent) in
              math, science, or engineering are eligible for anH-IC visa.

       ·      Requires a $500 fee for each position for which an application is filed for
              training, enforcement, and administration of the program.

       ·      The "H-IC" visas would be issued a 3-year period, renewable for an
              additional 3 years.

       ·      All of the requirements of the "H-IC" visa program would be the same as
              would exist under the reformed H-IB program.
,                                                                         Page 1 of 1


