RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TlME:23-APR-1998 14:09:33.00

SUBJECT:   H1B paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
HEre is the most recent draft.   Commerce and Labor are still in
disagreement over two parts.   (1) whether, as part of the attestation on
"recruit and retain" there should be an explicit requirement that the
employer retrain their incumbent workers (Labor -- yes; Commerce -- no);
and (2) that Labor wants to be able to impose sanctions if the employer
makes a "material misrepresentation" as to any of the attestations
(including the two new ones).   If they can, that swallows the exceptions
that we have carved out (Labor has this authority to sanction for
misrepresentations on other attestations, and would continue to).   We are
still working with Labor and Commerce to get this worked out asap.

Julie

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D63]MAIL473126211.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043C8040000010A0201000000020500000080410000000200OOA9BB5A6559B09B82EECCFC
                                                                                  -lex-Dump Conversion



                                                             April 23, 1998

                     Administration Position Regarding H-IB Legislation

The Administration has committed to pursuing both reforms to the H-IB visa program and
increased training opportunities for u.s. workers as part of any legislation that would temporarily
raise the annual cap on H-IB visas. The following represents the Administration's position on
major reforms and training initiatives.

I.     Recruitment and Non-displacement of United States Workers Prior to Seeking
       Nonimmigrant Workers

(a) IN GENERAL -- Section 212(n)(I)ofthe Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.c.
1 I 82(n)(I» is amended by inserting at the end the following new subparagraph:

       (E)(I) The employer, prior to filing the application, has taken good faith, timely and
       significant steps to recruit and retain sufficient u.S. workers in the specialty occupation in
       which the non-immigrant whose services are being sought will be employed. Good faith
       recruitment shall be defined as:

               (a)    That the employer took at least two of the following actions in a manner
                      reasonably designed to attract u.S. workers:

                      (i)     widespread advertising of the relevant job opening (e.g., through
                              America's Job Bank, the Internet, general circulation publications,
                              professional journals and magazines);
                      (ii)    participation in job fairs;
                      (iii)   provided meaningful monetary incentives (such as paying above
                              the prevailing wage or paying bonuses and training subsidies not
                              included in the base compensation package).

               (b)    That the employer has taken good faith steps designed to retain U.S.
                      workers, such as providing training, flex time, job sharing, day care
                      facilities, retention bonuses, or other similar measures to enable or
                      encourage workers to remain with their employer.

               (c)    The employer did not receive applications from any U.S worker or offered
                      employment to any U.S. worker who has substantially equivalent
                      qualifications and experience to the temporary foreign worker offered
                      employment.

       (E)(II) The recruitment requirements of this subparagraph shall not apply to aliens with
               extraordinary ability, aliens who are outstanding professors and researchers, and
               certain multinational executives and managers described in section 203(b)(I).
               The recruitment requirements of this subparagraph shall also not apply to a
               its equivalent in a scientific or engineering discipline, and who is coming
               temporarily to the United States to participate in a cooperative joint scientific
               activity carried out under an Agreement between the Federal Government and the
               alien's Government.

       (F) (I) The employer --

               (a)    has not, within the 90-day period prior to the filing of the application, laid
                      off or otherwise displaced any United States worker (as defined in
                      subparagraph (B)), including a worker obtained by contract, employee
                      leasing, temporary help agreement, or other similar basis, who has
                      substantially equivalent qualifications and experience in the specialty
                      occupation in which the nonimmigrant is intended to be (or is) employed;
               and

               (b)    will not layoff or otherwise knowingly displace, during the 90-day period
                      following the filing of the application, or during the 90-day period
                      immediately preceding and following the filing of any visa petition
                      supported by the application, any United States worker, including any
                      worker obtained by contract, employee leasing, temporary help agreement,
                      or other similar basis who has substantially equivalent qualifications and
                      experience in the specialty occupation in which the nonimmigrant is
                      intended to be (or is) employed.

       (F){II) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term "laid off," with respect to an
               employee, means the employee's loss of employment, other than a discharge for
               cause or a voluntary departure or voluntary retirement. The term "laid off' does
               not apply to any case in which employment is relocated to a different geographic
               area and the affected employee is offered a chance to move to the new location
               with the same wages and benefits, but elects not to move to the new location.

       (G)     The employer offered compensation as required by subparagraph (A).

(b) For purposes ofthis subsection, the term "United States worker" means --

       (I)     a citizen or national of the United States
       (II)    an alien lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence; or
       (III)   an alien authorized to be employed by this Act or by the Attorney General.

II.    Wage Comparability

Section 212(n)(1)(A){I) of such Act is amended by inserting "(including the value of benefits and
additional compensation)" after "wages." Section 212{n){1 )(A)(I)(I) is amended by inserting
"(including the value of benefits and additional compensation)" after "actual wage level."

In the case of an employer that is ajob contractor (within the meaning of regulations
promulgated by the Secretary of Labor to carry out this subsection), the contractor will not place
any H-I B employee with another employer unless such other employer has executed an
attestation that the employer is complying and will continue to comply with the requirements of
this paragraph in the same manner as they apply to the job contractor.

IV.    Enforcement

(a)    Independent Authority to Investigate

       Section 212(n) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(n» is amended


       (I)      in paragraph (2)(A), by striking the first sentence and inserting the
               following:

               "The Secretary may conduct investigations pursuant to a complaint or, where
               there is no complaint, where the Secretary has reasonable cause to believe that:

               (a)    there is a pattern or practice of complaints by U.S. workers against the
                      employer;

               (b)    an employer has filed H-IB visa petitions for more than 50 temporary
                      foreign workers in anyone year period;

               (c)    an employer is seeking to employ H -I B workers as more than 10% of its
                      U.S. workforce; or

               (d)    an employer has laid off or otherwise displaced more than 10% of its U.S.
                      workforce or 500 U.S. workers (whichever is fewer) in anyone year
                      period (or has announced the intent to make such a lay-off).

       The Secretary shall establish a process for the receipt, investigation, and disposition
       of complaints or other cases of noncompliance with this section."

       (II)    in paragraph (2)(C), by inserting ", or that the employer failed to cooperate
               in the conduct of the Secretary's investigation or has intimidated, discharged,
               or otherwise discriminated against any person because that person has
               asserted a right or has cooperated in an investigation under this paragraph"
               after "a material fact in an application."

       (III)   in paragraph (2), by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
               testimony of witnesses or the production of any records, books, papers, or
               documents in connection with any investigation or hearing, conducted under
               this paragraph. In conducting a hearing, the Secretary may administer
               oaths, examine witnesses, and receive evidence. For the purpose of any
               hearing or investigation provided for in this paragraph, the authority
               contained in sections 9 and 10 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15
               U.S.c. 49 and 50), relating to the attendance of witnesses and the production
               of books, papers, and documents, shall apply."

V.     Sanctions

Section 212(n)(2)(C) is amended to read:

       "If the Secretary finds, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, a failure to meet a
       condition of paragraph (1)(B); a substantial failure to meet a condition of paragraphs
       (1 )(C) or (1 )(D); a willful failure to meet a condition of paragraph (1 )(A); a violation(s)
       of paragraphs (1 )(E) or (1 )(F) that is willful, or reflects a pattern or practice of violations;
       or a mis-representation of a material fact contained in (I )(A), (1 )(B), (1 )(C) or (I )(D)-

       (i)     the Secretary shall notify the Attorney General of such finding and may, in
               addition, impose such other administrative remedies (including civil monetary
               penalties in an amount not to exceed $5,000 per violation) as the Secretary
               determines to be appropriate,"

VI.    Application Fee

(3)(A) The Secretary of Labor shall require payment of a fee by the employer for each
       position for which an application is filed under this subsection. The fee shall be in
       an amount prescribed by the Secretary of Labor, and shall be paid to the
       Department of Labor ....

       (ii)    During the period ending September 30, 2001, such a fee shall not exceed
               $250 for each position.


       (v)     It shall be unlawful for an employee to require, as a condition of employment
               by such employer, that the fee prescribed under this paragraph or any part
               of the fee, be paid directly or indirectly by the alien whose services are being
               sought.

       (vi)    Any person or entity that is determined, after notice and opportunity for an
               administrative hearing, to have violated clause (v) shall be subject to a civil
               penalty of $5,000 for each violation, to an administrative order requiring the
               payment of any fee described in this paragraph, and the disqualification for
               subsection.

       (vii)   Any amount determined to have been paid, directly or indirectly, toward the
               filing fee described in paragraph (3)(A) by the alien whose services were
               sought, shall be repaid from the fund to such alien.

VII.   Training

The Administration strongly supports the creation of Regional Skills Alliances and expansion of
the National Science Foundation (NSF)'s advanced technical education programs. The
Administration does not support providing scholarships or loans to individuals, including the
expansion of the State Student Incentive Grant (SSIG) program.

VIII. New Visa Category Proposal

A new program (H-IC) that creates temporary visas for use only by non-immigrants with
very high skill levels. In particular:

·      The program would be authorized for four years beginning in FY1998.

·      There would be a maximum of 25,000 visas for FY1998, FY1999, and FY2000, and a
       maximum of 15,000 visas for FY2001.

·      Only employers whose number of H-IB and "H-IC" employees in the prior year
       constitutes no greater than one-half of their U.S. based workforce are eligible to
       apply.

·      Only individuals with a minimum of a master's degree (or equivalent) in math,
       science, or engineering are eligible for an "H-IC" visa.

·      Requires a $500 fee for each position for which an application is filed for training,
       enforcement, and administration of the program.

·      The "H-IC" visas would be issued for a 3-year period, and renewable for an
       additional 3 years.

·      All of the requirements of the "H-IC" visa program would be the same as would
       exist under the reformed H-IB program.


