  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

  CREATION DATE/TIME:23-APR-1998 19:09:02.00

  SUBJECT:   New press paper

  TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Erena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  Christa says the press office is interested in having state-by-state
  numbers for the school modernization and class size proposals, as a way to
  capitalize on the regional press that the 50 state teachers of the year
  will get. We are only using numbers that have already been released, not
  providing anything new. Christa will get those to the press office--these
  are the tables that Jon's message was about.==================== ATTACHMENT      1 ----
  ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

  TEXT:
  Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D52)MAIL46433821N.126 to ASCII,
   The following is a HEX DUMP:

  FF57504344090000010A02010000000205000000B131000000020000E3A40FOA02CDF761879970
  C63983F8BE551BDE66B7CA4F268C1DD3D46855CF8208E44EOC9F5E4E85EDBC7447C2701E159415
                                                                                            '-lex-Dump Conversion



       HONORING TEACHERS OF THE YEAR AND STRENGTHENING PUBLIC
                              SCHOOLS
                             April 24, 1998

To have the best schools, we must have the best teachers . .. We should reward and recognize our best
                                                  teachers.
                                                             President Clinton, 1997 State of the Union Address

President Clinton honored the National and State Teachers of the Year in a ceremony held today
in the Rose Garden at the White House. In his remarks to the teachers, the President thanked the
teachers for their efforts to bring excellence to our schools, and criticized the Senate for
squandering an opportunity to strengthen public education, and instead passing a bill that moves
education backwards.

PRESIDENT CLINTON RECOGNIZES NATIONAL AND STATE TEACHERS OF THE
YEAR. Each April, the President introduces the National Teacher of the Year to the American
people in a ceremony held at the White House. The National Teacher of the Year program began
in 1952 and continues as the oldest, most prestigious national honors program that focuses public
attention on excellence in teaching. Cosponsored by the CounCil of Chief State School Officers
and Scholastic Magazine, the National Teacher of the year is chosen from among the State
Teachers of the Year by a national selection committee representing the major education
organizations. The 1998 National Teacher of the Year, Philip Bigler, will spend the year
traveling nationally and internationally as a spokesperson for the teaching profession. This year
marks the 47th year that the President has introduced the National Teacher of the Year to the
nation. Fifty-four State Teachers of the Year including DOD schools, Guam, Puerto Rico
and the District of Columbia will be represented at today' s ceremony.

CHALLENGING CONGRESS TO STRENGTHEN OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS, AND
PROMISING TO VETO SENATE EDUCATION MEASURE. President Clinton
underscored his commitment to strengthening public schools by raising standards, increasing
accountability, expanding choice, and investing in quality. He called on Congress to support his
call for national standards and tests in the basic skills, smaller classes in grades 1-3, and a
national effort to address the education infrastructure needs of the Nation.        President Clinton
reiterated that he would veto H.R. 2646 --the Cov.erdell bill-- as passed by the Senate yesterday,
which is bad education policy and bad tax policy. Instead of targeting limited Federal resources to
build stronger public schools, this proposal would divert needed resources from public schools. In
addition, the bill provides the families of public school students an average of only $7 in tax benefits
in 2002, while disproportionately benefiting the highest-income tax payers.

The President also assailed RepUblican-majority led Senate votes on several key amendments to derail
critical efforts to improve education. The Republicans:


·       Rejected support for modernizing 5,000 public schools. The Senate defeated an
        amendment which would have allowed for nearly $22 billion in bonds for modernizing
        public schools. This action leaves communities and states continuing to cope with




                        record student enrollments and deteriorating public school buildings.

                 ·      Rejected efforts to reduce class size. Voted down a sense of the Senate resolution
                        supporting the President's plan to reduce class size to a national average of 18 students in
                        grades 1-3 by hiring an additional 100,000 teachers.

                 ·      Blocked National tests. The Senate voted to deny parents information about how their
                        child performs academically compared to widely accepted national standards in the basic
                        skills, by halting the development of national tests in 4th grade reading and 8th grade
                        mathematics -- tests that would enable parents, schools and students to identify areas of
                        improvement in key subject areas.

                 REWARDING EXCELLENCE IN TEACHING AND SUPPORTING THE NATIONAL
                 BOARD FOR PROFESSIONAL TEACHING STANDARDS. President Clinton expressed
                 his strong opposition to a provision in a House bill that would eliminate funding for the National
                 Board ofr Professional Teaching Standards, a nonprofit, nonpartisan, and nongovernrnental body
                 devoted to strengthening the teaching profession by developing rigorous standards of excellence
                 in teaching. The Board has been at the forefront of bipartisan efforts at the national and state
                 level to strengthen teaching in America, and has received bipartisan support in the Congress and
                 in both the Bush and Clinton Administrations. The House bill would derail the President's plan
                 to help 100,000 master teachers seek board certification by the ear 2006--enough for one for
                 every school in the nation.

                  By defining standards of excellence for experienced teachers, the Board helps to focus and
                 upgrade teacher training, recognize and reward outstanding teachers, and keep our best teachers
                 in the classroom where they are needed the most. Earlier this month, the House Education and
                 Workforce Committee included a provision in the Higher Education Act that would eliminate
                 funding for the research and development work of the Board. The President pledged to work
                 with Congress to delete this provision before the Higher Education Act reaches his desk. The
                 President's budget request of $1 05 million over 5 years would help the Board complete
                 assessments in 25 academic areas covering the fields of90% of the nation's teachers and help
                 defray the cost to "teachers oftaking part in the Board certification process.


