RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-APR-1998 17:14:01.00

SUBJECT:   Unz

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below are talking points for Riley.  Based on all my experience with
Riley, I am convinced we should not try to overscript him on this--we
should layout the key points, signal if there are any key phrases we want
him to use--and then assume he will stay on basic message, using his own
unique style.

Draft Unz Talking Points

1.  It is essential to educate all of our students, including particularly
the growing proportion of our school children who are immigrants or
American born children of immigrants.   A well educated population is key
to a growing economy and a health society. We must help all of our
students reach the high standards and acquire the knowledge and skills
needed for the 21st Century.

2. We must help every child, especially children whose native language is
not English, become proficient in English.

3. The Unz Initiative is the wrong way to do this.   It will result in
fewer LEP students learning English, lower academic achievement in other
subjects, and greater frustration for students and parents.
  Kids learn at different rates; The one year time limit in Unz is an
extreme, one-size-fits-all approach that will harm kids rather than help
them.
 Unz limits the discretion of techers to choose the approach that is best
suited for the children they teach
 Unz would subject teachers, school board members and administrators to
personal liability if they fail to comply with its requirements.  This is
not the way to build cooperation between parents and teachers.
 Unz would fly in the face of local control and strip from local school
boards the ability to make educationally sound decisions about how to meet
the needs of the children.
 Unz will in all liklihood result in problems under federal civil rights
laws.

4. The right way is to strengthen our public schools overall and improve
how our schools help LEP students learn English.
 We can help LEP kids learn English and do well in academic subjects if we
give them the same tools that other students need in order to succeed:
higher standards, safe schools, smaller classes, well prepared teachers,
and a challenging curriculum, and schools that are accountable for
success.  This is what the Administration is already trying to help
schools in every state and community accomlish.

 No one approach to educating LEP students works best all the time; we


    must give local schools the flexibility to fashion an approach that will
    work the best for their students.

     We must provide LEP students with fully qualified bilingual and
    English-as-second-language teachers.  LEP students will succeed if they
    are given well-prepared teachers who know how to teach reading and who are
    knowledgeable about second-language acquisition.

     Local school districts must be accountable for performance and results.
    School districts should be accountable for helping students become
    proficient in English as rapidly as possible. They should measure
    progress regularly, report publicly on how well they are doing, and take
    corrective action if students are not making adequate progress.
     If we do these things, we can expect students to meet a goal of becoming
    proficient in English within 3 years.  This is a reasonable goal--many
    students can learn English faster than they do at present if we set clear
    expectations and give them the help they need. Some will learn faster, and
    some students may need more time. A goal is not a mandate or a one-year st
    raight-jacket; if a student needs additional time, he or she should get
    it, along with the help they need.




    Q.      Is the Administration planning on proposing changes to the
    federal bilingual education program now?

    A.      No, we are   opposed to Unz, and we have discussed the prinCiples
    we think should be   used to strengthen efforts to help LEP students learn
    English. Congress    is scheduled to reauthorize the bilingual education
    program along with   other elementary and secondary education program. We
    will send Congress   our reauthorization proposal at that time.


