RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Peter Rundlet ( CN=Peter Rundlet/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-APR-1998 18:20:22.00

SUBJECT:   Erskine's Briefing for LCCR

TO: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Judith A. Winston ( CN=Judith A. Winston/OU=PIR/O=EOP @ EOP [ PIR ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Charles F. Ruff ( CN=Charles F. Ruff/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Marjorie A. Black ( CN=Marjorie A. Black/OU=PIR/O=EOP @ EOP [ PIR ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Ora Theard ( CN=Ora Theard/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI,  Attached are Erskine's briefing materials for the LCCR meeting on
Monday.


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D69]MAIL420496318.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504306080000010A02010000000205000000849E010000020000E68C971CE3A5ED571F56D8
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion



                                       April 24, 1998

            LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE ON CIVIL RIGHTS MEETING

                                           DATE:Monday, April 27, 1998
                                           LOCATION: Roosevelt Room
                                           TIME:      1:30 - 3:30 p.m.
                                           FROM:      Peter Rundlet
                                           THROUGH: Sylvia Mathews

I.    PURPOSE

      The purpose of this meeting is to learn about and respond to a number of issues pertaining
      to civil rights that the members of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR) are
      concerned about, as welI as to inform them of some of the Administration's current
      priorities in this area.

II.   BACKGROUND

      LCCR is a coalition of over 185 national organizations committed to the advancement of
      civil rights laws and policies. LCCR includes organizations representing persons of
      color, women, labor unions, individuals with disabilities, older Americans, major
      religious groups, gays and lesbians, and civil liberties and human rights groups.
      Founded in 1950 by A. Philip Randolph, Roy Wilkinson, and Arnold Aronson, LCCR
      was created with the mission to implement the historic report of President Truman's
      Commission on Civil Rights, To Secure These Rights. Dr. Dorothy Height, former
      President of the National Council of Negro Women, is LCCR's Chairperson and Wade
      Henderson is the Executive Director.

      You have had three previous meetings with LCCR since becoming Chief of Staff
      --January 6,1997, March 7,1997, and March 13, 1998. At the first two meetings you
      discussed LCCR's policy agenda. At the last meeting, you, Dr. John Hope Franklin, and
      other senior members of the Administration discussed the President's Initiative on Race.
      At that meeting, it was determined that this meeting would be held to discuss policy
      concerns not directly related to the Race Initiative. Maria Echaveste has worked with
      Wade Henderson to create a list of issues that we expect them to raise with us. The
      agenda agreed to is attached, along with issue papers that provide background and talking
      points.

      Note: This past Monday evening, April 27, LCCR held its annual Hubert H. Humphrey
      Civil Rights Award Dinner. At the dinner, LCCR presented its Civil Rights Award to
       civil rights movement through their work as Director and Producer of the film, Amistad,
       and to the Honorable Bob Lanier, former Mayor of Houston, for his outstanding
       leadership oflast year's campaign to defeat Houston's anti-affirmative action ballot
       initiative. The President provided LCCR with a video message for the dinner and
       attended the reception that preceded the dinner.

       Note: April 22, the Wednesday before this meeting, was Wade Henderson's 50th
       birthday.

III.   PARTICIPANTS

       Event participants

       Wade Henderson, Executive Director, Leadership Conference on Civil Rights
       Dr. Dorothy I. Height, Chairperson, LCCR and National Council of Negro Women
       Judith Appelbaum, National Women's Law Center
       Barbara Arnwine, Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights
       Marisa Demeo, Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund
       Joe Ervin, National Council of Senior Citizens
       Anita Perez Ferguson, National Women's Political Caucus
       Jocelyn Frye, National Partnership for Women & Families
       Patricia Ireland, National Organization for Women
       Elaine Jones, NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.
       Charles Kamasaki, National Council of La Raza
       Joan Brown Campbell, National Council of Churches
       Judith Lichtman, National Partnership for Women and Families
       Robert McAlpine, National Urban League
       Laura Murphy, American Civil Liberties Union
       Karen Narasaki, National Asian Pacific American Legal Consortium
       Michele Pollak, American Association of Retired Persons
       Bob Sakaniwa, Japanese American Citizens League
       Hilary Shelton, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
       Carole Shields, People for the American Way
       Cynthia "Winnie" Stachelberg, Human Rights Campaign
       Karin Stanford, Rainbow/PUSH Coalition
       Eula Tate, International Union, United Automobile Workers
       William L. Taylor, Vice Chairperson, Leadership Conference on Civil Rights
       Richard Womack, AFL-CIO
       Nancy Zirkin, American Association of University Women




                                               2

      Erskine B. Bowles
      Sylvia Mathews
      John Podesta
      Maria Echaveste
      Chuck Ruff
      Judy Winston
      Chuck Brain
      Tracey Thornton
      Minyon Moore
      Karen Tramontano
      Elena Kagan
      Dawn Chirwa
      Rob Weiner
      Eddie Correia
      Mark Childress
      Richard Socarides
      Peter Jacoby
      Bob Shireman
      Julie Fernandes
      Michael Deich
      Broderick Johnson
      Barbara Chow
      Peter Rundlet

IV.   PRESS PLAN

      Closed Press.

V.    SEQUENCE OF EVENTS

            You welcome participants, formally introduce new White House staff members
             Eddie Correia and Mark Childress to LCCR, and ask everyone else to introduce
             themselves.

            You then give your introductory remarks.

            You then recognize Wade Henderson.

            Wade Henderson then makes introductory remarks on the purpose of the meeting
             and turns to the list of agenda items.



                                             3
    status of the nomination and confirmation of judicial and other appointees.

   You make, OR ask Karen Tramontano or John Podesta to make, remarks about
    the Administration's efforts with regard to the decennial Census.

   You make, OR ask Chuck Brain to make, remarks about our strategy to preserve
    the President's budget priorities (specifically, increased funding for civil right
    enforcement and food stamps for legal immigrants), in light of the ISTEA bill.

   You may ask Elena Kagan to provide greater detail on the status of our increased
    funding request for the EEOC, ifnecessary.

   You may ask Barbara Chow to provide greater detail on the status of our request
    for funding for food stamps for legal immigrants, ifnecessary.

   You make, OR ask Eddie Correia to make, remarks about the Riggs amendment
    to the Higher Education Reauthorization bill.

   You make, OR ask Bob Shireman to make, remarks about the voluntary early
    retirement incentive program (VERIP) amendment to the Higher Education
    Reauthorization bill.

   You make, OR ask Maria Echaveste to make, remarks about our efforts to reach
    out to higher education leaders to promote diversity and inclusion in higher
    education.

   You make, OR ask Eddie Correia to make, remarks about Washington state;s
    anti-affirmative action ballot initiative (I-200).

   You make, OR ask Dawn Chirwa to make, remarks about the status of the black
    farmers' litigation.

   You make, OR ask Peter Jacoby or Richard Socarides to make, remarks about the
    proposed Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA).

   You make, OR ask Peter Jacoby or Richard Socarides to make, remarks about the
    status of the proposed Hate Crimes Prevention Act.

   You make, OR ask Broderick Johnson to make, remarks about the proposed Fair
    Housing Amendments Act of 1998 (H.R. 3206).




                                     4
              American redress litigation.

             Ask Eddie Correia to make a few remarks about the recent D.C. Circuit court
              decision regarding FCC's affirmative action regulation.

             Ask Judy Winston to provide a brief update on PIR's April activities.

             You or Sylvia Mathews close the meeting, thanking them again for their support,
              and encouraging them to stay in close contact with your staff.

VI.    REMARKS

       Introductory Talking Points (attached at Tab B)
       Issue Papers with Background and Talking Points (attached at Tab C)

VII.   ATTACHMENTS

       Agenda (Tab A)
       Introductory Talking Points (Tab B)
       Issue Papers with Talking Points (Tab C)




                                               5
                                  The Roosevelt Room
                                     April 27, 1998
                                       1:30 p.m.

                                            Agenda


1. Nomination and Confinnation of Judicial Appointees
     and Other Executive Branch Nominees

2. The Decennial Census

3. Budget Implications of the ISTEA Bill, Generally

       - Specifically with Regard to Civil Rights Enforcement
       - Specifically with Regard to Immigration Policy Issues (i.e., Food Stamps)

4. Higher Education Issues:

       - Higher Education Reauthorization -- Riggs Amendment
       - Higher Education Reauthorization -- Early Retirement & Tenured Faculty
       - PIR Outreach Plan to Higher Education Leaders

5. Washington State Anti-Affinnative Action Ballot Initiative (1-200)

6. Black Fanners' Litigation

7. Legislation:

       - Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA)
       - Hate Crimes Prevention Act of 1998
       - Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1998 (H.R. 3206)

8. Japanese/Latin American Redress Litigation

9. Other Issues and Wrap-up


I. INTRODUCTIONS

      I want to thank everyone for coming today.

      I enjoyed our previous three meetings and believc that they were productive. I am
       looking forward to discussing several issues of mutual concern with you. Before we
       start, I would like to go around the room and introduce ourselves. I am Erskine Bowles,
       Chief of Staff at the White House, and with me today are a number of the senior White
       House staff who will introduce themselves. Before they do, however, I would like to
       make special introductions for two of the newest members of our staff, both of whom I
       imagine you may have worked with in other contexts.

      Eddie Correia was recently named Special Counsel to the President for Civil Rights.
       Eddie comes to us most recently from Northeastern Law School in Boston, where he
       taught Constitutional and anti-trust law. Prior to this, Eddie was Chief Counsel to
       former Senator Howard Metzenbaum. Eddie is overseeing our current and continuous
       effort to defend reasonable, appropriate affirmative action.

      Mark Childress joined us less than one month ago as Senior Counsel for Nominations.
       Prior to joining us, Mark served for many years as Counsel to the Senate Labor
       Committee, where, among other things, he took the lead on many important nominations.
        You can rest assured that Mark is working full time to help us nominate and confirm
       new judges to the federal bench.

      Please welcome both Eddie and Mark; I encourage you to stay in contact with both of
       them.

[After introductions are concluded, make opening remarks below.]

      I know that there are a number of issues on our agenda that we need to discuss -- and we
       will tum to them in a moment. Before we do, though, I want to take a moment to thank
       all of you for your superb efforts in helping us defeat two attempts to eliminate the
       Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DB E) program in the ISTEA reauthorization bills in
       both the House and Senate. Both amendments to eliminate this necessary and fair
       affirmative action program were defeated handily in bi-partisan votes. Thanks to your
       efforts, we all have reason to celebrate.

      I also want to thank you, again, for strongly supporting many of the President's nominees.
        You supported the nomination of Bill Lann Lee, and we responded by appointing him as
       the Acting Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights. As you know, we are
       maintaining our effort to have the Senate remove the "Acting" from his title, by

   Since we first started meeting, we have made great progress on many of our shared
    objectives -- from holding the Hate Crimes Conference last November to defeating
    Houston's anti-affinnative action initiative to following through with several policy
    initiatives designed to reduce economic, educational, and health disparities, and much
    more. The President has placed a high priority on many of the issues that concern you
    most. Of course, we have further battles to fight together, and we look forward to
    working with you on all of them.

   Wade, I know that you have been talking with Maria Echaveste about a number of issues
    you would like to discuss today. Would you like to make any remarks before we turn to
    the agenda?


                               [Turn to the Issue Papers)

Note: The list of issues below follows the order of the Agenda (and are tabbed accordingly) and
      the name of the White House staff person responsible for handling the issue is indicated.
      Each of them is expected to attend the meeting and each will be prepared to make
      remarks about their issue or respond to any question that you would like them to handle.


1.     Nomination and Confirmation of Judicial Appointees:               Mark Childress

2.     Confirmations of Jim Hormel and Fred Hochberg:                    Karen Tramontano

3.     The Decennial Census:                                             Karen Tramontano

4.     Budget Implications of the ISTEA Bill (Generally):                Chuck Brain

5.          -Specifically with regard to civil rights enforcement:       Elena Kagan

6.          -Specifically with regard to immigration policy/food stamps: Barbara Chow

7.     Higher Education Reauthorization -- the Riggs Amendment:          Eddie Correia

8.     Higher Education Reauthorization -- ADEA & tenured faculty:       Bob Shireman

9.     PIR Outreach Plan to Higher Education Leaders:                    Maria Echaveste

10.    Washington State's Anti-affirmative Action Initiative (1-200):    Eddie Correia

11.    Black Farmers Litigation/Legislation:                             DawnChirwa

12.    Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA):                         Peter Jacoby or
                                                                         Richard Socarides

13.    Hate Crimes Legislation:                                          Peter Jacoby or
                                                                         Richard Socarides

14.    Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1998 (H.R. 3206):                  Broderick Johnson

15.    Japanese Latin American Redress:                                  Rob Weiner

Other (non-agenda) possible issues:

16.    The FCC Affirmative Action Decision in the D.C. Circuit:          Eddie Correia
17.    Update on PIR's April Activities                                  Judy Winston

Staff Persons: Mark Childress or John Podesta

Note: Because of the importance of this issue to LCCR. you may want to ask John to make a
      few remarks before asking Mark.

Background

Wade Henderson and others from the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR) are
concerned about our overall plan and efforts to confirm candidates to the federal bench. Wade's
efforts last year helped to focus attention on the Senate's failure to move nominees. Now that
the Senate has taken action on a number of nominees, Wade is likely to emphasize the need for
us to speed up the pace of nominations.

From the beginning of the Clinton Administration, a high priority has been placed on appointing
qualified candidates from diverse backgrounds to the federal bench. Two statistics demonstrate
the extent to which the Administration has succeeded: 1) President Clinton has nominated more
minority and women judicial candidates than any previous president; and 2) President Clinton
has had more nominees confirmed that were rated "well qualified" by the American Bar
Association than any previous president:

                             Clinton I & II        Bush           Reagan I & II

Number Of Nominations:       327                   195            385

% Women and Minorities:      51 %                  27%            14.5%


ISSUES: Most importantly, Wade is likely to express disappointment over the slow pace of
nominations coming out of the White House. He has recently pointed out that the Senate has
confirmed more nominees (20) in 1998 than we have nominated (17). (Although by the time of
the meeting, we should have nominated more.) Without underrating our mutual concern about
speeding up the pace of nominations, it is difficult to limit comparison of confirmation and
nomination numbers to 1998 because, for example, of the 20 nominees confirmed this year, an
average of 285 days passed between nomination and confirmation, with several of the nominees
waiting years for confirmation.
which we are now in a position to do. We have been delayed in producing nominations by a
number of factors including delays in receiving names from Senators, but we now should be able
to nominate 18-20 candidates prior to the Memorial Day recess, beginning with several nominees
the week of the 20th. (We also nominated four candidates immediately prior to the current
Congressional recess). We are on track to nominate several candidates virtually every week
between now and the end of May. These estimates are based on candidates already identified,
and most of these are out being reviewed by the ABA and FBI right now.

Ifwe meet this ambitious schedule, we will have cut in half the current number of vacancies for
which we do not have a nominee. It is probably worth stressing to Wade that we keenly
understand the limited time left for getting judges confirmed. which is why we are making an
all-out push to get nominees before Memorial Day. This effort includes negotiating with the
American Bar Association to meet a much more expedited schedule for reviewing nominees, and
pressing Senators for names for all remaining vacancies.

Wade Henderson may also express concern about the extraordinarily long time certain nominees
have been awaiting confirmation. Specifically, 6 of the 8 judicial nominees who have been
delayed the longest, (nominated over 1 year ago), are women or minorities. (Mark Childress has
details on these 6 nominees). The good news is that we are seeing some movement on at least a
couple of these long delayed nominations, and we will continue to push on all of the nominees.

Talking Points

      You all know about President Clinton's commitment to diversity on the federal bench.
       This Administration has placed far more minorities and women on the federal bench than
       any previous Administration.

      Your efforts in focusing attention on delays in the judicial confirmation process were vital
       to breaking the deadlock in the Senate last year, and we have recently been seeing real
       progress on Capitol Hill in addressing the backlog.

      I know that you are concerned about the pace of nominations, and I share that concern.
       We have to act more rapidly to send judicial nominees up to the Senate, and we will.

      We sent up four nominees immediately prior to the most recent Congressional recess, and
       we sent up more nominees immediately upon Congress's return last week. And we will
       be adding to a steadily increasing pipeline over the next few months.

      I believe that we will have 18-20 nominees sent up to the Senate between now and the
       Memorial Day recess. In fact, we should be sending up several names virtually every
       week between now and the end of May.



                                                2
       critical to our ability to put a pipeline into place, but I have to ask you to continue to help
       in that regard; with, of course, a special emphasis on seeking diversity candidates.

      Mark Childress has recently joined us as our new Senior Counsel for Nominations and he
       can give you more background on where we are.

If you want to say something about Frederica Massiah-Jackson:

(Wade may mention the/ailed candidacy o/Frederica Massiah-Jackson. the Philadelphia judge
who withdrew her nomination after significant controversy arose over her alleged leniency in
criminal sentencing.)

      We want to thank you for helping us deal with a very delicate situation in the case of
       Massiah-Jackson's nomination. We were adamant that under no circumstances were we
       going to ask her to withdraw.

      Fortunately, with your assistance, she was finally able to make her case for confirmation
       in a public forum, which enabled her to make the personal decision that she withdraw.




                                                  3

Staff person: Karen Tramontano

Background

       As you know, the President nominated Jim Hormel to be Ambassador of Luxembourg.
Secretary Albright worked with Senator Hclms to get Hormel voted favorably out of the
Committee. He has been on the Executive Calendar since last fall. Senators Inoufe,
Hutchinson (Arkansas), and Smith (NH) have holds on the nominee because he is gay.
According to these three Senators, they do not oppose Hormel because he is gay, they oppose
him because he is a gay activist.

        We have been working each week to try to get the "holds" released. From the beginning
of this battle, LCCR and Wade Henderson have been supportive. LCCR wrote a letter to
Senator Lott supporting Hormel and asking that a vote be scheduled. You should thank LCCR
for their early support and for their letter.

        We currently have 54 votes, we are trying to get 60. If appropriate, you could ask LCCR
for any help they could offer to add to our list of Republicans. The two strongest Republican
supporters are Senators Hatch and Gordon Smith (Washington). Senator Lott has said he
believes there is not sufficient time to deal with this issue, but he has stopped short of saying he
will not schedule a vote. Frank Rich wrote a very strong piece recently in the New York Times.
We have a lobbying strategy that involves the Human Rights Campaign and the State Department
talking with Republicans who we believe will vote for cloture and for Hormel.

The only issue that LCCR may raise is that Secretary Albright--of late--has not said anything in
public supporting the nominee. We have really tried to hold Albright for the final push, rather
than have her in the public debate on this issue. The advocacy groups are concerned about this
strategy--we are reevaluating it with the State Department. There is a Time Magazine story that
is due out Monday and State is putting Albright in that story to quell these concerns.

LCCR may ask what the President has done with regard to Hormel. He has talked with Senator
Lott about giving Hormel a vote. And, last month while in California he publicly stated his
support for Hormel and said he thought the Senate should schedule a vote.

Talking Points

      We are working very hard to break the logjam on Jim's nomination. We're pleased with
       the recent favorable press and believe that Senator Lott ultimately will be forced to give
       us a vote.

      We appreciate the help you have given us so far on this important nomination.


                                                 4

Staff person: Karen Tramontano

Background

        Fred Hochberg has been nominated by the President to be the Deputy Director of SBA.
am not sure that this issue will be on LCCR's list. The Republicans have successfully centered
the debate about Hochberg on his finances. Additionally, Hochberg has not wanted to make the
issue be that he is gay. As a result, we have been very low key about this nominee with the
advocacy groups, including LCCR.

        If they do raise the issue, the current status is as follows: Senator Bond had been
refusing to hold a hearing unless he can review all the documents in the White House relating to
this nominee. Buzz Waitzkin in Counsel's office has done a very good job of narrowing the
scope of Bond's inquiry. As a result, we have a resolution to the issue. Senator Bond reviewed
 a narrower set of documents on Friday. We believe that he will now schedule the hearing for
Hochberg. At this time we believe we have the votes to confirm Hochberg.

Talking Point

      We had a good meeting with Senator Bond on Friday and he has agreed to hold a hearing,
        probably on May 12th. This is real progress and we believe we have the votes to
       confirm Fred.




                                               5

Staff person: John Podesta or Karen Tramontano

Note: Because of the importance of this issue to LCCR, you may want to ask John to make a
      few remarks before asking Karen.

Background

       The Leadership Conference on Civil Rights is very involved in the Decennial Census. In
1990, as you will recall, there were many problems with the census. The one that most concerns
LCCR is the undercount of minorities. They are part ofthe Census 2000 coalition (put together
to support an accurate Decennial Census) and at LCCR's annual conference this week they
hosted a panel discussion on achieving accuracy in the next census--which included a discussion
of sampling.

       As you know, the RepUblicans in the House with the exception of Chris Shays, oppose
our plan to use sampling. Our goal is to have the most accurate census, employing the most
up-to-date, scientific methods with the most cost-effective use of taxpayer dollars. Statistical
sampling has been endorsed by the National Academy of Sciences--the Justice Departments for
the Carter and the Bush Administration's have found sampling to be legal and constitutional.

         The Leadership Conference supports sampling but has additional concerns. They are
concerned they we have not selected a permanent director to replace Dr. Ritchie, who left the
Census Bureau at the end of January. The Secretary of Commerce and the White House will
have interviewed the top three finalists for this position on Friday, April 24. We will have a
recommendation memo to the President as soon thereafter as possible. The position is .
confirmed by the Senate so the President's selection will have to be vetted, which will take some
time. Carolyn Maloney and other Democrats in the House want us to appoint Barbara Bryant --
President Bush's Census Director. I doubt very strongly that we will make that recommendation
to the President, although she has been interviewed for the position. We have not told any of
the advocates that it is unlikely Bryant will be selected. I recommend you do not mention
it to this group. If you are asked, you should say that Bryant is under consideration.

       The President has appointed the Census Monitoring Board -- with Tony Coehlo as one of
the Co-Chairs. The Monitoring Board has 8 members -- 4 Republicans and 4 Democrats with
Republican and Democratic Co-Chairs. The Board will have two Executive Directors. I
believe LCCR is happy with the appointments, although they were concerned that the vetting
process took too long.

       Another concern is whether the Commerce Department and the Census Bureau can
accomplish all they have to accomplish as the 2000 census gets more politicized. This is a
legitimate concern but one that the Commerce Department and the Census Bureau is aware of


                                                6
should thank them.

Talking Points

      The Administration is focused on ensuring we have a fair and accurate census, that we are
       using the most up-to-date technology including sampling, and that every one is counted.
       In 1990, the Census Bureau undercounted millions of individuals -- many minorities,
       children and women. We do not want that to happen again.

      This is a priority for our Administration and we are putting the people in place to see that
       it receives the appropriate attention. John Podesta is our point person here in the White
       House.

      The Senate recently confirmed the Presidenes nominee for Undersecretary for Economic
       Affairs -- Rob Shapiro, who has oversight of this matter in the Commerce Department.
       The White House has interviewed several finalisst for the Director of the Census Bureau
       and we will be making a recommendation to the President shortly.




                                                7
                                   (H.R. 2400 and S. 1173)

 Staff person: Chuck Brain

 Background

 The highway bill now in conference spends approximately $33.4 billion in outlays above the
 surface transportation levels proposed in the President's FY 99 budget submission. The intent
 of Chairman Shuster and Congressman Oberstar is to fund the additional highway spending with
 the mandatory spending cuts proposed in the President's budget as offsets for Administration
 initiatives. If the mandatory offsets are insufficient, as they are likely to be, the Speaker has
 instructed the conferees to reduce the discretionary spending pot by the amounts needed to offset
 the rest of the bill. These exorbitant highway funding levels will inevitably exert a crowding out
 effect on the already constrained pool of domestic discretionary resources.

 Ifwe assume the level of domestic discretionary funding in the President's budget, the highway
 bill would require a 2 percent outlay reduction in the other non-defense accounts and up to a 3.9
 percent reduction in budget authority for FY 99.

  The ultimate endpoint of the highway bill is by no means clear. It is uncertain whether the
  conference can get a majority of votes for all the offsets proposed in the President's budget. In
  addition, the House bill contains approximately 1600 "demonstration" projects portioned out
  roughly 55% to 45% between Republicans and Democrats. The Senate bill contains none .
. Finally, due to the vote, 96-4 in the Senate and 337-80 in the House, the President may be faced
  with a bill that has veto proof margins in both chambers

Talking Points

       We have become increasingly concerned regarding the effects of the spending in the
        highway bills on the remainder of the budget, in general, and our priorities, in particular.
        There has been much confusion concerning the total costs of both of these bills and
        exactly how this spending would be offset.

       According to the current estimates, it now appears that the House bill would cost an
        additional $34.5 billion beyond current projections. The Senate bill would cost an
        additional $35.5 billion.

       Under current budget rules, all of this spending would have to be offset with other
        spending reductions. In fact, since some of the spending in the House bill is mandatory
        spending, the necessary offsets would have to come from mandatory programs. Rather
        than identify specific spending reductions, one rumor that we've heard is that they might
        simply reduce the spending caps for discretionary spending by the amount needed.


                                                  8
    programs.

   We are now beginning the process of dealing with the transportation committee staffs and
    the leadership to make them realize how big ajob they have to offset the amount of
    spending they want to do. We hope that we will be able to instill some reality into their
    thinking and to realize that there will be much more opposition to the Conference Report
    than there was to the bills when they were considered in the House and Senate. We're
    going to make it clear that they have a tough job to do.

   As the Conference on this proceeds, we will determine if they are improving the bill and
    what our final attitude on signing will be.




                                            9

Staff person: Elena Kagan

Background

The Administration's 1999 budget contains $279 million for the EEOC -- $37 million (15%)
more than the enacted 1998 budget. Funds will go to reduce the average time it takes to resolve
private sector complaints from over 9.4 months to 6 months by the year 2001 through a
combination of investments in infonnation technology, increased use of mediation, and increased
staffing.

On March 3, 1998, Speaker Gingrich testified before the Education and Workforce Committee's
Subcommittee on Employer-Employee Relations and indicated support for the President's EEOC
budget request, conditioned on the agency implementing six "refonns" to its operation:

       (1) improvements to the investigative and intake processes (including greater supervision
       ofthe process by lawyers);
       (2) a significant reduction of the backlog of cases and the length of time for case
       processing;
       (3) a more appropriate allocation of resources to charge processing vis-a-vis litigation;
       (4) expanded use of alternative dispute resolution;
       (5) clarification of the criteria for litigation by the EEOC; and
       (6) an agreement by the EEOC not to use its scarce resources for employment testers.

Congressmen Fawell and Goodling subsequently sent a letter to Chainnen Livingston and Rogers
supporting Gingrich's position.

On Friday, April 17, 1998, EEOC staff met with Rogers's and Fawell's staff to better detennine
where they are headed. The EEOC believes that they can come to favorable agreement on the
first five "refonns." However, the Speaker has made clear to Fawell and Rogers that the
provision related to testers is a "line in the sand."

At this point, we are still unsure of the breadth of the Speaker's suggested refonn related to
testers. At a minimum, Gingrich wants the EEOC to agree not to spend any money in FY99 on
hiring employment testers. Though the EEOC currently has a very small pilot program to
explore whether and how the agency could use testers, the program is only funded through the
end of this fiscal year, and there are no plans to expand it. The FY99 budget does not include
any money for testers. However, depending on the results obtained from the pilot, we may want
to include a testing program as part of a future EEOC budget. Thus, we could likely agree not to
spend money on testers in FY99 as long as the agreement would not limit the agency's ability to
use or hire testers in the future and did not in any way send a signal that we do not think that
testing in an appropriate tool for civil rights enforcement.


                                               10
evidence obtained from testers generally (commissioned by non-profits, for example). This
would be very difficult for us to agree to. It could be interpreted as questioning the validity of
the use of employment testers in the enforcement of anti-discrimination laws. The use of testers
is an established tool for the enforcement of the Fair Housing Act, and HUD now provides grants
(through the Fair Housing Initiative Program) to non-profits for the use of testers to gather
evidence in housing discrimination cases. Also, the President's FY99 budget includes an
additional $10 million for HUD to conduct a nationwide testing program.

Talking points

      The Administration is committed to working hard to get a 15% increase ($37 million) for
       the EEOC in FY99. Though we have been encouraged by the expressed support of
       Speaker Gingrich and others in Congress on this issue, we are concerned that some of the
       conditions for their support may inhibit the agency's ability to effectively determine how
       to allocate resources, set litigation priorities, or utilize effective tools for the enforcement
       of federal anti-discrimination laws. Most particularly, we are concerned about the
       Speaker's suggested "reform" that would prohibit the agency from utilizing
       discrimination testers.

      The EEOC currently has a small pilot program to determine whether and how to use
       testers as part of their enforcement arsenal. This program ends at the end of this fiscal
       year. The EEOC's FY99 proposed budget does not include any money for testers.

      Though the EEOC could likely commit to not employing testers in FY99, we are
       concerned that Gingrich and others may try to statutorily limit the EEOC's ability to use
       testers in the future or to limit the ongoing use of evidence obtained by outside testers
       (e.g., those employed by non-profits). This would be a very bad result. Though we
       have not yet concluded that the EEOC's use of testers is effective and appropriate (the
       pilot has been operating for approximately 6 months), we do not want to tie the agency's
       hands.

      Moreover, we do not want to signal that the use of testers is not an appropriate tool for
       enforcement of the anti-discrimination laws generally. This is particularly true in light of
       the President's strong endorsement of the use of testers in the housing context, reflected
       in his request for a new $10 million for HUD to conduct a nationwide testing program.

      Our strategy is to continue to meet with Hill staff (both Democratic and Republican) to
       determine precisely what their bottom line is on the issue of testers. If, in order to get
       necessary Republican support for our budget request, the agency would need to agree not
       to employ testers in FY99, we need to assess whether this commitment would somehow
       institutionalize the limitation, thus making it harder for the agency to use testers in the
       future. If, however, they want a broader restriction, we need to assess the degree to


                                                  11




                                        12

Staff person: Barbara Chow

Background

      The 1996 welfare refonn bill denied Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and Food
      Stamps to most legal immigrants currently in the country and who enter in the future.
      Immigrants who enter after the enactment of welfare refonn are also denied means tested
      benefits, including Medicaid and TANF, for their first 5 years.

      The Balanced Budget Act (BBA) significantly reversed these restrictions and restored
      benefits to immigrants. The BBA restored SSI benefits to 420,000 immigrants in FY
      1998 at a cost of$I1.5 billion over 5 years (CBO estimate).

     The Conference Report on the agriculture research bill reflects a bipartisan agreement to
      address Congressional and Administration priorities. Using offsets almost entirely from
      the Food Stamp program, the bill restores Food Stamps to vulnerable groups of
      immigrants, including children, refugees, the elderly and disabled, and addresses priority
      agriculture issues.

             The bill provides more than $800 million over five years and restores benefits to
             250,000 people in 1999, including 75,000 children. These provisions are
             financed using less than half (43%) of the Food Stamp savings in the bill.

             The bill helps 5 important groups: children, the elderly, individuals with
             disabilities, refugees and asylees, and Hmong who helped the U.S. during the
             Vietnam conflict.

             The provisions for the elderly and the disabled mirror what was provided for them
             in SSI and Medicaid in last year's BBA. In general, the bill only provides
             benefits to individuals who were in the country as of the signing of the welfare bill
             in 1996. The bill provides assistance to immigrant children -- a group that did
             not receive any restorations in the BBA.

     Status of the Legislation. Majority Leader Lott is apparently concerned that the
     agriculture research bill uses a $1.7 billion offset from Food Stamp administrative costs
     which is earmarked in the Senate budget resolution to finance highway spending. It is
     possible that the House will try to use these funds for transportation as well. As noted
     above, several other Republican Senators have also expressed concerns with the bill.




                                              13
      the full Senate in its entirety. Delaying consideration or splitting the report will create a
      conflict between spending on highways and spending on farmers and vulnerable
      immigrants. The Administration believes that restoring food assistance to vulnerable
      immigrants and improving programs for our nation's farmers is the highest priority.

Talking Points

      The President's FY99 Budget included a comprehensive $2.4 billion proposal to restore
      Food Stamps to vulnerable groups oflegal immigrants who lost benefits due to the cuts in
      welfare reform that had nothing to do with moving people from welfare to work.

      Through the Administration's efforts, the Conference Report on the agriculture research
      bill provides over $800 million to restore Food Stamp benefits to legal immigrants. The
      major offset in the bill saves $1.7 billion from Food Stamp State administrative costs.

      The agriculture research bill, which also contains funding for some other Administration
      priorities in addition to legal immigrants -- crop insurance, agriculture research, rural
      development -- is currently being blocked from consideration in the Senate.

      Majority Leader Lott had indicated to Senator Harkin that he would bring the bill up for
      Senate floor consideration after the Easter recess. We are hopeful that this will occur,
      but significant hurdles remain. Several Republican Senators reportedly have "holds" on
      the bill and there is a rumor that at least one (possibly Sen. Gramm) may offer a motion to
      recommit the bill to strip out the food stamp provisions, a motion we would strongly
      oppose.




                                               14

Staff person: Eddie Correia

Background

        The higher education reauthorization bill is likely to be on the floor of the House in the
next two weeks. Rep. Riggs (R-Calif.) may offer an amendment that would bar any college or
university receiving federal funds from considering race or gender in its admissions decisions.
The practical effect of the Riggs amendment would be to prohibit hundreds of institutions from
using affirmative action in admissions to increase the diversity of their student body. It goes
further than Prop. 209 because it applies to private institutions as well as public institutions. It
would lead to drastic drops in minority enrollment in major universities and graduate schools
throughout the country. Consequently, there is enormous concern in the civil rights and higher
education communities about the amendment.

        We have a good chance of prevailing in the House, but the importance of the issue
warrants significant efforts. (A comparable amendment in the Senate is unlikely.) White House
staff have been working with the Department of Education to develop briefing materials for
Members. Secretary Riley (perhaps joined by the Attorney General) intends to send a strong letter
to Members opposing the amendment and recommending a veto if it is enacted. The President
could also send a short letter opposing the amendment. These statements would parallel those
made by the administration prior to the DOT/DBE vote. The Riley/Reno letter will be
coordinated with the release of the SAP on the overall bill.


Talking Points

      We have all seen stories about the drastic decline in minority enrollments in California as
       a result of a bar on affirmative action. The full story is actually worse since the final
       enrollment levels will be even lower.

      Many of the minority applicants who were rejected were extremely well-qualified to do
       the work; many had outstanding academic records. The fact that they were denied
       admissions means that the educational experience of all of the students who were
       admitted will suffer. We cannot tolerate a country where the classrooms at our best
       universities are full of white faces.

      The President strongly opposes the Riggs amendment and we are working hard to defeat
       it. He considers it one of his highest priorities.

      With your help, the House and Senate recently rejected efforts to kill the Department of
       Transportation's Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) program. The Administration


                                                 15
    defeat of the Riggs amendment the third straight vote for reasonable affirmative action.

   I know representatives of LCCR have met recently with White House and Department of
    Education staff. Please let us know what we can do.




                                            16

Staff person: Bob Shireman

Background

Overview: A House committee has moved legislation that includes an exception to the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) to allow colleges to target early retirement
incentives on tenured professors. College and faculty organizations support the change. The
AARP (and, we anticipate, the LCCR) oppose the idea because it would discriminate against
older workers; e.g., a 55-year-old targeted for early retirement would be eligible, while a
65-year-old with the same or more years of service would not. The EEOC also opposes the
change. Discussions on a possible compromise have begun (at the Administration's suggestion).

As part of the 1986 ADEA amendments that prohibited mandatory retirement ages for most
workers, Congress permitted colleges and universities to continue requiring tenured faculty
members to retire at age 70 until the end of 1993. Colleges were concerned that without
mandatory retirement, aging faculty would be unremovable because of tenure, leaving less room
for new faculty who are traditionally the source of new ideas.

Congress directed the EEOC to seek advice from the National Academy of Sciences on whether
to continue the exemption from the mandatory retirement prohibition for tenured faculty. In
1991, the NAS concluded that ending mandatory retirement would not be a problem for most
colleges and universities. Some research universities, however, "are likely to suffer adverse
effects from low faculty turnover: increased costs and limited flexibility to respond to changing
needs and to provide support for new fields by hiring new faculty." The NAS recommended
that to address this problem, Congress should permit age-capped retirement incentive
programs. However, no changes have been made in response to that recommendation, and
colleges are concerned that EEOC and court decisions have narrowed rather than expanded the
options available to them. For the past several years, colleges have been lobbying for legislation
permitting a broader array of voluntary early retirement incentive programs (VERIPs).

The AARP, the EEOC, and others have opposed the VERIP proposals in Congress. They argue
that offeringa retirement incentive that is available only when a worker is younger (such as age
60) rather than older (such as age 70) allows just the type of arbitrary, age-based discrimination
that the ADEA was intended to prohibit.

The House Education and the Workforce Committee included a VERIP amendment in its
proposal for reauthorization of the Higher Education Act. Similar legislation has been
introduced in the Senate. Weare preparing a SAP on the House bill, and the EEOC has
recommended language opposing the VERIP proposal. Administration officials (NEC) have
spoken to the AARP, EEOC, and higher education representatives, and have urged them to
attempt to reach a compromise on this issue.


                                                17

     We are aware of the problems with the early retirement incentives proposal that has been
      included in the House bill reauthorizing the Higher Education Act.

     However, we are also mindful of the National Academy of Sciences' recommendation in
      1991 that some additional options be provided to address reduced faculty turnover as a
      result of the prohibition on mandatory retirement.

     We are encouraging the EEOC to sit down with the higher education community and the
      AARP to see whether a compromise can be worked out on this issue.

     The SAP has not been finalized, but it will certainly also attempt to push in the direction
      of compromise on this issue.




                                               18

Staff person: Maria Echaveste

Background

LCCR has expressed concerns about the Administration's response to the attacks on diversity in
higher education. While they applaud the President's dcfense of affirmative action and his
impassioned call for continued diversity in institutions of higher education, they hope to see more
leadership in this area.

In response to Hopwood and Prop. 209, in connection with the President's Initiative on Race and
in anticipation of continued attacks on affirmative action in higher education, the Administration
has undertaken the following steps:

      Begun meeting with university leaders informally, together with ACE, to discuss the
       possibility of the creation of an independent coalition of university leaders, possibly also
       including foundation and corporate leaders. This coalition would undertake an
       aggressive and proactive campaign to educate the public about the value of diversity in
       higher education -- to make the case to the public. The coalition would also share best
       practices for how to achieve diversity in a changing legal environment.

      Our preliminary conversations have been very positive with leaders of the some of the
       country's elite institutions. Our goal is to have a core group of 20-30 leaders who will
       publicly commit to this undertaking and who will, in tum, seek to expand the number of
       people with credibility to make the case.

      The Administration is also meeting regularly with persons involved in ongoing litigation
       to stay informed of potential opportunities for action. This area is more problematic
       since it involves litigation and it is not always clear that Administration action would be
       helpful in a particular case. We are committed, however, to ensuring that the
       Administration stays fully informed and fully engaged on this issue.

Talking Points

[Maria Echaveste would like you to ask her to make the remarks with regard to this issue.]




                                                19

Staff person: Eddie Correia

Background

         This fan the voters of the State of Washington will decide whether to adopt 1-200, a ballot
initiative modeled after California's Proposition 209. It will represent the third high profile
ballot initiative following the adoption of Prop. 209 and the rejection of a similar initiative in
Houston. The outcome will be closely watched as a signal of where the country is heading on
affirmative action. The demographics of Washington are less favorable to defeating the
initiative than Houston's. On the other hand, the voters tend to be more progressive, and one of
the leading opponents of the initiative is Gary Locke, the popular Asian-American Governor.

        White House staff have been in contact with elected leaders in Washington as well as
advocacy groups working to defeat 1-200. At one point, their strategy was to offer an alternative
ballot initiative, which would have conveyed a "mend it, don't end it" message. This was
rejected because of procedural problems, the costs of mounting a signature drive and mixed
signals about the support it would receive. The opponents of the initiative need help in raising
funds and in communicating their message in a way that has broad appeal. We cannot help them
raise money, but we can encourage Cabinet Secretaries and others to visit the state to speak on
the issue. The opponents ofthe initiative have asked for our help in arranging for visits by the
Secretary of State, the Secretary of HHS, and Colin Powell, among others.

Talking Points

      The banot initiative in Washington will be a critical test of the country's direction on
       affirmative action. The Administration cares about this vote and we want to help.

      We understand that the demographics in Washington are different than in Houston.
       Women and moderates will be critical to the outcome.

      Our staff has been in frequent contact with people in Washington. We have offered our
       assistance and we will continue to work with, and take the lead from, them. We
       understand that financial support is critical, but raising money for their effort is
       something we cannot do. However, we may be able to help in others ways, for example,
       by speaking out about the importance of the issue.




                                                20

Staff person: Dawn Chirwa

Background

We have been infonned that it is likely LCCR will wish to discuss issues related to black fanners
at our meeting. In anticipation of this, Dawn Chirwa spoke with Wade Henderson to discuss the
impact ofthe Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) opinion with him and the
steps we are taking to resolve the problems caused for particular black fanners by the statute of
limitations bar. He was pleased with our efforts and said that the issue is still likely to come up,
but primarily as a request for an update on our efforts.

As you know, the Justice Department's OLC opinion concludes that the statute oflimitations in
the Equal Credit Opportunity Act bars claims by many black fanners. The opinion was released
last week and copies were sent to interested Members of Congress. Since the opinion was
released, the team working on this issue (USDA, Justice, and from the White House -- WH
Counsel, Legislative Affairs and Public Liaison) has been working closely with Hill staff on
legislation that would provide remedies for farmers currently barred from relief by the statute of
limitations.

Various Members have expressed considerable interest in passing such legislation, including
Reps. Clayton, Thompson, Waters, McKinney, Conyers, the Speaker and Rep. Smith, Chainnan
of the Agriculture committee. Our team met with staff from the Speaker's office and majority
staff of the House Agriculture committee last week to discuss USDA's proposed legislative
language. The meeting went well and it appeared that the staff was interested in working
cooperatively with the Administration on passing legislation. Legislative Affairs and .uSDA are
also engaged in ongoing discussions with House and Senate Democrats and are working with
them on legislative language changes. At the same time, we are working with representatives of
the black fanners to ensure that any concerns they have with the legislation are addressed.

On the litigation front, we are awaiting the district court's decision on the statute oflimitations
issue. Justice filed papers with the district court last week arguing the same position articulated
in the OLC opinion. In opposition, the black fanner plaintiffs have argued essentially that the
statute oflimitations should be equitably tolled with respect to all the fanners' cases. It is highly
unlikely that the plaintiffs will prevail on this issue. Of course, there is always the possibility
that the court will rule against the government. We do not expect, however, that the court will
rule prior to our meeting with LCCR. Until the court rules on this and other legal issues,
mediation of the fanners cases is being held in abeyance.

In addition, WH Counsel is discussing with Justice other, non-legislative means of remedying the
problems caused by the statute of limitations. The OLC opinion did leave open the possibility
that, in certain cases, an argument could be made that the statute was equitably tolled. While we


                                                 21
difficult to make and will not help all farmers harmed by the statute oflimitations. This is why
we have made the legislative route our first priority. However, you should know that Wade
Henderson is particularly concerned that we continue to explore this option and we have assured
him that we are doing so.

Finally, WH Counsel has also asked a team of USDA and Justice staff to explore enforcement
actions that can be taken against individuals within USDA who are discriminating against
fanners. It will be important to point this out to LCCR attendees.

Talking points

      We understand and appreciate the concern you and others have expressed over OLC's
       conclusions with respect to this statute of limitations issue. We share your desire that all
       black farmers who have suffered from discrimination be able to obtain a remedy for the
       hann done to them; we do not like the effect of this statutory provision any more than
       you. I want to let you know what we and USDA have done in this area and what we are
       doing to address the OLC opinion.

      As you know, Secretary Glickman has made it a top priority of his to provide a remedy
       for the farmers who have faced discrimination by USDA. Recently, he reconstituted the
       team set up to review claims of discrimination to expedite the process and get fanners
       with valid claims their money sooner, including hiring 14 new full-time investigators.
       He also brought on a new Associate General Counsel for Civil Rights (David Harris) and
       a Special Assistant for Civil Rights (John Sparks) who works directly for the Secretary
       and is overseeing the review process to ensure it is moving along efficiently.

      USDA has closed 295 program discrimination cases of the 1,088 total. There have been
       15 settlements -- some in the hundreds of thousands of dollar range. (F or example,
       recently, Mr. Eddie Ross from Mississippi received a settlement in excess of $300,000.)
       Of the remaining cases, 180 are claims of discrimination filed by African-American
       fanners. The Secretary hopes that the new team in place will soon clear up the backlog.

      Justice and USDA are also looking at ways to take enforcement action against
       discriminators within USDA to attack the problem at the source.

      As for the statute oflimitations issue, I am personally committed to doing everything we
       can to pass legislation which will cure the problems this time bar creates. In recent days,
       my staff has been working closely with the Hill on a bi-partisan basis on such legislation.
        I also had a conversation with the Speaker about the legislation; he was receptive and his
       staff have been very cooperative with our staff. We will continue to keep you infonned
       of our progress.



                                                22

Staff person: Peter Jacoby or Richard Socarides

Background

Overview: The Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA) would provide federal
protections against employment discrimination based on sexual orientation. Those
protections are currently provided based on race, religion, gender, national origin, age and
disability. The measure would prohibit employers (including Congress), employment
agencies and labor unions from using an individual's sexual orientation as a basis for
employment decisions, such as hiring, firing, promotion, or compensation. Employers
could not subject an individual to different standards or treatment based on that
individual's sexual orientation --real or perceived --or discriminate against an individual
based on the sexual orientation of those with whom he or she associates.

Additionally, the bill prohibits any form of preferential treatment, including quotas, and
prohibits discrimination claims based solely on statistics ("disparate impact" claims). It
does not require an employer to provide benefits for the same-sex partner of an employee.
Although the bill does not apply to religious organizations, including schools and
educational institutions that are substantially controlled or supported by religious
organizations, it does apply to their "for-profit activities subject to taxation." Finally, the
measure does not apply to the armed forces or to small businesses with fifteen (15) or fewer
employees.

Legislative Status: In the Senate, Senators Kennedy (D-MA), Jeffords (R-VT) and
Liebermann (D-CT) have gathered 35 cosponsors for their bill since its introduction last
year. Additionally, Senator Jeffords as Chairman of the Labor and Human Resources
Committee held a hearing on the measure last October. Unfortunately, however, the
measure remains mired in the Labor Committee because Chairman Jeffords cannot
convince any Republican on the Committee to join him and vote to report the measure to
the full Senate. Consequently, there is a debate going on within the ranks of the bill's
supporters over whether they should continue to work to secure the necessary votes in the
Labor Committee (an approach strongly favored by Senator Jeffords) or take the bill
directly to the Senate floor and offer it as an amendment to some appropriate legislative
vehicle (an approach favored by Senator Kennedy). Given the closeness of the vote on this
measure when it was offered as a floor amendment during the last Congress (49-50), the
high number of cosponsors, and the likely votes of freshman Senators, any floor vote can
expected to be very close.

In the House, Congressman Frank (D-MA) and Congressman Shays (R-CT), the measure's
lead sponsors, have signed up a total of 158 cosponsors (12 Republicans and 146
Democrats) for ENDA. That number will jump to 159 when Lois Capps (D-CA) signs on


                                              23
number of cosponsors the measure has had since its was first introduced several
Congresses ago.
While the bill introduced in this Congress is much more moderate than previous versions
of END A, the measure has not gained much support from Republicans, especially the
moderate northeastern and Californian Republicans whose support will be critical for
moving this bill through the House. Consequently, the measure is not a priority in any of
the committees with jurisdiction (Judiciary, Government Reform and Oversight, Education
and the Workforce and House Oversight) - which have not held a single hearing on the
measure - or for the Republican House leadership.

Talking Points

     We are strongly committed to getting ENDA passed in the Senate during this
      Congress. To that end, we will support all efforts to bring the measure to the floor
      of the Senate for debate and passage.

     With respect to ENDA, moderate Republican support is the key in both the House
      and the Senate. This bill is about a creating a government that is fair and doesn't
      interfere in the private lives of its citizens- - this should have great appeal to
      moderate Republicans.

     In the House, there are many Californian and northeastern Republicans who have
      not yet cosponsored the bill and we should work to get those Members on board.

     In the Senate, moderate Republicans are the key, especially those swing Republicans
      on the Labor Committee like Senators Frist, Collins, peWine and Warner, and we
      will work to gain their support.




                                           24

Staff person: Peter Jacoby or Richard Socarides

Background

Overview: The Hate Crimes Prevention Act of 1998 is designed to give federal
prosecutors both the statutory authority and the necessary resources to prosecute flagrant
acts of racial or religious violence, gay-bashing, gender-motivated violence and violence
against the disabled. Specifically, the measure expands the federal government's current
ability to punish racial violence by removing unnecessary jurisdictional requirements in
existing law. The measure also gives federal prosecutors new authority to prosecute
violence against women, the disabled and gays.

On the resource side, the measure would authorize additional funding to hire the necessary
law enforcement personnel to investigate and prosecute hate crimes. The bill would also
authorize new spending for programs designed to prevent hate crimes. Finally, the
measure directs the U.S. Sentencing Commission to determine whether additional criminal
sentencing enhancements would be appropriate for adults who recruit juveniles to commit
hate crimes.

Senator Kennedy and Congressman Schumer introduced the measure in the Senate and the
House last November in conjunction with the President's White House Conference on Hate
Crimes. The Attorney General is strongly supportive of the measure which is modeled
after the highly effective Church Arson Prevention Act passed by Congress two years ago.

Legislative Overview: In the Senate, Senator Kennedy has been pressuring Judiciary
Committee Chairman Hatch (R-UT) to convene a hearing on the hate crimes legislation.
Senator Hatch has reportedly agreed to hold a hearing but he has been slow to deliver.
One concern that Senator Hatch has expressed, which has been echoed by other opponents
of the measure, is that this may be an issue better left to state jurisdiction. Due to the
uncertainty in Committee, sponsors had originally planned to offer the measure to S. 10,
the Senate's juvenile crime bill. That measure, passed by the Judiciary Committee last
fall, is currently stalled in the Senate due to the Senate Republican leadership's fears that
Republicans will be forced to vote on politically volatile amendments offered by Democrats
during the measure's floor consideration.

In the House, Congressman Schumer (D-NY) has garnered 64 cosponsors for the measure
but no action is expected. It is unlikely that any activity will occur until the Senate acts.

Talking Points

      We are strongly committed to enacting Hate Crimes legislation during this


                                              25
    of the Senate for debate and passage.
   With respect to the Hate Crimes bill, we should be working to get Senator Hatch to
    hold a hearing on the measure prior to the Memorial Day recess. Following that,
    we must identify an appropriate legislative vehicle to get it through the Senate.




                                          26

Staff person: Broderick Johnson

Background

On February 12, 1998, Representatives Charles Canady (R-FL), Brian Bilbray (R-CA), and Jane
Harman (D-CA) introduced H.R 3206, the "Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1998." The
legislation constitutes a major restructuring of the Fair Housing Act, which celebrates its 30th
anniversary this year. The Fair Housing Act is regarded as fundamental civil rights legislation,
and thus H.R. 3206 has caused great concern among the civil rights community and fair housing
advocates.

As currently drafted, H.R. 3206 addresses complicated matters involving relationships between
the Fair Housing Act and the First Amendment; protections against discrimination based upon
familial status; the relationship between state and local governments and the federal government
on zoning and land use issues; and complaint procedures under the Fair Housing Act. These
issues were hotly debated and resolved during debate and passage of the "Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988".

Two major concerns of LCCR with regard to H.R. 3206 have to do with: (I) whether it should
be made more difficult to bring Fair Housing Act cases against those who publicly espouse
opposition (in the context of zoning proceedings, for instance) to certain disabled and minority
persons living in their neighborhoods; and (2) the ability of state and local governments to cluster
group homes in certain neighborhoods and whether they can restrict the categories of persons
who can live in certain such homes and neighborhoods (e.g., disabled persons as opposed to
recovering substance abuse patients).

The original version of the bill is apparently being modified since the bill was considered by the
House Judiciary's Subcommittee on the Constitution. Some of these changes were made to
address criticisms raised by Subcommittee Democrats (led by Ranking Democrat Bobby Scott
(D-Va. Nevertheless, the bill was reported out of the subcommittee on a straight party line
vote, and the anticipated changes are not likely to affect HUD's recommendation that the
Administration strongly oppose the bill. A coalition of advocacy groups, which includes civil
rights groups, disability groups, and religious organizations, is likely to continue to strongly
oppose the bill. The National League of Cities is a major supporter of the bill.

Full Judiciary Committee consideration has been delayed several times, but could occur as early
as next week.




                                                27

     The President has made clear his unequivocal commitment to strong, fair, and effective
      enforcement of the Fair Housing Act, and HUD's recent enforcement program under
      Secretary Cuomo exemplifies the President's commitment.

     The 30th anniversary of enactment of this landmark civil rights statute is certainly no time
      to weaken that law or to retreat from our nation's commitmcnt to fair housing for all
      Americans. The various issues raised in H.R. 3206 are best addressed through joint
      efforts by HUD and the Justice Department, perhaps involving greater flexibility, rather
      than through the changes advanced by this legislation.

     The Administration stands ready to work with the Congress, civil rights and fair housing
      advocates, and such entities as the National League of Cities to try to achieve mutual
      objectives. Nonetheless, we remain strongly oppo'sed to this or any other legislation
      that threatens the ability of minorities and the disabled to be protected under the Fair
      Housing Act.




                                              28

Staff person: Rob Weiner

Background

During World War II, several Latin American countries sent residents of Japanese descent to the
U.S. to be used for prisoner exchange with Japan or interned in U.S. camps. Approximately 2300
Japanese Latin Americans, most from Peru, were brought here. Of these, we sent 800 to Japan
during the war. Another 900 left after the war. Most of these went to Japan because Peru and
other Latin American countries would not let them return. Others remained here and eventually
became citizens.

In 1988, Congress enacted the Civil Liberties Act to apologize for the internment of Japanese
Americans and to authorize a $20,000 payment to eligible internees.      "Eligible" internees
included only those who were American citizens or permanent resident aliens at the time of
internment. "Permanent resident aliens" included only persons "lawfully admitted into the
United States for permanent residence." The U.S. government has deemed most Japanese Latin
American internees ineligible because they were brought to this country against their will for
internment or prisoner exchange, rather than admitted for permanent residence.

Five Japanese Latin Americans brought a class action, Mochizuki v. United States, in the U.S.
Court of Claims seeking redress under the Civil Liberties Act. They claim:

       (1) they were "lawfully admitted" because the U.S. government brought them here, and
       they were "permanent residents" because they came for an indefinite time period;
       (2) they should be treated as "permanent residents under color of law" -- a constructive
       permanent residency status used under some welfare statutes to provide benefits; and
       (3) to deny redress unconstitutionally discriminates based on national origin.

The u.S. has opposed these claims on the basis that the statute clearly intended to exclude these
individuals and that Congress has broad constitutional power to distinguish between citizens,
permanent residents, and others.

In January 1998, the President responded to a letter from Representative Tom Campbell, who
had urged settlement of the Mochizuki case. The President stated that:

       My staff and the Department of Justice explored thoroughly the possibilities of redress for
       these people under the Civil Liberties Act of 1988. The Act provides redress to persons
       of Japanese ancestry who were citizens or permanent resident aliens at the time of their
       internment. Unfortunately, many Japanese individuals from Latin American did not
       have such status at that time. . .. Nor is it within my power to confer the requisite status
       retroactively.


                                                29
Mochizuki litigation, it does not resolve whether the Justice Department has power, as part of its
overall authority to settle lawsuits, to settle this one by offering some compensation from the
redress fund.

After struggling with the issue, the Justice Department offered to settle the case for $5,000 per
claimant. The offer of25 cents on the dollar reflected an assessment of the low litigation risk
of the case, which the Justice Department must consider in settling cases, as well as the amount
of money left in the fund. Absent a settlement, approximately $6-8 million should be left in the
redress fund when the program sunsets in August 1998. If all 1300 Japanese Latin American
claimants sought redress at $5000 each, the total claimed would be $6.5 million.

After initially rejecting the offer, representatives of the Japanese Latin Americans decided to
accept it. A few items remain to be negotiated, but they are unlikely to derail the settlement.
The representatives of the Japanese Latin Americans are likely to want the Administration to
seek legislation to treat their clients the same as others who can make claims on the redress fund.

Talking Points

      We are pleased that settlement negotiations appear to be on track and that a resolution
       appears to be within reach.

      We believe that the moral claim of Japanese Latin Americans to redress stands on the
       same footing as the claim of Japanese-Americans who were interned during World War
       II. Unfortunately, the legal basis of their claim under the Civil Liberties Act was not
       strong, and the Justice Department had to be able to justify a settlement legally.

If LCCR brings up legislation:
      We are happy to work with you on a legislative solution that treats Japanese Latin
       Americans the same as other internees. You should recognize that it will not be easy to
       achieve such a solution, and you will need to put in a great deal of effort with us.




                                                30

Staff person: Eddie Correia

Background

A unanimous panel of the D.C. Circuit just struck down FCC rules that require a radio station
licensee to engage in a number of outreach and recruiting efforts in order to achieve a diverse
workforce. Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod v. FCC. (The panel was made up of three of the
most conservative judges in the circuit.) The licensees were required to provide EEO notices to
employees, to submit information on their hiring, and to use minority-specific recruiting sources.
Such requirements are common in EEO programs. The court found these requirements, as
applied, amounted to race classifications under Adarand and, therefore, triggered strict scrutiny.
It heid that the FCC's asserted interest, "diversity in programming," was not compelling, and, in
any event, the rules were not narrowly tailored to accomplish it.

The most serious problem is that the opinion could make it difficult to justify common recruiting
and outreach requirements in many areas, including contracting, and hiring. For example, the
opinion says that FCC's policy of reviewing the hiring record oflicensees puts pressure on
employers to make certain hiring decisions. Obviously, most EEO programs will involve some
type of review. The government has an interest in determining whether an outreach program is
ever implemented and whether it is working. This review is important even if the government
makes it as clear as possible that it is assessing outreach efforts, not actual hiring or contracting
decisions. If the opinion means that any race-specific recruiting or outreach program that creates
even the slightest incentive to hire minorities triggers strict scrutiny, it could have very wide and
devastating affect. DOJ is currently considering its options, one of which is to ask for a
rehearing en banc (in front of a panel of the full D.C. Circuit).

Talking Points

      The administration is deeply concerned about the recent FCC decision and the
       implications that it is has for recruiting and outreach requirements in affirmative action
       programs. I know Rev. Jackson, Wade Henderson, and others met with Bill Lann Lee to
       express their views on this case, and I know Bill understands your feelings.

      Recruiting and outreach efforts are essential if affirmative action programs are going to
       work and if weare going to open up opportunities for people who have been shut out of
       them. Even conservative Republicans support recruiting and outreach, so that is a sign
       of how extreme this opinion is.

      The Justice Department and the FCC are studying this decision now. One of the options is
       to ask the full circuit to grant a rehearing on the decision. We will be monitoring this
       case closely.


                                                 31

Staff person:   Judy Winston

Note: Judy will briefly review for LCCR the following events.

ESPN Conversation on Race and Sports. On April 14, the President participated in the
ESPN discussion in Houston, Sports and Race: Running In Place? The conversation was
successful in moving the dialogue on race forward and reaching an audience that may not have
been aware of the Race Initiative. Participants from the sports world included current and
former athletes, coaches, and executives in football, baseball, basketball, and track and field.

They included:
       Jim Brown, former football player; currently president of Amer-I-Can program
       Vince Dooley, former college football coach, currently university Athletic Director
       Dennis Green, professional football coach
       Keyshawn Johnson, professional football player
       Jackie-Joyner Kersee, five-time Olympic medalist in track and field
       Felipe Lopez, college basketball player
       Joe Morgan, former professional baseball player, currently ESPN sports broadcaster
       Carmen Policy, president of professional football team
       John Thompson, college basketball coach
       John Moores, owner of professional baseball team

Three Advisory Board members (Governor Winter, Reverend Cook, Mr. Thomas), consultant
Laura Harris, and Executive Director Judy Winston also attended.

HUD Roundtable Discussion on Fair Housing. In commemoration of the 30th anniversary
of the Fair Housing Act, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development conducted
a public meeting and roundtable discussion on April 23 in Newark, New Jersey, with
representatives from fair housing and community organizations.    The meeting focused on
race and housing issues in New Jersey. Advisory Board members Franklin and Kean
participated in the discussion. HUD Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal
Opportunity Eva Plaza also participated in this event.

Statewide Days of Dialogue. Statewide Days of Dialogue is an effort to involve governors,
mayors, and others in the Race Initiative by issuing a proclamation, participating in a
dialogue, organizing a town hall meeting on race, or other activities. Statewide Days is
being launched on April 30 in conjunction with the YWCA's National Day to Erase the Hate
and Eliminate Racism. To date, 16 Governors, several Mayors, and more than 100 YWCA's
in 37 states and the District of Columbia have agreed to participate. Attorney General Reno
will be attending a Capitol Hill luncheon related to these events and Secretary Riley will be
participating in a dialogue with school children in Birmingham, Alabama.


                                              32
across the country in the Race Initiative in town hall meetings, smaller discussions,
campus-community projects, and other activities. Close to 600 schools participated in
Campus Week of Dialogue events from April 6-9, including universities both large and small,
historically black colleges and universities, Hispanic serving institutions, tribal colleges, and
community colleges. Advisory Board members and Initiative staff participated in a number
of events at different campuses. Cabinet participants included Attorney General Reno and
Secretary Babbitt. White House staff participating in Campus Week events included Maria
Echaveste.




                                               33
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 075 - FOLDER -009


[04/24/1998 - 0412711998]
