         RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

         CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

         CREATION DATE/TIME:27-APR-1998 12:03:21.00

         SUBJECT:     q&a's

         TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TEXT:
          Unz Initiative/Bilingual Education

         Q.      TodayO,s L.A. Times reports that the President will oppose
         CaliforniaO,s Proposition 227, the Unz Initiative.  What is wrong with
         this proposal, and why has the President decided to weigh in on a state
         ballot initiative?

         A.      The Unz Initiative will virtually end bilingual education and
         instead limit students who do not speak English to a one year O&English
         immersionD8 program, after which they must be placed in a regular class.

         This is an extreme, one-size-fits-all approach that wonS,t work with all
         kids. It limits the ability of local schools and teachers to use
         approaches that will work.  If it is implemented, we believe that fewer
         students who need to will become proficient in English, fewer students
         will do well in other academic subjects, and more students and parents
         will be frustrated with the education they are receiving.

         This is an important issue, which will have a big impact on the education
         of children in California.  And while this is currently a ballot
         initiative in California, it is of national significance.   The same issue
         will be faced in other states and communities, and will come up in the
         Congress. Therefore, the President believes it is important for him to
         address the issue.

         Q.      TodayO,s L.A. Times reports that the Administration has decided
         to oppose CaliforniaD,s Proposition 227, ~he Unz Initiative. will the
         President be addressing this when he is in California?

         A.      First let me say that Secretary Riley will be putting out a
         detailed statement on the AdministrationO,s position early this afternoon.
         At the same time, Acting Deputy Secretary of Education Mike Smith will
         conduct a background briefing on this issue for those of you with more
         specific questions.

         In addition, because this is such an important issue, I expect the
         President will want to comment on it while he is in California starting on
         Friday. No decision has yet been made about the particular time or place
         for the President to address the issue.

         Q.      TodayO,s L.A. Times reports that the Administration will propose
         to limit participation in bilingual education programs to three years. Is
         this right?

         A.         The President believes that we must have a clear goal that students
 ~




should learn English within three years, and that this goal can be met if
we give students the opportunities and help they need--smaller classes,
well trained teachers who know how to teach students a second language, a
good curriculum, etc.  Having a clear goal will help students, teachers
and principals, by focusing their attention on what they must accomplish.

But we are not proposing to throw students out of a program designed to
teach them English, if they havenD,t mastered English within that time
period. That would be the wrong thing to do, and would make as much sense
as throwing out of school any student who doesnD,t meet academic standards
in math by the 8th grade. The right thing to do would be to hold the
school accountable, insist that the school use a more effective approach,
and give students who need it extra help so they do learn English.

Q.      Will the President send legislation to Congress to change the
federal bilingual education program based on the three year goal?

A.       Congress is scheduled to consider the bilingual education
program next year, along with other elementary and secondary education
programs. At that time, the President will transmit legislation that will
fully accord with his principles for improving how we help students learn
English.

The President has already sent the Congress an ambitious package of
education initiatives this year--which they have not acted on. The
President would like to see the Congress enact his legislation to reduce
class size, modernize school buildings, end social promotions, and help
low income students make their way to college.


Q.       Polls in California show that the Unz Initiative is extremely
popular.   Does the President expect that his opposition will have an
impact on the vote?

A.      The President hopes that voters in California will pay attention
to his views and consider them when they go to the ballot box.

Q.      Many of the Latino groups and others who support bilingual
education oppose any sort of time limit for bilingual education. Does the
Administration expect these groups to support your position?

A.      The President believes that a 3 year goal is the right policy;
it is good for students and good for education.  Everyone who cares about
helping students with limited English proficiency should support this goal.

Q.      What is the PresidentD,s view of bilingual education?

A.       The President believes is is critical for all students to learn
English.   At present, there are approximately 3.2 million students who are
not yet proficient in English, and they need extra help.   The President
supports bilingual education programs that help immigrant students and
other students whose native language is not English, become proficient in
English.

The President strongly supports the federal Bilingual Education program,
because it provides local communities with the funds they need to provide
extra help to students with limited English proficiency, while leaving the
decision about how best to provide that help to each local school system.
In his FY99 budget, the President called for a 17 percent increase -- $33
million -- in the Federal bilingual education program. These funds would
.. ~'. ·    .1




           help train 20,000 teachers over five years to more effectively teach
           English in the context of high academic standards.

           The President has strongly opposed the provision in the House supplemental
           appropriations bill that would cut funding for the bilingual education
           program.

           Q.      What is the PresidentO,s view of the DeLay bill that would
           eliminate the Federal Bilingual education program.

           A.      The President is opposed to this bill or any other bill that
           would wipe out the funds needed to give students they help they need to
           learn English. With nearly 20% of the children in our schools immigrants
           or the children of immigrants, we should be strengthening our efforts to
           help students learn English, not ending them.

           Q.      What is the PresidentO,s view of the Riggs bill that would end
           funding for bilingual education programs that donO,t teach kids English
           within 2 years?

           A.      This bill was recently introduced and is being reviewed by the
           Education Department and the Domestic Policy Council.   The review has not
           been completed, and the matter has not been brought to the PresidentO,s
           attention yet.


