RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [. WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-APR-1998 18:59:47.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly Report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D61]MAIL47498691X.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043F20F0000010A02010000000205000000ED4F00000002000024BA23469CB30342206DCE
6FA5C684AB6628E69854E42074C5A9E7A7C52A632FC99BB7469033FB629B428CE759B81815C019
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion



                                            May 1, 1998


 MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

 FROM:         Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

 RE:           DPC Weekly Report


         Tobacco -- Legislative Update: Senator Lott has said he will bring the McCain bill to
  the Senate on May 18th. On Wednesday, as you know, we had a very positive meeting with Lott
  and Daschle where we discussed developing an agreed upon manager's amendment as well as an
  amendment strategy for the floor. We then met separately with Senator McCain on Thursday,
. and he said that he would urge Lott to appoint Senator Mack to negotiate on behalf of the
  Republicans. We expect that negotiations could begin as soon as Tuesday.

         The Commerce Committee will shortly release a new version of the McCain bill with
technical changes. In addition, McCain's staff asked for our assistance in restructuring the bill so
that it could operate effectively whether or not the industry consents. In response, we plan to
provide them shortly with proposed revisions that separated out all the provisions
requiring the consent of participating manufacturers -- as well as the benefits they are
seeking, such as the liability cap -- into a single stand-alone title. The other titles would
apply to all manufacturers, whether they consent or not, and include advertising restrictions
originally included in the FDA rule but not the broader ones that raise constitutional difficulties
(those would be put in the separate title). ELENA: LA COUNTY OFFICIALS ARE IN
TOWN NEXT WEEK, SO THIS WOULD BE A GOOD WEEK TO GET THIS IN. I
HAVE ALREADY HEARD A RUMOR THEY ARE TRYING TO GET A MEETING
WITH ERSKINE, THOUGH NOTHING IS ON HIS CALENDAR YET. THEY'LL
PROBABLY ALSO PUSH FOR A VP MEETING.

        Child Support Enforcement -- Progress on Child Support Incentives Legislation:
Both the House and Senate are moving forward on good legislation to reward states for high
performance on child support collections, and to ensure that states face tough but reasonable
penalties if they fail to establish child support enforcement computer systems on time. The
penalty in current law is so extreme (withholding all TANF and child support funds) that it has
never been enforced, while the proposed penalties are smaller -- e.g., 4% the first year, 8% the
second year -- but automatic. We favor the tougher House bill. The Senate bill would allow
states an extra year to comply without penalty, and let them "earn back" prior penalties once they
come into compliance. About 15 states are likely to face some penalty.
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

         The Senate bill was specifically crafted to satisfy members from California. That state
faces far greater penalties than any other state beyause it is years away from having a functioning
state-wide system and has continued to rely on county-based systems. However, L.A. County
remains very unhappy with even the Senate position, and is pushing both Congress and the
Administration to give it a special exemption from any penalty. L.A. County District Attorney
Gil Garcetti argues that L.A. County has an excellent county system that has long functioned well
and was designed with federal involvement under a waiver several years ago. DPC, HHS, and
OMB hold that such an exemption would allow numerous other counties to make the same
argument, and that the federal government must hold states accountable for their actions in this
critical area. (States are not required to pass along penalties to counties.) Hill leaders do not
generally support an L.A. County exemption, and California members like Matsui and Stark
oppose it. Sen. Feinstein supports the exemption.

        In addition, we are working with Congress on how to create a standard form for medical
support orders, in order to make it easier for children to be covered by anon-custodial parent's
health insurance. Finally, the House bill would exclude aliens who fail to pay child support
from admission to the U.S. and make them ineligible for visas. We generally support this
provision, but are working to ensure that it is better targeted so that it does not create a huge
administrative burden for the INS.

        Health Care -- Prescription Drug Coverage and Medicare: Prescription drug costs
represents the highest out-of-pocket health care expenditure for three out-of-four elderly.
Many older Americans "stretch-out" their supply of prescriptions to defray costs; their
non-compliance with drug regimens frequently results in additional, more expensive health
care treatments. A number of your Medicare Commissioners, as well as a host of outside
validators (like Henry Aaron and Bob Reischauer), have indicated their interest in
exploring options to providing prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries.
They note that much of our future medical interventions will be pharmacologically-based
and, as such, Medicare's current lack of coverage of out-patient drugs is antiquated. In
response, DPCfNEC is setting up a work group to review policy options and costs. Costs
will certainly determine the viability of any drug coverage. However, more studies are
becoming available about the cost-effectiveness of drug coverage. Moreover, since more
than half of Medicare's managed care plans now offer some type of prescription drug
benefit, it is not inconceivable to contemplate required prescription drug coverage for at
least these plans. Such a recommendation could be bolstered by studies that show that,
notwithstanding the BBA Medicare reforms, most managed care plans remain
overcompensated relative to the patients they serve. Finally, it may be advisable to raise
this issue relatively early in the debate to illustrate that the Commission's and our review of
the long-term challenges facing Medicare are focused on the need for program
improvements as well as financing.

      Health Care -- Patients' Bill of Rights Update: On Wednesday, Congressman
Ganske and six other Republicans added their names as cosponsors to the Dingell Patients'


                                                2
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


Bill of Rights legislation. In a White House released statement, you praised these members
for providing "new momentum towards ensuring that a patients bill of rights will become
the law of the land." Congressman Ganske appreciated your comments and Congressman
Dingell's office indicated that it has helped place needed pressure on the Republican
Leadership to move th!s legislation this year. On Friday, we met with the disability
advocacy community to encourage them to mobilize their effective network to strongly
push for passage of this bill. They have indicated that they are going to make this a much
higher priority. (NOTE TO ELENA: THIS IS A MEETING THAT WILL TAKE
PLACE TOMORROW AND I AM ASSUMING WHAT I BELIEVE THE OUTCOME
WILL BE.)

           Immigration -- HIB visas: HI B visas are temporary work visas that allow "highly
  skilled" immigrants (with a BA or equivalent) to work in this country for up to six years. Under
  current law, the number ofHIB visas is capped at 65,000 per year. Last year, this cap was
. reached for the first time. The infonnation technology industry strongly supports raising the
  annual cap to address what they maintain is a shortage of U.S. workers with IT skills. Others,
  including the Department of Labor, challenge the industry'S conclusions about Ii shortage and are
  concerned that the current HIB program does nothing to target its useto employers who are
  experiencing skills shortages. On April 30, 1998, the Administration sent a letter to Congress
  supporting Representative Lamar Smith's bill, which includes a substantial refonn of the HIB
  program, ifit is modified to include meaningful training provisions and a more modest increase
  in the cap. Representative Smith's bill was voted out of committee without amendment. We
  plan to continue to work with Smith and other Members (both House and Senate) to develop a
  bill that meets the Administration's objectives.

        Campaign Finance Reform -- Free Broadcast Time: . Nonn Ornstein, co-chair of the
Advisory Committee on Public Interest Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters is trying
to forge a consensus proposal on free broadcast time. There are two main components to this
proposal: 1) Each broadcast station would be required to provide 5 minutes of free air time per
night (6:00 pm to 11 :30 pm) over the last 30 days of an election. At least 3 minutes of the free
time wold be broadcast consecutively. Local stations would decide which candidates have
access to the free air time .. Stations would also design the fonnat for the air time (commercials,
interviews, mini-debates). This proposal would be implemented either as an FCC mandate or as
part of a new "Code of Conduct". To give a voluntary agreement some teeth, the FCC would
announce that no broadcast licenses would be renewed unless the station could justify why it did
not meet the conditions of the Code of Conduct (currently the presumption is for automatic
renewal); 2) Challenge Congress to replace "lowest unit rate cost" with a system that would
provide one minute of free time for every two minutes purchased. Under Ornstein's proposal,
the state parties would control the free time, not the candidates.

       While we think that Ornstein's proposal moves the debate in the right direction, we are
concerned about giving the broadcasters too much control over fonnat and candidate access.
We believe the Committee and the FCC should develop guidelines for the broadcasters on access


                                                 3
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

and format. We have reservations about challenging Congress to enact the second part of
Ornstein's plan. While the FCC cannot repeal "lowest unit rate cost" it could require
broadcasters to provide one free minute of air time for every two minutes purchased. We think
the Committee should recommend that the FCC institute such a system and challenge Congress
to repeal "lowest unit rate cost" as a separate issue. Finally, we are concerned with the role of
state parties in Ornstein's proposal and believe there should be a cap on the amount of free time
that anyone candidate could accumulate in order to prevent very wealthy candidates from
abusing the system.

       Education -- D.C. Student Opportunity Scholarship Act (Voucher Bill): The
House passed legislation (214 to 206) that would set up a D.C. voucher program by providing
scholarships of $3200 for low-income students to apply toward the cost of a private school
education. You have promised to veto this legislation when it reaches your desk.
Congressional leaders have acknowledged that they lack the necessary votes to override a veto.

         Education -- Administration Opposition to Vnz Initiative Announced: The Los
Angeles Times reported Monday that the administration was opposed to the Unz Initiative to
eliminate bilingual education in California. The Times reported that the administration is in favor
of reforms to bilingual education, including a three-year goal for teaching students English.
Also on Monday, Secretary Riley issued a detailed statement explaining our position on the Unz
Initiative. Senior staff in IGA, Public Liaison and Political Affairs reported that the reactions of
state and local leaders was positive both to the message and the timing of the announcement.

        Education -- Charter Schools in California: After two weeks of negotiations among
Silicon Valley high-tech executives, the California Teachers' Association (CTA), and state
legislators, a legislative conference committee reached a compromise Wednesday on a legislative
alternative to a charter school ballot initiative backed by the executives and opposed by the CTA.
 If enacted, the bill would increase the cap on charter schools in the state from 100 to 250, and
allow another 100 new schools each subsequent year. The bill would also amend California's
charter school law to make it easier to start charter schools. Votes were expected Thursday, April
30 in both houses of the California legislature on the conference agreement. The bill would
need to be signed into law by Friday, May I in order to keep the initiative off of the ballot.

        Crime -- Assault Weapons: Despite efforts by both Republicans and Democrats on the
conference committee considering the supplemental appropriations bill, a provision to exempt
firearms "in transit" from the Administration's decision to ban semiautomatic assault rifles that
accept large capacity magazines was not included in the final conference report. However,
Senator Craig expressed his intention to offer a similar amendment during the appropriations
process.

           Crime -- COPS Initiative: The Department of Justice is preparing to launch a new
$240 million initiative to hire about 2,000 more police in high-crime and high-need
neighborhoods. Under this initiative, the Justice Department will select 16 cities (8 small, 8


                                                 4
                                                                           Hex-Dump ConverslOr


large) that agree to target crime and drug "hot spots," youth violence problems, or economically
distressed areas and provide them with 100% grants to hire more police officers. By waiving the
25% local match, key cities that may not have been able to afford more police officers will be
able to do so. Mayor Daley of Chicago has pushed the Justice Department to use its waiver
authority in this targeted manner, and he is interested in announcing this new initiative with the
Administration. We are working with Rahm to submit a scheduling request for such an event.




                                                5


