RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: l-MAY-1998 09:20:04.00

SUBJECT:   assisted suicide draft memo

TO: Karen A. Popp ( CN=Karen A. Popp/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is the current draft of the assisted suicide memo.  It may be too
long, but I have also highlighted areas where we might want to put in more
relevant information.

Elena, we need you to review, edit, and get back to us as soon as you
can. Do you want to get this memo in later this afternnoon? If so, Karen
would like to make sure that Chuck reviews what we send in.  Either you or
I can give Rahm and Paul a call to go over how we are presenting this; I
doubt either of them will have the inclination to read the memo (or
respond to it in a timely manner.)

Thanks.

cj==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D46]MAIL48144302T.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750435C030000010A02010000000205000000883A00000002000034698CBC2AC74D3DA41861
87C44CC381734705DOBAC4297C56C47BFE6COC46463954CF4953887C1EF33A1280EA5AFACD33FC
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

                                           May 1, 1998

DRAFT: BOLD ARE crs SUGGESTIONS TO INITIAL DRAFT; ITALlCS ARE KAREN's
  EDITS TO CJ's OPTIONS SECTION


MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

FROM:

SUBJECT:


         The Justice Department has determined that the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
 has no authority under the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) to take adverse action against
 physicians who assist patients in ending their lives by prescribing controlled substances pursuant
 to Oregon's "Death with Dignity Act." (Do we want to say that this interpretation overruled
 the original DEA position on this issue and is in response to an inquiry from the Hill?
 Something like:) This legal review is in response to an inquiry from Congressman Hyde
. and Senator Hatch?; it supersedes a preliminary positive interpretation by the DEA (do we
 get into issue that DEA did not want to alienate their authorizing committees and do not
 want this authority)_

       The Justice Department has completed draft letters to Congressman Hyde and Senator
Hatch explaining its legal conclusions. The letters will not be forwarded to Congress until we
have developed a roll-out strategy, including a position on federal legislation prohibiting
physician-assisted suicide.

        As you will recall, we were previously informed at a meeting with representatives of the
Catholic Health Association (CHA) that Senator Hatch and Representative Hyde are prepared to
introduce legislation amending the CSA in the event the Attorney General concludes that no
authority.currently exists for DEA to pursue physicians who assist patients in committing suicide.
 In assessing the possible options for responding to Hatch's and Hyde's likely initiative, we held
meetings within the White House and with the Departments of Justice and Health and Human
Services (including the FDA).

        Justice and HHS/FDA are of the policy view that the Administration should not support a
legislative change to existing law. Justice is concerned with the resource drain on the DEA if
that agency were tasked with enforcement duty. In addition, because DEA currently relies on
cultivated relationships with some doctors in pursuing narcotics law violations, the agency's core
function could suffer by a change in the law as contemplated by Senator Hatch and
Representative Hyde. Moreover, DEA's approach to enforcing the narcotics laws is inconsistent
with the type of sensitivity that would be needed in pursuing doctors. This helps explain why
health 'care provider groups (like the AMA and CHA) have expressed grave concern that
a new Federal law that authorizes DEA to purse criminal investigations would further
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


exacerbate the problem of physicians underprescribing pain medications for terminally ill
patients.


        The Justice Department also cites principals of federalism in support of its position
against a legislative change. Traditionally, the federal government has deferred to the states as
the primary regulators of the medical profession. HHS/FDA concur with these positions. We
have been informed by HHS/FDA that regulating physician conduct in assisted suicide in a State
that permits the practice would be an inappropriate use of the Agency's authority and contrary to
the deference the agency has historically given to states in regulating their medical professionals.
 FDA's core function is the public health mission of regulating foods and medical products.

        We also considered the prior positions you have taken on assisted suicide, especially your
moral opposition to the conduct. We all agree that not supporting a change in the law under
principals of federalism is not necessarily inconsistent with your previously stated positions.
(I think this has to be explained a bit further) Nor is last year's "Assisted Suicide Funding
Restriction Act" inconsistent with a refusal to support a legislative change. The Funding
Restriction Act bans the use of federal funds to pay for or promote assisted suicide. Nothing in
the Act authorizes the federal government to take adverse action against a private physician for
assisting in a suicide in a non-federal facility.

        At a meeting with Rahm Emanuel, Paul Begala and Chuck Ruff, we addressed the policy
question and associated issues. Mr. Ruff agrees with the positions taken by the agencies. He is
especially concerned with the federalism implications of the HydelHatch initiative and the
potential disasters associated with DEA having criminal enforcement authority over doctors.
Rahm and Paul are comfortable with the policy recommendation by Justice and HHS, but
are concerned about how we position ourselves on this issue.

        We have prepared a detailed outline of four possible options for responding to the
expected Hyde/Hatch initiative. We have included a summary ofthe possible advantages and
disadvantages for each option. Each option assumes that the Justice Department letter that
goes to the Hill does nothing more than outline DoJ's interpretation of the law;
in other words, it would not provide an Administration policy position on the issue.
Instead, we would wait to see how the Hill responded and react according to the policy and
strategy you choose to pursue. The four options are: (1) support the HydelHatch legislation;
(2) oppose HydelHatch legislation outright; (3) oppose the HydelHatch DEA approach, but
suggest openness to alternatives; (4) engage in a "Kick the Can" strategy -- creating the
perception of openness to alternatives with the intent of creating an environment that would
conclude with no action. (NOTE TO ELENA: At end of each option, we could give a sense of
where the Departments and the White House folks stand on them. E.G., we could say all oppose
option 1, HHS and Treasury might prefer option 2, most would probably oppose option 3, and
the political folks might well prefer option 4. What do you think?)
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


     OPTIONS FOR RESPONDING TO LIKELY HYDE/HATCH LEGISLATION



1.   Endorse Hyde/Hatch Legislative Alternative. After the Justice Department's legal
     interpretation is released, we could endorse the expected introduction oflegislation
     authorizing the DEA to pursue criminal investigations of physicians prescribing
     medications for assisted suicides.

     Pros

           Appears consistent with our stated public position of opposition to assisted
            suicide.

            Avoids inevitable conflict with the Republican Congress and "right-wing" side of
            party.

     Cons

           Raises important and potentially extremely problematic precedent for the
            establishment of a major Federal regulatory role over medical practice, a
            responsibility that has historically been the province of the states.

            According to physicians' groups and even the Catholic Health Association, a
            Federal law in this area will increase the well documented problem of
            undermedicating terminally ill patients as physicians become even more afraid of
            prescribing pain control medications that could make them vulnerable to
            prosecution by the Federal Government.

           Ignores the fact that DEA is ill-equipped and lacking in resources for effective
            enforcement.

2.   Oppose Hatch/Hyde legislation outright. Concurrent with the expected introduction
     of the Hatch/Hyde bill, communicate to the Hill that, while you find assisted suicide to be
     an abhorrent practice (as illustrated by your enactment of the Anti-Assisted Suicide Act
     of 1997), you cannot support legislation that diverts limited law enforcement resources
     from the DEA forthis purpose. Moreover, you would underscore that you believe it
     would be ill-advised to pass a new, precedent-laden Federal bill that was extremely
     intrusive to state oversight over the regulation over the patient/doctor relationship.

     Pros

           Sends a clear signal of opposition, a position that is consistent with that advocated
            by both HHS and Justice.
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

           Does not further confuse or frighten doctors, who are already seriously
            undennedicating tenninally ill patients because of their fear of being prosecuted
            or at least publicly criticized for hastening death inappropriately.


           Could avoid a time-consuming and likely unproductive negotiating process with
            the Hill over Federal legislation that is extremely difficult to envision resulting in
            a rationale, desirable policy outcome.

     Cons

            Appears inconsistent with historic position in opposition to assisted suicide.

           Risks major confrontation with the Republicans and virtually all representatives of
            the "religious right."


3.   Oppose DEA (likely Hatch/Hyde) approach, but suggest openness to alternatives.
     Welcome the intent of the Republican DEA bill, but raise the same concerns outlined in
     option 2. Advise Republicans that we believe that there may be other ways to implement
     the intent of their legislation in a more workable fashion. In this context, we could .
     suggest alternative enforcement agencies (such as FDA) and enforcement mechanisms,
     (such as reducing Federal support for Medicaid for states that are engaged in this
     Euthanasia process). By definition, this process would be designed to seriously attempt
     to find some common ground with the Republicans and the Governors to sincerely
     developing a workable legislative alternative to DEA enforcement.

     Pros

           Seems consistent with your historic "assisted suicide" position.

            Shows we are seriously concerned about this issue; so much so that we are willing
            to help develop legislation that addresses the "rationing" fears that many
            conservative Americans have.

           Would take an enforcement approach that does not tap into limited DEA resources
            or rely on DEA enforcement agents (who might not be sensitized to this most
            sensitive of issues).

     Cons

           May excessively raise expectations that a legislative solution can be achieved
            when, in fact, it may be virtually impossible to reach consensus.
                                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


                     Relying on a financial enforcement mechanism like reduction of Federal Medicaid
                     matching (or something like highway) dollars would be strongly opposed by the
                     states as micro-management and as an inappropriate Federal intrusion of states
                     rights and responsibilities.

                     Is contrary to HHSIFDA historical practice and mission.

        4.   "Kick the Can" Strategy. The last option is to take the same "openness to addressing
             issue" public position on the bill that was outlined in option 3, but participate in a process
             that is explicitly designed to conclude in non-action. Such an approach would presume a
             drawn-out process that allows the time for the medical groups, states, and others to
             communicate to all sides that Federal approaches in this area don't work and are
             ill-advised. At the very least, the opponents would raise serious enough objections to
             conclude that we do not have time to draft thoughtful Federal legislation this year.

             Pros

                    Would allow the process and the affected parties be the most influential
                     participants to achieving closure on this controversial issue -- not us.

                     Would allow us to reiterate our strong position against assisted suicide in a way
                     that does not result in legislation that creates as many or more undesirable
                     precedences and problems than it solves.

                    Would allow the time for all the issues on this controversial issue to be aired;
                     might even help educate physicians and the public at large about the very real and
                     serious under-medication for terminally ill problem.

             Cons

                     Could make us look indecisive and weak.

                    Could be viewed with skepticism on the Hill and make us vulnerable to charge
                     that we are trying to have it both ways.



        DOES THIS MEMO REQUIRE A DECISION BOX; OR WILL A LESS FORMAL MEMO
        SUFFICE? ELENA?
