RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1998 11:50:35.00

SUBJECT:   Organic memo w/more Sally changes

TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Sally called back with some more changes -- they are in bold.==================== AT
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D57]MAIL40567462C.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504370040000010A0201000000020500000062210000000200OOC761CDE5AD5DE8019B1720
221087C5E3C3B17FED377D9052281E4BCD4BABEBBE4360DA4859DD7C3E17E6D88F5EA2FIC13C6D
                                             DRAFT (11 :37 am)                      Hex-Dump Conversion
Sally called with further additions, all her additions are in bold.


                                           May 6,1998

MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

FROM:                  ELENA KAGAN
                       SALLY KATZEN

SUBJECT:               USDA's Proposed Organic Rule

         In 1990, Congress passed the Organic Food Production Act which required the
Department of Agriculture (USDA) to establish a government certification program and
national standard defining the use of the term "organic" for use on food products. The
legislation was strongly supported by the organic industry which sought to involve the federal
government in creating a unified organic standard, rather than the myriad of private and
state-endorsed definitions.

        In December 1997, USDA published a proposed regulation to establish a national organic
standard. It has been the USDA position that the standard is a marketing description of
what is and is not organic. . The Secretary has emphasized that the organic designation is
not intended to convey information about the safety, nutritional value, or environmental
benefits of organic products and practices. On the other hand, the Administration has
long promoted food safety and some agencies have strong concerns that an organic label
will inevitably be construed as an indication of the improved safety of the product.

        Since the publication of the proposed rule, it has been the subject of extensive criticism.
USDA has received almost 200,000 comments regarding the proposed rule, the most ever
received for a USDA rulemaking. The primary complaint has been that the proposed rule does
not explicitly prohibit the use of genetically modified organisms, irradiation, and. biosolids
(sludge) in food that could be labeled "organic." In the preamble to its proposal, USDA had
requested comments as to whether foods using any of these techniques could be considered as
organic. It requested comments on these products and practices because of possible safety
benefits and consistency with Administration policy, not because they were thought to be
within the definition of organic, which they are not. The rule has also been the subject of
unfavorable editorials in many newspapers including the New York Times, the Washington Post,
the Chicago Tribune, and the Los Angles Times. ( Sample "Organic Hash From the USDA
Kitchen"). Finally, 47 members of the House and 30 Senators have signed letters to Secretary
Glickman expressing concern about the proposed rule.


Current Status
      Secretary Glickman plans to issue a press release this Friday, May 7th, (attached),
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

indicating that USDA will repropose the rule and "make fundamental changes in the new
proposed rule on organic standards." Specifically, the statement would indicate that
biotechnology, irradiation, and biosolids are "being taken off the table and will not be included in
our new proposal." Articles in the last week in USA TODAY, and the Washington Post have
indicated that USDA is preparing such a ·statement.

        Representatives ofOMB and NEe have been concerned about USDA's plan to issue a
statement taking these techniques "off the table." These agencies argue that consumers will likely
view a product labeled as organic as safe, despite the fact that there is not evidence to
demonstrate that organic food is any safer than non-organic food, or that genetically modified,
irradiated, or food grown using sludge is unsafe. To the extent that consumers read an
organic label as demonstrating safety, they may be misled. OMB points out that organic
material might be even worse in terms of some microbiological hazards. Organic foods
fertilized with manure have been and may in the future be linked to illnesses such as occurred
in the Odwalla juice outbreak. OMB notes the danger of contradiction in Administration policy
in areas such as genetically modified products and biosolids (sludge) in which the
Administration is on record supporting the safety of the practice. OMB and NEe suggested that
USDA consider modifying the organic label to include a provision stating something along the
lines of "organic food may be no more or less safe than non-organic food" or that USDA
continue its comment review process and not prematurely prohibit using the term organic for
food using any of the three disput~d techniques.

         USDA felt strongly that the label should not be modified and that a statement announcing
a reproposal needs to be made promptly. USDA states that the organic label is not intended to
signify the overall safety of the food, only the methods by which the food was produced, and that
it will not advertise the label as having anything to do with safety. USDA notes that the
disputed techniques are clearly not in keeping with the public's expectation of what constitutes
organic. The Food and Drug Administration has expressed general support for USDA's
position.

Recommendation
        We recognize the need for USDA to clarify its position on organics, and recommend that
Secretary Glickman issue a statement indicating that biotechnology, irradiation, and sludge will
not be part of the revised proposal. We suggest USDA not include the phrase "taken off the
table," however, which may imply they could never be considered. In its place we suggest the
phrase "we will be clear that the term 'organic' is not intended to encompass these
products and practices." In addition, after discussions with OMB, OSTP, NEe, FDA and
USDA we have agreed upon two additional measures that could ameliorate some concerns over
safety. These include (1) having USDA and FDA conduct a survey on consumer attitudes
towards organic food to determine whether consumers purchase organic products on the basis of
unproven safety claims, and (2) having USDA insert in the preamble of its new rule language
indicating that the National Organic Standard Board should report regularly to the Secretary on
possible uses of new technologies and whether they might meet an organic standard.


