RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1998 17:51:00.00

SUBJECT:   next draft of press paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D50]MAIL48761762F.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750433A050000010A020100000002050000000F2D0000000200001883E45D92D77863B7B9E8
63177B581FD774D774510D123F281196928C68D9A42E071A4129B379B3F35C5A92AD0605A632FE
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


                     A NATIONAL EFFORT TO REDUCE CLASS SIZE:
                  SMALLER CLASSES WITH WELL-PREPARED TEACHERS

                                           May 8, 1998


The President spoke to the Delaware legislature to promote his comprehensive education agenda,
announce that he is transmitting legislation to Congress today that would reduce class size to a
national average of 18 in grades 1-3, and highlight two new reports released today by the
Education Department. The reports show that smaller classes do lead to improved student
achievement and ihat all states have now adopted legislation requiring students to be expelled if
they bring a firearm to school.

REDUCING CLASS SIZE IN GRADES 1-3 TO NATIONWIDE A VERAGE OF 18. President
Clinton transmitted legislation today to help local schools provide smaller classes with
well-prepared teachers in the early grades. The initiative would provide $12.4 billion over 7
years to help make sure that every child receives personal attention, gets a solid foundation for
further learning, and learns to read independently and well by the end of third grade. The
initiative will reduce class size in grades 1-3 to a nationwide average of 18 by providing funds t<;>
help local school districts hire and pay the salaries of an additional 100;000 teachers. States will
receive funds to boost teacher quality through teacher training, recmitment, and testing, and new
teachers will be required to pass state competency tests.

NEW REPORT SHOWS THAT SMALL CLASSES MAKE A DIFFERENCE. The President
announced a new Education Department report showing that reducing class size, especially in the
early grades, leads to improved student achievement. According to the report -- which analyzed
the data and findings from the most carefully designed research studies on class size -- the
research shows that:

       Smaller dass size increases student achievement.   The report found that reducing class size
       from substantially above 20 students per class to below 20 students leads to gains in
       student achievement with the performance of the average student moving from the 50th
       percentile to somewhere above the 60th percentile. Students from smaller classes in
       initiatiyes from Burke County North Carolina, Wisconsin, Indiana, and Tennessee
       outperformed their peers in larger classes. Follow-up studies showed that students from
       smaller classes in Tennessee's STAR Project continued to outperform their peers in all
       academic subjects even after returning to larger classes in the 4th grade. An analysis of
       data on 10,000 4th graders in 203 school districts, and 10,000 8th graders in 182 school
       districts, across the United States shows that students in smaller classes performed better in
       4th grade and 8th grade than comparable students in larger classes.

       Smaller dasses reduce discipline problems and increase instruction time for teachers.        In
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


        Burke County, North Carolina, the percentage of classroom time devoted to instruction
        increased from 80 percent to 86 percent, while the time devoted to non-instructional
        activities such as discipline decreased from 20 percent to 14 percent when class size was
        reduced. Students from Tennessee's STAR program were still working harder and
        causing fewer discipline problems than students from larger classes even after the STAR
        students returned to the larger classroom in the 4th grade.

        Smaller dasses with well-prepared teachers make a difference.    Smaller classes will boost
       student achievement the most when teachers are prepared to teach well in these classes,
       and efforts to reduce class size clearly increase the demand for quaJified teachers. A
       review of more than 100 research studies indicated that positive effects of smaller classes
       were more likely if teachers change their instructional methods and classroom procedures
       in the smaller classes. Class size reduction efforts resulting in student achievement gains
       in Wisconsin and North Carolina included a strong focus on professional development for
       teachers.

       Smaller dasses make the greatest impact in the early gradesJ and for disadvantaged and
       minority students. The clearest evidence of positive effects of smaller classes on student
       performance are in the primary grades, particularly kindergarten through third grade.
       Research on class size reduction efforts in Tennessee, Indiana, Wisconsin, and North
       Carolina show clear academic gains for students in smaller classes through the third grade,
       while studies questioning the impact of class size have often focused on class size
       variation across all grade levels. The national study of 10,000 4th graders and 10,000
       8th graders found the greatest impact of smaller classes on inner-city youth.


ENFORCING ZERO TOLERANCE FOR GUNS IN SCHOOLS Another report being issued by
the Department of Education today on the Gun-Free Schools Act indicates that all states have
now passed legislation providing for students who bring firearms to school to be expelled for at
least one year. Although most schools do not report serious crimes to law enforcement --and
less than 1 of students report bringing a gun to school --this new report shows that more than
6,000 students were disciplined for bringing a firearm (i.e., handguns, rifles, bombs, etc.) to their
schools during the 1996-1997 school year. Most of these cases involved handguns that were
brought to high schools.
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion


.NEW LEGISLATION TO HELP STATES AND COMMUNITIES REDUCE CLASS SIZE
                  SMALLER CLASSES WITH BETTER TEACHERS

The President transmitted legislation to Congress today to help communities and school districts
reduce class size to a national average of 18 in grades one to three. This initiative will lead to
smaller classes with well-prepared teachers so that students can master the basics and learn to read
well. President Clinton's initiative will:

       Help Hire an Additional 100,000 Teachers to Reduce Class Size. States will allocate funding
       under this initiative to school districts to pay salaries and benefits for additional teachers to
       reduce class size in the early grades. Up to 90 of the funds allocated to school districts
       would be used for hiring teachers.

       Make Sure These Teachers Are Prepared to Teach Well.            States would be required to
       implement competency testing for new teacher, with each state selecting the tests it
       determines is most appropriate for this purpose. Participating states and school districts
       would also be required to ensure that individuals hired to fill these new positions be
       either fully certified, or making satisfactory progress toward full certification.

       At least 10 of the funds in this· initiative allocated to school districts would be used to
       promote high quality teaching by (1) training teachers in proven practices for teaching
       reading and in effective practices in small classes; (2) providing mentors or other support
       for newly hired teachers; and (3) providing incentives to recruit qualified teachers to
       high poverty schools. States could use a portion of their funds to toughen teacher
       certification requirements, as well as develop more rigorous assessments of subject matter
       expertise and professional knowledge that new teachers would need to pass before getting
       a license.

       Hold Schools Accountable for Results and Help Every Child to Read Well and Independently
       By the End of the Third Grade. School districts receiving these funds would be required
       to show that each school is making measurable. progress in improving reading
       achievement within 3 years, or take necessary corrective actions --such as providing
       additional teacher training, revising the curriculum, or implementing proven practices for
       teaching reading.      School districts could lose funding if there is no subsequent
       improvement in reading achievement in those schools. School districts would also be
       required to publish an annual school report card, providing parents and taxpayers with
       clear information on student achievement, class size, and teacher qualifications.

       Target Funding to Areas of Greatest Need. The President's initiative would distribute
       funds to states on the basis of the Title 1 formula. Within the state, each high-poverty
       school district would receive the same share of these funds as it received under Title 1,
       and the remaining funds would be distributed within the state based on class size;
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

Matching funds would be required from participating school districts, on a sliding scale
ranging from 0-50 , with high-poverty districts contributing the least. Once a state has
reached an average class size of 18 in grades 1-3, it could use these funds to further reduce
class size in the early grades, or it could extend its efforts to other grades.


