RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1998 10:33:52.00

SUBJECT:   POTUS Qs & As for Mayors Event TODAY

TO: Laura Emmett     CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
These are the Qs&As for     POTUS in his session with the Mayors today.================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:      o 00:00:00.00
TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D34)MAIL46771462A.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BA040000010A02010000000205000000CC35000000020000B6EA9CA99F218A33F55492
F10FB722230792B2COF78AA2098472FE1511FF4E887F5A35246236308996F5F952D4197FD8AE68
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion



                          Q's and A's for Meeting with Mayors


Q.   What is the liklihood that Congress will pass your education agenda this year?

A.   They should pass all of it. Wc have laid out a comprehensive agenda to strengthen·
     American public education, and we are working hard to secure its enactment. We need
     to invest in school modernization, smaller classes, better-prepared teachers, higher
     standards, greater accountability and other measures to improve public schools.

     Some key elements of my agenda are slowly working their way through the Congress in.a
     bipartisan fashion--the way we ought to work on education. Earlier this week the Senate
     passed its version of my OJ. Bill for America's Workforce, that will overhaul our job
     training programs. I hope that bill will come to my desk by July I. My America Reads
     proposal has been passed by the House and is awaiting consideration in the Senate. The
     House has also passed a bipartisan charter schools bill--I hope the Senate will take that up
     soon as well. And the House has just passed my High Hopes proposal as part of the
     Higher Education Act, which will help colleges form parternships with middle schools, to
     help provide low income students with mentors other support to spark their interest in
     college, and help them prepare to attend. So, we are making progress in some areas.
                                                                                                        ·
     However, on a number of critical education issues--school modernization, smaller
     classes, reforming urban public schools -- the Congress is either doing nothing or the
     wrong thing. Instead of taking the steps to strengthen our public schools, both the House
     and Senate have recently passed bills that would drain resources from our public schools.
     The Senate rejected proposals that would have instead helped strengthen public schools.

     But the session is not over, and there is still a chance for the Congress to do the right
     things. I'll continue to fight for smaller classes, modem school buildings, after school
     programs, technology for our. schools and other initiatives. I'll need your help to
     convince members of Congress that they should support these initiatives.

Q.   Many mayors believe that the federal government can best support urban education
     reform by providing block grants directly to local communities. This approach
     would provide local communities with the flexibility they need, instead of requiring
     them to follow Washington's dictates. Would you support local block grants?

A.   I am in favor of giving local communities maximum possible flexibility in using federal
     education funds, though I have serious reservations about most of the block grant
     proposals I have seen. Federal education programs must have clear purposes, they must
     target the funds to the communities that need it the most, and there must be accountability
     for results, and any block grant proposal should meet these same tests.
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversiop

     Over the past 5 years, Secretary Riley has overhauled every one of the federal programs
     for elementary and secondary education, making them more flexible, less bureaucratic,
     and more clearly focused on getting results. He has eliminated two-thirds of the
     regulations covering elementary and secondary education programs, and launched two
     major new programs--Goals 2000 and School-to-Work programs, without issuing a single
     new regulation.      We fought to get authority from Congress to waive federal
     requirements where they interfered with local education reforms, and Secretary Riley has
     approved more than 200 waivers so far.          .

     According to a recent GAO study, federal education funds are eight times more likely
     than state funds to target disadvantaged students. Certain block grant proposals--which
     provide funds to states--would most likely result in less targeting of federal funds and
     would therefore be detrimental to many cities.

     Third, federal education programs serve important national purposes, such as providing
     disadvantaged students with extra help to learn the basics, helping schools incorporate
     technology into classrooms, helping communities raise academic standards, or supporting
     the growth of charter schools. These purposes won't be met if we fold all of these
     programs into block grants. And federal funding for education will decline. In 1981, 42
     education programs were block granted into one program.· Today, that block grant
     received half of the funding it did then.


Q.   Many urban school systems are putting in place the right reform strategies, but lack
     the resources necessary to fully or effectively carry them out. How do your
     initiatives target funds to the communities with the greatest needs?

A.   I agree that additional funds can make a difference if they are help support real reforms
     based on higher standards, increased accountablity, and more choice, and I am glad that a
     growing number of cities are moving in this direction. Most of my new initiatives
     specifically target funding to high poverty urban, and rural, school districts, including the
     Education Opportunity Zone proposal, our 21st Century After-School Learning programs,
     the High Hopes initiative that builds college-school partnerships to help low income
     students make their way to college. My proposal to reduce class size in the early grades
     would ensure that low income communities get their fair share of the funds (the same
     proportion as they receive under Title 1), and my school modernization proposal calls for
     half of the bonding authority to go to the poorest urban districts.


Q:   Are we finally going to reform our job training system this year?

     Background   In May 1997, the House passed a bill that incorporates these principles and
     on Tuesday the Senate passed their version of this bill with overwhelming bipartisan
     support. The Administration supports passage of the Senate bill, however, we strongly
     oppose an amendment (offered by Sen. Ashcroft) prohibiting the use of funds available
                                                                          Hex-Dump ConversIon


       under the Act to carry out activities authorized under the School-to-Work Opportunities
       Act.

       In addition, you should know that the Mayors had been concerned about a provision in
       the original version of the Senate bill that would give Governors more control over
       training funds to cities with populations between 200,000 and 500,000. Their concerns
       have been addressed with an amendment (offered by Senator Lautenberg) that would
       permit the Secretary of Labor to continue funding those affected cities which are meeting
       performance standards if the Governor elects to discontinue the training funds.

A:     I am pleased that on Tuesday the Senate passed their version of my G.l. Bill for
       America's Workers with a strong bipartisan vote (91-7). I am pushing to get this bill to
       my desk by July 1 in order to make available $250 million for the Youth Opportunity
       Areas initiative which would greatly benefit America's cities. I want to thank you for
       your support for this critical program to create jobs and opportunity for out-of-school
       youth.

       This new G.l. Bill would also fundamentally reform our employment and training system
       by empowering Americans to gain new skills with a simple skill grant. In addition it
       would consolidate the tangle of training programs; create a network of One-Stop Career
       Centers; increase accountability to ensure results; and empower people to gain the skills
       that are in greatest market demand.

       And, the new G.l. Bill would provide mayors with more local control. The bill would
       allow States and communities to tailor programs to locally determined needs and it
       ensures that business, labor, and community organizations are full partners in system
       design and quality assurance.


Q.     The Junior ROTC program has been a great benefit to our efforts to improve
       education in Chicago. One of the best things the federal government can do is to
       expand this program, so that more units can be established and more students can
       participate. What can you do to help expand J-ROTC?

Background: Mayor Daley made the above point in his opening remarks to the Mayors
yesterday, and we anticipate he will raise it today. While the J-ROTC program has expanded
significantly over the past 6 years, DOD currently has no plans to ask for further expansion in the
number of ROTC units.

A.     The Junior ROTC program fulfills an important role in teaching citizenship, leadership,
       teamwork and self-discipline to students in high schools nationwide.      Since 1992, the
       Junior ROTC program has grown from 1,600 to over 2,500 units. This expansion has
       resulted in an increase in student participation from 200,000 students in 1992 to 380,000
       student in 1997. The funding for the program increased from $80 million in 1991 to
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

$164 million in 1997. In my FY 1999 budget request, I have asked for $167 million to
support the J-ROTC program.
