RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-MAY-1998 18:17:26.00

SUBJECT:   Most Recent Assisted "Suicide Memo

TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Chuck Ruff and Karen Popp have copies of this and they will get comments
to uS.==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D56]MAIL43378582X.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750439F030000010A0201000000020500000025340000000200002BD94B9F04835E4C18B406
4EA16442082C6F9CE9CD42008E164C366EAA10703B81B034E5FCC82220354CAE828E17413A98FE
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

                                           May 8,1998

MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                         Bruce Reed
                              Chuck Ruff

SUBJECT:                      Assisted Suicide Legislation


         The Justice Department has determined that the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
has no authority under the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) to take adverse action against
physicians who assist patients in ending their lives by prescribing controlled substances pursuant
to Oregon's "Death with Dignity Act." The Department conducted its legal analysis in response
to letters sent by Senator Hatch and Congressman Hyde urging the Department, through DEA, to
invoke the CSA against physicians who assist in patient suicide under the Oregon law.

       The Justice Department has completed draft letters to Congressman Hyde and Senator
Hatch explaining its legal conclusions. The letters will not be forwarded to Congress until we
have developed a roll-out strategy, including a position on federal legislation prohibiting
physician-assisted suicide.

        As you will recall, the Catholic Health Association (CHA) has informed us that Hatch
and Hyde are prepared to introduce legislation amending the CSA in the event the Attorney
General concludes that the CSA does not authorize the DEA to pursue physicians who assist
patients in committing suicide. They may even introduce this legislation before receiving the
Department of Justice's opinion letter. In assessing the possible options for responding to
Hatch's and Hyde's likely initiative, we held meetings within the White House and with the
Departments of Justice and Health and Human Services (including the FDA).

        Justice believes that the Administration should not support the Hatch/Hyde proposal.
Justice is concerned with the resource drain on the DEA if that agency were tasked with
enforcement duty. Justice also worries that this new task would damage DEA's relationship
with the medical profession, on which it often relies in pursuing narcotics law violations. In
addition, Justice thinks that DEA's approach to enforcing the narcotics laws is inconsistent with
the kind of sensitivity that would be needed in pursuing doctors who are assisting terminally ill
patients to commit suicide.

        The Justice Department also cites principles of federalism in support of its position
against a legislative change. The federal government has deferred to the states as the primary
regulators of the medical profession. Especially on such a hotly contested issue as assisted
suicide, Justice believes there is good reason to continue this tradition of deference to local
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversiop

decision-making.

        HHSIFDA concurs with Justice's position, stressing especially the historic deference
given to states in regulating their medical professionals. HHSIFDA also worries that a new
federal law authorizing the federal government to take adverse action against doctors who assist
their patients to commit suicide would exacerbate the problem of physicians' under-prescribing
pain medications for terminally ill patients.

        Your longstanding opposition to the practice of assisted suicide is not necessarily
inconsistent with the agencies' positions. You could believe the position that assisted suicide is
wrong, but that it is not a matter that should be handled by federal narcotics agents. Or more
broadly, you could believe that it is not a matter to be dealt with by the federal government at all,
but instead left to state and local decisionmaking. Nor is last year's "Assisted Suicide Funding
Restriction Act" inconsistent with a refusal to support a legislative change. The Funding
Restriction Act bans the use of federal funds to pay for or promote assisted suicide. Nothing in
the Act authorizes the federal government to take adverse action against a private physician for
assisting in a suicide in a non-federal facility.

         We detail below four options for responding to the expected Hyde/Hatch initiative.
These options are: (1) support the Hyde/Hatch legislation; (2) oppose the HydelHatch DEA
approach, but suggest openness to alternatives and work with Hatch and Hyde to develop a better
bill; (3) engage in a "Kick the Can" strategy, suggesting openness to alternatives, but attempting
to ensure that no congressional action is taken; and (4) oppose' the Hyde/Hatch legislation
outright.


1.     Endorse Hyde/Hatch Legislative Alternative. After the Justice Department's legal
       interpretation is released, we could endorse the expected introduction of legislation
       authorizing the DEA to pursue criminal actions against physicians prescribing
       medications for assisted suicides.                             .

       Pros

              Appears consistent with your longstanding opposition to assisted suicide.

              Avoids inevitable conflict with the Congress, where the HatchlHyde legislation is
               likely to be popular..

       Cons

              Conflicts with historic practice of allowing states to regulate the medical
               profession, and does so with regard to a hotly contested and emotional issue on
               which local decisionmaking may be particularly appropriate.


                                                  2
                                                                   .      Hex텱ump Conversion


             Places authority to act against doctors in an agency ill톏quipped to perform this
             function in a way that could interfere with its primary mission.

            Ignores danger, noted by many physicians' groups and even the Catholic Health
             Association, that a federal law of this kind will lead doctors to under-medicate
             terminally ill patients for fear of federal prosecution.


2.    Oppose DEA (likely Hatch/Hyde) approach, but suggest openness to alternatives.
      Under this option, you would welcome the intent of the Republican DEA bill, based on
      your longstanding opposition to assisted suicide, but raise concerns about using federal
      drug agents and resources to address this issue. You would advise Republicans of ways
      to implement the intent of their legislation in a more workable fashion, perhaps .
      suggesting alternative enforcement agencies (such as FDA) or enforcement mechanisms
      (such as reducing Federal support for Medicaid for states permitting assisted suicide).
      You would try seriously to find some common ground with the Republicans on
      developing a workable legislative alternative to DEA enforcement.

      Pros

            Appears consistent with your longstanding opposition to assisted suicide and
             shows that you are seriously concerned about this issue.

             Takes an approach that recognizes the problems with using DEA resources and
             agents to address this issue.

      Cons

     .      Assumes that we can develop a workable alternative approach, when we may not
             be able to do so. Direct regulation of doctors through HHS/FDA also raises
             serious issues, and enforcement mechanisms directed toward states, such as
             reduction of Medicaid dollars, would raise widespread protests of federal
             micro-management and intrusion.

             Raises expectations that a legislative solution can be achieved, when it may be
             virtually impossible to reach consensus.


3.   "Kick the Can" Strategy. Under this option, you would also express openness to
     addressing this issue through federal legislation, but rather than trying to reach agreement,
     you would attempt to forestall legislative action. You would try to delay long enough to
     allow the medical groups, states, and others to communicate that federal approaches in
     this area are ill-advised. These objections could make Congress conclude that it does not


                                               3
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
       have time to draft thoughtful legislation this year.

       Pros

              Allows you to reiterate your strong position against assisted suicide, while
               preventing problematic federal legislation .

               . Provides sufficient time to air the many issues surrounding assisted suicide
                 legislation, perhaps even educating physicians and the public about the problem of
                 under-medicating terminally ill patients

       Cons

               May make us look indecisive and weak.

              May be viewed with skepticism on the Hill and make us vulnerable to the charge
               that we are trying to have it both ways.


4.     Oppose Hatch/Hyde legislation outright. Under this option, you would tell the Hill
       that, although you believe that assisted suicide is an abhorrent practice, you cannot
       support legislation that intrudes on state responsibility over this issue and diverts limited
       law enforcement resources for this purpose.

       Pros

               Takes a strong position consistent with agency views on the undesirability of
               federal legislation in this area; respects federalism principles; protects law
               enforcement priorities; and prevents further under-medication of patients due to
               physicians' fear of criminal prosecution.

       Cons

              Appears inconsistent with your longstanding opposition to assisted suicide.

              Risks major confrontation with the Congress, which almost certainly will pass
               federal legislation over your objection.


        The Departments of Justice and Health and Human Services support Option 4 and
strongly oppose Option 1. Of the middle options, they would prefer Option 3 to Option 2.
Chuck agrees with the agencies: he believes both that the DEA should not regulate medical
practice and that federal legislation in this area conflicts with federalism principles. Bruce


                                                 4
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


    agrees that federaiiegislation in this area makes little sense, but believes that the "Kick the Can"
    strategy may be the best way to prevent it; he therefore recommends Option 3.




                                                     5


