 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-MAY-1998 13:21:38.00

 SUBJECT:   Revised Weekly w/ one more WR item

 TO: Elena Kagan    CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  ==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
. ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00: 00: 00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D79)MAIL414192821.126 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF57504310100000010A02010000000205000000EC4C0000000200007898766933817360341074
 95171B25A6214EDFEECB558140EAF4DDOB11E3CE5B2618D16D7C323A9C51F4DAl183EF65298797
                                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion



                                            May 8,1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report


        Tobacco -- Legislative Update: Although Senator Lott vacillated somewhat in the
press this week, it appears he still intends to bring the McCain bill to the Senate floor on May
18th. We hope to begin talks shortly to develop an agreed upon manager's amendment as well
as an amendment strategy for the floor. We have spent this week in internal meetings preparing
for these negotiations in order to nail down our position and strategy on issues related to price,
lookback penalties, smuggling, an antitrust exemption, preemption of local suits, environmental
tobacco smoke, attorneys fees, and international tobacco control.

        The Commerce Committee released their report this week, along with a revised bill that
incorporated several of our proposed technical corrections. In response to their request for
assistance in restructuring the bill so that it could operate effectively whether or not the industry
consents, we met with Senator McCain's staff and provided them with proposed revisions that
separated out all the provisions requiring the consent of participating manufacturers -- as
well as the benefits they are seeking, such as the liability cap -- into a single stand-alone
title. The other titles would apply to all manufacturers, whether they consent or not, and include
advertising restrictions originally included in the FDA rule but not the broader ones that raise
constitutional difficulties (those would be put in the separate title). McCain's staff appeared
receptive to these changes, and they are considering including them in a manager's amendment.

        We also met with Senator Hatch to assess his interest in these proposed structural
changes, hoping that they could give him a way to leave his mark on the McCain bill
constructively. While he expressed some interest in the proposal, he also reiterated concerns he
raised during the Judiciary Committee hearing on smuggling -- namely, that the McCain bill
would result in increased smuggling and would bankrupt the companies.

        Tobacco -- Scoring: Through staff conversations, OMB has learned that the Joint Tax
Commi ttee is going to score the price per pack increase in the McCain bill at $2, instead of the
$1.1 0 estimated by Treasury. We attribute this difference to Joint Tax's more conservative
assumptions about the amount of industry payments that will be passed through to price,
smuggling and coverage of tobacco products other than cigarettes. We have asked OMB to draft
                                                                             Hex·Dump Conversion


a proposal which would ensure that as the volume of cigarette sales fall due to reduced smoking
rates, the price would not rise accordingly.

        Tobacco -- House Activity: Representatives Hansen, Meehan, and Waxman announced
that they would introduce a bipartisan comprehensive tobacco legislation which would raise the.
price of cigarettes by $1.50 over three years, reduce youth smoking by 80% over 10 years
(compared to 60% in McCain), contain very strong company specific penalties (but no
industry-wide penalties), provide full FDA authority to regulate tobacco under the existing drug
and device titles, and have strong protections against environmental smoke. The proposal would
raise approximately $500 billion over 25 years, with 10% of spending for public health and
education programs, 35% for the states, and 55% for federal debt reduction. The proposal does
not provide any assistance to farmers. Drs. Koop and Kessler endorsed the bill.

         Health Care -- Medicare and Abortion Coverage: Recently, a provider sponsored
organization (PSO), which is a member of the Catholic Health Association (CHA), was
informed by a Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) regional office that it could not
participate in Medicare unless it agreed to provide abortion services for Medicare beneficiaries.
Although a little known fact, Medicare does provide reimbursement for those limited occasions'
when a disabled Medicare beneficiary is pregnant and seeks an abortion. The CHA requested
that we attempt to find an exception for PSOs that object to providing the service on
religious/moral grounds. Senator Nickles is also placing great pressure on HHS to develop a
formal position. He is reportedly drafting legislation that would apply the Hyde Amendment to
Medicare if we conclude that Hyde does not have the statutory reach to apply to Medicare.
(HHS initial review has concluded that Hyde does not apply, but we are having White House
lawyers review this analysis.) Even if Hyde does not apply, we believe we may have found a
way to respond to CHA's request. Specifically, PSOs that have "conscience clause" policies
could be exempt from providing abortion services; beneficiaries in these plans could go to a
physician that billed Medicare directly for the service. Unfortunately, Senator Nickles is not
likely to accept this option, even if CHA does. He clearly sees this as an extremely attractive
election year issue. Ironically, however, since the Hyde amendment has a rape or incest
exception, our approach -- which would not require that these PSOs reimburse for any abortion
-- is more responsive to and consistent with the CHA position. We have a working group from
DPC, Council's office, OMB, and HHS reviewing legal, policy and strategic options. You will
receive an options memo on this issue shortly.

       Health Care -- Genetic Discrimination Update: Senator Jeffords, Chairman of the Senate
Labor and Human Resources Committee, has indicated his intention to produce a bipartisan bill
-- likely with Senator Dodd -- that prohibits insurers from accessing and inappropriately utilizing
genetic coding information. This is consistent with your challenge to Congress to pass
legislation to bar both insurers and employers to use genetic information in a discriminatory
fashion. The Senator's announcement was as surprising as it is welcome; we will be sending


                                                 2
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

Administration witnesses to testify at the Labor Committee's hearing on this subject within the
next two weeks. While it will take work, we believe this Committee activity has every real
chance of making a significant contribution toward passing this bill either as a free standing
measure, as part of a patients bill of rights bill, or as part of a broader medical records/privacy
initiative.

        Child Care -- Democratic Working Group: House Democrats have formed a Child
Care Working Group led by Congressman Fazio and have begun work on a child care bill that
they plan to introduce in the next several weeks. We are meeting with the Members and staff
next week to review their bill, but we expect it to include most of the elements of your proposal
(including subsidies for families, tax credits for families and businesses, quality improvements,
and after-school programs) as well as a tax credit to help parents who stay at home. We will
continue to work with them and use the introduction of the bill to generate new momentum for
child care legislation; however, it seems likely that the group intends to craft a comprehensive
and expensive proposal that will give them an opportunity to champion child care throughout the
Fall rather than a bill that has a chance of passage during this legislative session.

        Child Care -- Kids Count: We participated in a panel discussion and release ofthe
Annie E. Casey Foundation's KIDS COUNT Databook, annual publication tracking the status of
children in the United States. This year, the report highlights the need for safe and affordable
child care, particularly for the 10 million children who grow up in low-income working families,
and concludes that ensuring adequate child care is crucial to the success of welfare reform.

        Welfare   ww   Federal Hiring Initiative: The federal ag'encies continue to make progress on
their commitments to hire welfare recipients. The total number of hires increased by 22 percent
in the past month, from 3,688 in March to 4,494 in April. Treasury hired almost 400 people in
the past month and has already hired more than double its commitment through the year 2000.
DOD hired an additional 200 people in the past month.
             I


        Welfare -- HHS Defines Programs Off Limits to Illegal Aliens: In the next few
weeks, HHS will publish a list of benefits that illegal immigrants may not receive. The welfare
law states that illegal immigrants are not eligible for "federal public benefits," and HHS is now
providing its interpretation of that term. HHS will state that illegal immigrants are not eligible
for child care, low-income heating assistance, and Community Service block grant benefits,
among others. However, HHS believes the law does allow illegal immigrants to remain eligible
for services at community health clinics and for benefits under the Maternal and Child Health
block grant and the Older Americans Act. Republicans such as Rep. Lamar Smith and Gov.
Wilson of California will argue that HHS should have defined the term federal public benefit far
more broadly to include these programs, but we are comfortable with HHS's legal rationale,
HHS feels strongly that community health clinics, which are often the only providers of prenatal
care in poor communities, should remain open to all.



                                                     3
                                                                     Hex.Dump ConvelSlon


        The welfare law also requires that those programs classified as federal public benefits
verify the immigration status of all applicants, including U.S. citizens. The INS will soon issue
a regulation to implement this requirement, and we expect to hear complaints about the burden
this will impose on those programs.

        Crime -- Uniform Crime Report: Next weekend (May 15-17), the FBI will release its
preliminary estimate of the number of crimes reported to law enforcement in 1997. These
figures indicate that crime is down 4% from the previous year -- and down for the 6th year in a
row. A significant decline in the number of murders and robberies (9% each) helped fuel an
overall drop of 5% in violent crime; property crime fell 4%. All regions of the country and
cities of all sizes reported declines in the number of serious crimes.

        Crime -- COPS: On Thursday, the COPS Office announced $32.8 million in funding to
hire 463 additional officers and deputies. The grants will go to 138 law enforcement agencies
nationwide, bringing the total number of officers funded under the COPS Program to over
73,000.

       Crime -- Gun-Free Schools Report: Several weeks ago we sent you information on the
Department of Education's proposed Gun-Free Schools Report for the 1996-97 school year. As
you know, this information was released this Friday, but with several major revisions. Most
notably, the initial data from Colorado included all expulsion and were adjusted significantly
downward (from 1,873 to 475). The final and revised key findings are:

       1) Total expulsions: 6,093 students were expelled during the 1996·97 school year for
       bringing a firearm to school (a rate of .119 per 1,000 students).

       2) Compliance up: 55 states and territories reported data during the 1996-97 school year.
       Only American Samoa did not report.

       3) States with most expulsions: by number, were Ohio (937), California (723), and Texas
       (532); and by rate, Ohio (.449 per 1,000), Missouri (.310 per 1,000) and New Mexico
       (.195 per 1,000).

       4) School level: 58% of expulsions were high school students, 34% were in junior high,
       and 9% were in elementary school.

       5) Type of firearm: where firearm type was identified, 58% involved handguns, 7%
       involved rifles and the remaining 35% involved some other type of firearm (bombs,
       grenades, starter pistols, rockets).

       Drugs -- Republican Plan: Following up on last week's "deployment ceremony," the
Speaker's Task Force for A Drug-Free America declared this week "Drug-Free Schools and
Campuses Week" and highlighted the following items: (I) a House-passed resolution expressing


                                                4
                                                                Automated Records Managef!lent System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

    the sense of the House that Americans must remain committed to combat the sale and use of
    illegal drugs to children; (2) the drug-free student loans provision included in the Higher
    Education bill; and (3) legislation introduced by Representative Mica that authorizes a
    demonstration program for the voluntary drug testing of teens applying for driver's licenses, and
    an incentive grant program to combat drugged driving. As you know, in October of 1996 you
    signed a directive on this issue, and former Transportation Secretary Pena and Director
    McCaffrey jointly recommended the creation of a demonstration program for pre-licensure drug
    testing; however, in the FY 1998 transportation appropriations, Repubiican appropriators barred
    DOT from using its funds such an initiative. Since then, we have been working to identify
    alternative funding within the Justice Department for demonstrations in Arizona and Florida.




                                                    5


