RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-MAY-1998 12:32:25.00

SUBJECT:   Q&A on GAO report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here are the Q&A for the GAO report on imported fruits and vegetables. We
basically rearranged what FDA sent over and recycled questions from
earlier Q&A.  OMB and USTR have signed off on this.   FDA has taken an
initial pass through and said it looks fine, but will get back with final
sign off shortly. Thanks ==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D55]MAIL42723503K.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504318050000010A020100000002050000002D3C000000020000F4099197BDBAD8600034FE
6F40787E64D374AE52FE5F80BF1049A7512A1B90759C07A50C764D41D18FD1CDD10FD55453F31A
                                                                                     "lex·Dump Conversion


                        Q&A for GAO Report on Imported Foods
                                   May 11, 1998

Q:   What are the GAO's major findings regarding imported foods?

A:   The GAO affirmed the Clinton Administration's conclusions that greater attention should
     be paid to the safety of imported foods. In particular, the report states that "[i]n order to
     strengthen FDA's ability to ensure the safety of imported foods, GAO recommends that
     the Congress require food eligible for import to the United States, not just meat and
     poultry, be produced under equivalent food safety systems." The Administration
     submitted legislation to Congress earlier this year which addresses this concern. The
     major conclusion that FDA needs additional authority is consistent with the
     Administration's position about how to strengthen protection against unsafe foods
     imported into the United States.

Q:   Are there some findings and recommendations in the GAO report that FDA
     disagrees with?

A:   Only relativelyminor points. For example, the report notes that each year FDA plans to
     conduct a certain number of import inspections yet falls short of those plans. The
     "workplan" is merely a way oftargeting resources, not a mandatory exercise whose
     failure to carry out to the letter will result in a threat to the public health. FDA does not
     expect to carry out 100 percent of the plan, as emergencies arise that pull staff off of
     routine duties.

Q:   The report also notes that some importers illegally distribute imported foods into
     U.S. commerce and that FDA does not have adequate deterrent power to prevent
     those imports. Does the Administration agree with GAO's recommendation that
     Congress give FDA civil money penalty authority for these violations?

A:   Yes, FDA agrees with the recommendation that civil monetary penalties would be an
     effective tool.

Q:   What does the Administration's legislation do?

A:   This legislation gives FDA the authority to refuse imports of any food regulated by the
     FDA, including fruits and vegetables, from any country or facility that does not meet U.S.
     food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. The
     legislation also permits FDA to consider refusal of inspection as a factor in halting
     imports from a facility or country.

Q:   Is Congress moving to enact the legislation that the Administration has submitted to


                                               1
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
     give FDA greater authority over food imports?

A:   No hearings have been scheduled, and this issue does not appear to be on the
     Congressional agenda for this year.

Q:   Why did your Administration propose new legislation?

A:   There have been dramatic changes in the produce department of the grocery store. Thirty
     years ago, most produce sections only had around a dozen items year round, increasing to
     as many as 50 in the summer. Today, the chances are that there are 400 or more items in
     the produce section and they are there all year round. Last year, 38 percent of the fruit
     and 12 percent of the vegetables Americans ate were imported.

     We have changed as well. Americans are eating more fresh fruits and vegetables than
     ever before, and our nation's health experts tell us we will live longer, better quality lives
     as a result. Our environment is also changing. We are finding "new" exotic bugs such
     as cyclospora and E. coli 0157:H7 on our food that once were not there.

     We must ensure that these changes do not increase the risk to American consumers of
     foodborne illnesses. Although raw produce -- including that imported from foreign
     countries -- is now safe, experts have suggested ways to make further improvements, and
     my actions accord with their recommendations.

Q:   Are you saying that imported produce is unsafe?

A:   There is no data indicating that imported fruits and vegetables are more unsafe than
     domestic products. But some recent outbreaks of foodborne illness have been traced
     back to imports, and it is important to ensure that foreign fruits and vegetables meet U.S.
     food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. The steps
     we are taking today are adding additional layers of protection. We am making sure that
     there are no gaps in our food safety system -- that high safety standards apply to imported
     as well as domestic food, and to fruits and vegetables as well as to meat, poultry, and
     seafood.

Q:   What steps is the Administration taking to improve food safety?

A:   Last year we launched a new Presidential food safety initiative, and added more than $40
     million to the FY '98 budget. With that money we started putting in place new
     science-based preventive systems to improve the safety of seafood, meat and poultry and
     began work on a new early warning system to help detect and respond to outbreaks of
     foodborne illness .. This year, our budget seeks an even more substantial increase in
     resources, $101 million, to improve food safety. The resources will go to a variety of
     initiatives, including: giving FDA authority to prevent the import of produce from


                                               2
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


     countries without safety precautions equivalent to our own; hiring FDA inspectors to
     improve the safety of our nation's fruits and vegetables, both domestic and imported;
     developing new ways for federal inspectors to detect food-borne illnesses in meat and
     poultry and determine the source of contamination; improving educational outreach on
     proper food handling; and further expanding our early warning system and strengthening
     state surveillance activities for foodborne illnesses.


     Questions on Food Safety Legislation

Q:   What does the legislation do?

A:   This legislation helps ensure that the FDA will refuse imports of any food regulated by
     the FDA, including fruits and vegetables, from any country or facility that does not meet
     U.S. food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. The
     legislation also permits FDA to consider refusal of inspection as a factor in halting
     imports from a facility or country.

Q:   How is this different from current authority?

A:   This legislation increases the FDA's authority to refuse imports for foods from countries
     or facilities that do not meet U.S. food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level
     of protection required. Currently, the FDA can only refuse imports after inspection or
     testing at the border when the FDA determines that the food appears to be unsafe or
     otherwise violates U.S. law. This new legislation will enable the FDA to ensure that
     food products entering this country were grown and processed in conditions that meet
     U.S. food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. This
     authority is necessary because experience has shown that inspection and testing of
     products at the border may not be sufficient in all cases to ensure the safety of food
     products. It may be necessary to identify and address the source of potential
     contamination to ensure that products offered for sale in the United States meet domestic
     food safety requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required. FDA
     currently has such authority with respect to domestic production.

Q:   Does this legislation give FDA additional authority to inspect in other countries?

A:   No. Foreign inspections will continue to be done by consent. In making the
     determination that a food offered for import into the U.S. is adulterated, the legislation
     does permit the Secretary to consider whether FDA has been refused access to conduct
     inspection of the places where. such food has been prepared, packed or held. The
     Secretary may deny importation to foods from such location or establishment on the basis
     of such refusal and other. relevant factors. Because c:ienying reasonable access is one .
     factor in making that determination, the exporting country and the food establishment


                                              3
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
     both have a strong incentive to allow such access.


Q:   There is concern that this legislation is the first step in providing FDA with the
     authority to inspect farms in the U.S. Is that next?

A:   Under current law, FDA already has authority to inspect establismnents where food is
     prepared, packed, or held, which would include places where food is grown, such as
     domestic farms. While such inspections are infrequent, FDA has taken action against a
     U.s. farmer when a violation occurs. When FDA is involved in a food safety problem
     that is found to originate on a farm, the agency's focus generally is on identifying the
     source of the problem and removing the unsafe food from commerce.

Q.   Doesn't this legislation impose trade barriers to food imports at a time when you are
     saying you want to lower them? Is this legislation consistent with free trade?

A.   This legislation is consistent with free trade and all our treaty obligations. We have no
     obligation to open our borders to imports that pose a greater risk than domestic products
     to American consumers. As long as we are not imposing any greater requirements on
     foreign countries -- as long as we are only holding them to our standards -- we are acting
     consistently with our trade policy and international obligations.

Q:   What makes you think this new legislation can be effective? Do you seriously think
     you are going to be able to put FDA inspectors in every country abroad?

A:   The new legislation would give the FDA the same kind of responsibility that the USDA
     already has for meat and poultry. The USDA system has worked well to ensure that
     unsafe meat and poultry, produced in fOreign facilities which do not provide the same
     level of protection that is required in domestic facilities, will not be imported. The FDA
     should be able to run a similarly effective system that ensures food safety and prevents
     imports from any foreign country or facility that does not meet U.S. food safety
     requirements or otherwise achieve the level of protection required.




                                              4


