RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:15-MAY-1998 12:21:45.00

SUBJECT:   Complete Weekly 5/15

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  Nothing from education, child care, race, or policy   planning'r=====~=============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D48]MAIL449126435.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043620F0000010A02010000000205000000443D00000002000039290F1D4E13E69C04EA17
29A44F948ED43B11E340F771ACAD8706E4F8D3407A5CDE89BE63EOCB5B8383A45732815D236C75
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion




                                          May 15, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report


       Tobacco -- Legislative Update: On Monday, the Senate will begin consideration of the
McCain bill. We have spent this week negotiating with Senators McCain and Hollings to
develop an agreed upon manager's amendment as well as an amendment strategy for the floor.

        On Thursday, the Finance Committee marked up those sections of the McCain bill that
are within its jurisdiction. The Committee adopted a Conrad amendment raising the per pack
price from $1.10 to $1.50, adopted a Nickels amendment to remove the child care authorization
language, and struck language from the Committee mark which would have devoted revenues
raised under the bill to health care related tax relief.

        Tobacco -- Scoring: On Thursday, the Joint Committee on Taxation released their
score of the McCain bill, estimating a per pack price increase of $1.89 in 2003 (adjusted for
inflation), instead of $1.1 0 estimated by Treasury (in 1998 dollars). The Joint Tax estimate,
however, is only $1.69 when viewed in tenns of 1998 dollars. The differences in our analysis
and Joint Tax's are attributable to a number of technical assumptions based on the expected
volume of tobacco product sales. We assume that wholesalers and retailers will not add an
additional markup to the $1.1 0 price increase, that states will not add new tobacco taxes (due to
the large payments they will receive under the legislation), and that smuggling will be minimized
through a system based on the current successful model for alcohol.

         Tobacco -- House Activity: On Thursday, Representatives Hansen, Meehan, and
Waxman introduced bipartisan comprehensive tobacco legislation which would raise the price of
cigarettes by $1.50 over three years, reduce youth smoking by 80% over 10 years (compared to
60% in McCain), contain very strong company specific penalties (but no industry-wide
penalties), provide full FDA authority to regulate tobacco under the existing drug and device
titles, and include strong protections against environmental smoke. The proposal would raise
approximately $500 billion over 25 years, with 10% of spending for public health and education
programs, 35% for the states, and 55% for federal debt reduction. The proposal does not
provide any assistance to fanners. The bill had 90 original cosponsors. 11 were
Republican.


                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dwnp Conversion
mark up ofthe tobacco legislation, Senator D' Amato's mastectomy amendment passed by a
narrow 11 to 9 vote. This legislation requires health plans to allow women to stay in the
hospital as long as is medically necessary following a mastectomy, to cover breast reconstruction,
and to guarantee women a second opinion on breast cancer. It did not pass by an overwhelming
vote for a number of reasons. Some felt that tobacco legislation was an inappropriate vehicle for
this legislation; some were concerned that this proposal just contains "body part mandates" rather
than broader patient protections, such as assuring access to specialists, emergency care, and an
external appeals process for patients to address grievances. Others argued that the D' Amato
legislation is designed to be a substitute for a more comprehensive patients' bill of rights, such as.
the bill of rights recommended by your quality commission or the DingelllKennedy or Norwood
legislation. While we generally support this legislation, we agree with the Democratic
Leadership that it should be done in the context of the broader set of patient protections that you
have been advocating. We do believe, however, that this issue will resonate with both the
disability and the women's community. Therefore, we are tentatively scheduling an event with
you to underscore the importance of the patients' bill of rights to women and to unveil some type
of report that underscores the need legislation.

        Health Care -- Health Care Tax Deductions: The Senate Finance Committee also
voted to reject Senator Roth's proposal to dedicate a portion of the tobacco revenues to offset the
cost of two health care tax deductions -- a faster phase-in of the self-employed tax deduction
($5.5 billion over five years) and a deduction for those who buy in the individual health
insurance market (about $12 billion over five years). The rationale for the Committee's decision
to reject these proposals mirrored our stated concerns -- that the proposal was inappropriate in
this context because it would undermine the potential to invest dollars from tobacco legislation in
public health, research, and programs to benefit children. With regard to the proposal to allow
deductibility for individual health insurance market, we underscored that such an approach is
regressive, will not significantly increase the number of insured, could create an incentive for
some employers to drop coverage, and is not advisable, particularly in the absence of broader
reforms in the individual insurance market. Because there remains a real possibility that
Republicans will insist on some type of tax proposal in the tobacco legislation, we have
established a process to r'eview options in this regard.

Elena should we delete this section? It was already briefly discussed in the first tobacco
section.

        Welfare Reform -- Vice President's Coalition Meeting: On May 19th the Vice President will
hold the third meeting of the Welfare to Work Coalition to Sustain Success. The Coalition
consists primarily of non-profit and faith-based organizations who are involved in helping
welfare recipients succeed on the job through mentoring and other supports. This meeting will
focus on connecting small businesses with the community-based organizations who can help
them retain welfare recipients. The VP and SBA Administrator will facilitate a town-hall
meeting in the OEOB, with 14 satellite sites around the country hosted by the SBA regional
administrators and other federal partners. The panel will also include two Coalition                       ·


                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
(possibly one of SBA's Welfare to Work award winners to be recognized as part of SmaU
Business Week that begins on May 31st), and a former welfare recipient on the panel.
Participants at each site will include representatives from small businesses,
community-based organizations, and public agencies.

         Welfare -- New Database Beginning to Find Parents Who Owe Child Support: Since
it became operational in last October, the National Directory of New Hires, established by the
welfare reform law, has identified 900,000 parents who owe child support. The database has
information on new hires, as well as wage and unemployment insurance data for all workers. In
all of the cases identified through the new database, states were unable to find the absent parent
using in-state data alone. Once these parents are found, states then follow up by using wage
withholding to begin to collect the overdue payments. Database operations will greatly improve
after October 1998, when HHS will have in place a national registry of child support orders, and
will no longer have to rely on states to request information on individual child support orders.

        Note: It would be good to get this item in this week, because HHS is testifying on the
database before Shaw on Tuesday. (It's expected to be a friendly hearing.) HHS was planning
to announce the 900,000 number below at the hearing, but they'll hold it ifwe want them to do
s.D. Possible opportunities to announce the number are the signing statement for the child
support felony bill or, if we hold off longer, a signing statement/ceremony for the child support
incentives bill. (Maybe the number will be over 1 million by then.) Note: USA had a story on
this number on April 24, but the number reported then was 700,000 matches. This is more up to
date.

        Crime -- Police Week: This week is Police Week, dedicated to honoring law
enforcement officers around the country. On Wednesday night, the Attorney General
participated in the annual candlelight vigil held on the Mall; on Friday, the Vice President will
speak at the Peace Officers' Memorial to commemorate officers slain in the line of duty. In
1997, 159 law enforcement officers were killed in the line of duty. This represents an increase
of almost 40% from the number killed in 1996 (116). By the end of the week, we expect
Congress to pass two bills that are strongly supported by law enforcement and the
Administration. One establishes a grant program to help local law enforcement agencies purchase
bulletproof vests for their officers; the other helps fund counseling services for dependents of
slain officers.

         Crime -- Law Enforcement Technology: Next Tuesday, the Vice President will
announce a partnership between the Departments of Energy, Justice, and Treasury to provide for
the transfer of key technologies from the National Laboratories to federal, state and local law
enforcement to be used to fight crime, drugs, and terrorism. Examples of these technologies,
which will be on display in the Indian Treaty Room, include: a miniaturized gas chromatograph
-- the size of a calculator -- which can analyze forensic evidence at the crime scene; and the
"team leader" multimedia system, which enables law enforcement to simultaneously collect and


                                                3
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Helt-Dump Conversion



    transfer crime scene data as well as communicate with other team members and their command
    post.

            Crime -- Missing Children: Next Thursday, the Justice Department will release a
    guide developed to give family members the information and tools they need to work with law
    enforcement to find their missing child. The guide was written by parents who have
    experienced the trauma of a missing child (including Patty Wetterling and Colleen Nick), with
    the assistance of law enforcement and youth service professionals. National Missing and
    Exploited Children's Day is May 25.




                                                   4
                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                     . Hex-Dwnp Conversion


