RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 18-MAY-1998 12:22:57.00

SUBJECT:   Re: Cops/Tobacco -- Update

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III   ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/Ou=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
        Here is the paper for today's law enforcement meeting.==================== A
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to c,onvert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D801MAIL48554573Q.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750433FOC0000010A020I0000000205000000494C0000000200000628E7ECEEB2555BB65D45
7E2A6339EF3BC9E48FF12E2B2FF2D446990AAC3A80807CDC8234058C8359C3ABCOC172CC80052F
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conver~""
               CONTROLLING TOBACCO DIVERSION/SMUGGLING UNDER
                    COMPREHENSIVE TOBACCO LEGISLATION

The Administration has a strong interest in ensuring that the enactment of tobacco legislation will
not result in either a domestic black market or the smuggling of tobacco into the United States.
It is essential that comprehensive tobacco legislation contain provisions that will minimize the
diversion and smuggling of tobacco from the legitimate chain of distribution. The Senate
Commerce Committee bill, as improved by Senator McCain's Manager's Amendment, contains
provisions that will ensure that the diversion and smuggling of tobacco can be effectively
controlled and will not defeat the purposes of comprehensive tobacco legislation - protection of
young people from the addictions of smoking.

A "closed" distribution system will effectively control tobacco smuggling.

The creation of a sound regulatory system - one that will "close" the distribution chain for
tobacco products - will ensure that tobacco products flow through legitimate channels and that
any leakages will be effectively policed. An effective system must have the following elements,
all of which are included in the McCain bill:

~       All entities in the distribution chain for tobacco products should be required to obtain a
        license. Manufacturers, importers, wholesalers, exporters and distributors should be
        required to obtain a Federal license. Licensing of retailers can be done at the State level.
         These licenses would be issued based on certain clearly specified criteria and could be
      . revoked or suspended for specified violations. Those conducting business without a
        license would be subject to penalties.

       Licensed entities should only be authorized to sell tobacco products to other licensed
       entities or purchase tobacco products from other licensed entities. The sale or
       distribution to any entity that is unlicensed would be unlawful.

       Effective marking, branding and identification of packages of tobacco products intended
       for domestic distribution and for export should be required so that they may not be
       diverted or smuggled in circumvention of the legitimate channels of distribution.

       Record keeping requirements that will create an audit trail for distribution of tobacco
       products should be required.

       Any regulatory system should include penalty and administrative provisions that will
       deter would-be smugglers and will allow for effective, efficient and uniform enforcement
       of controls over distribution.

The fear of potential unlawful trafficking in tobacco products should not be a reason for failing to
act on these issues because there are workable solutions. These solutions have been
incorporated in the McCain legislation.
                                                 -2-
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


The regulatory system in the Commerce Committee bill parallels the system in place (or
alcohol

The proposed licensing scheme for tobacco products is similar to the way the Federal
Government has effectively regulated alcoholic beverages for over sixty years. It would
incorporate the years of experience the Federal Government has in administering that system.

~      The distribution chain for alcoholic beverages is a tightly regulated, closed distribution
       system that includes Federal licensing and regulation of producers, importers and
       wholesale distributors and effective State licensing and regulation (or in some cases
       actual control) of the distribution of alcoholic beverages at the wholesale and retail level.

       The system regulating alcoholic beverages imposes marking and labeling requirements as
       well as record keeping requirements.

       This system has allowed for commerce in alcoholic beverages while effectively curtailing
       illicit trafficking.

The real price of cigarettes is estimated to rise by $1.10 per pack by 2003 under the Commerce
Committee bill

We estimate that the Commerce Committee bill will raise the real price of cigarettes by $1.10 per
pack by 2003. Given our projections of other underlying trends in cigarette. prices, we estimate
that this will result in an ultimate constant dollar price per pack of $3.19 in that year ($3.57 in
2003 dollars).

~      These estimates have been validated by objective experts in this area. Professor Jeffrey
       Harris, an economist at MIT and a physician at the Massachusetts General Hospital, who
                                                                                                 th
       is also one of the nation's leading authorities on tobacco taxation,testified on May 13
       that the real price of cigarettes in 2003 will be $3.38, quite close to our estimate of $3.19.

       Some Wall Street analysts have claimed that the ultimate price per pack arising from this
       legislation could be in the range of$5.00. But these estimates are inappropriate for a
       number of reasons:

       1.      Some analysis assumes that the industry will pay the full
               amount of the youth look-back penalties in 2003, adding
               up to 40-45 cents to the price per pack. But our analysis,
               drawing on the scientific consensus in this area, is that
               the look-back targets will be easily met by 2003 with a
               $1.10 price increase, so that there are likely not to be
               look-back payments over this period.
                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

     2.    Some analysis assumes that firms will immediately pay the
           full amount of the liability cap ($6.5 billion), and that
           this will be passed through to price, adding another
           roughly 40 cents to the price per pack.    But given the
           history of tobacco litigation, there is no reason to think
           that the industry will be subject to this amount of
           judgments. Moreover, there is no reason to think that
           liability costs will be shared by all companies -- and
           thus that they will be passed on to price.    We therefore
           assume that there is no incremental impact on the price
           of cigarettes from the liability cap.

     3.,   Some projections also assume that the annual per-pack cost
           will be subject to a percentage mark-up by retailers and
           wholesalers. This contention is refuted by both expert
           analysis and previous empirical evidence; indeed, these
           mark-ups have actually fallen in the face of recent
           manufacturer price increases.

     4.    Some analysis includes projections about increases in
           State excise taxes, but these exceed historical and recent
           experience by a large margin.

The "Canadian Experience" is not an appropriate predictor of           u.s.
smuggling activity.

Many cite the problems Canada had with unlawful smuggling after it
raised its excise taxes on tobacco products as support for the notion
that the same will happen if comprehensive tobacco legislation
similar to the Commerce Committee bill is enacted in the united
States. There are several reasons 'to believe, however, that the
Canadian experience is not an appropriate predictor of what would
occur if tobacco legislation such as this bill is enacted.

~    First, and most importantly, Canada did not have in place the
     type of effective licensing and enforcement regime that is
     contained in the Commerce Committee bill.   This was borne out
     by testimony from David Sweanor, Senior Legal Counsel for the
     Smoking and Health Action Foundation in Canada, who stated
     before the Senate Judiciary Committee on April 30 th that" [tlhe
     Canadian government appeared unable or unwilling to tackle the
     sources of the criminal trade.   Our government did not take
     on the tobacco industry over its ultimate supplying of product
     to the smugglers, and failed to implement effective
     anti-smuggling measures." For example:
                                                  Hex-Dwnp Conversion
     1.   Canada did not mark its cigarette packaging with "FOR
          EXPORT ONLY" labels until after smuggling became a
          significant problem.

     2.   Canadian law enforcement had very few personnel devoted
          to tax evasion.

     3.   The vast majority of enforcement with respect to Canadian
          taxes was done at the provincial level and there was little
          or no coordinated enforcement effort at the national or
          inter-provincial levels.

     4.   With the exception of manufacturers, Canada does not
          license the distribution chain for tobacco products.

Finally, Canada's laws on tax evasion did not contain strong penal ties
and there were inadequate resources to enforce those laws.

~    Second, the size of the Canadian population, as well as its
     concentration along the border with the United States, makes
     the Canadian example not particularly instructive for the United
     States.

     1.   Smuggling became a problem in Canada because of the ease
          of access to alternative markets.  Eighty percent of the
          Canadian population lives within a two-hour drive of the
          U.S. border, placing it within easy reach of smugglers
          transporting cigarettes from the United States.

     2.   The U. S. population is more dispersed, making the logistics
          of a nationwide black market in smuggled cigarettes more
          complex and expensive for organized smugglers.       The
          dispersal of population also means that a U.S. resident
          is less likely than a Canadian resident to be able to cross
          the border routinely for casual cigarette smuggling.

Current laws are not adequate to prevent interstate diversion or
smuggling.

The current level of tobacco smuggling is not a good indicator for
determining the level of smuggling that will take place if the
Commerce Committee bill is enacted.

~    The distribution chain for tobacco products is currently not
     "closed." Current Federal laws regulating tobacco are aimed
     at collecting the Federal excise tax and assisting States in
     their efforts to collect excise taxes imposed on certain tobacco
                                 -5-           Hex-Dump Conversi0n


     products, not at regulating the distribution of tobacco products
     and preventing smuggling.

     The Commerce Committee bill would enhance the Treasury
     Department's ability to assist State and local law enforcement
     to control the unlawful trafficking in tobacco products to avoid
     State tobacco taxes. The bill would broaden the scope of the
     Contraband Cigarette Trafficking Act (CCTA) to all tobacco
    .products, lower the threshold amount for federal jurisdiction
     from 60,000 cigarettes to 30,000 cigarettes, eliminate the
     current loophole relating to states that do not require indicia
     of tax payment, and expand the forfeiture provisions of the
     CCTA so that proceeds traceable to violations will be subject
     to seizure and forfeiture.

     Also, the Federal Government has the expertise and experience
     to deal wi th imported contraband products and already has made
     a substantial investment in the introduction of non-intrusive
     inspection systems and other equipment needed to detect the
     smuggling of contraband.    The organic nature of tobacco and
     the distinctive shape ·of cigarettes makes them readily
     detectable by equipment that the Federal Government currently
     has in place at the border.

Sufficient resources are   necessa~    to prevent smuggling.

The Administration agrees that there must be sufficient resources
available to assist law enforcement to prevent the diversion and.
smuggling of tobacco products to a black market.    Effective and
efficient regulation of the distribution chain for tobacco products
will require adequate resources to ensure compliance through
verification.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 077 - FOLDER -002


[05/18/1998 - 05/19/1998]


