RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Barry J. Toiv ( CN=Barry J. Toiv/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TlME:19-MAY-1998 13:53:59.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
San Francisco's forest of tobacco billboards will
                 come down by June 1, after an agreement
                 yesterday between the city and two outdoor
                 advertisers who own virtually all the signs.

                 Outdoor Systems Advertising and Eller Media Co.,
                 both with headquarters in Phoenix, Ariz., said they
                 will eliminate the advertising six weeks before a
                 tough new city ordinance banning most of them
                 takes effect.

                 "We will get them down within two weeks,"   said
                 Stephen Shinn, a spokesman for Outdoor Systems'
                 Northern California office in Berkeley.

                 Both companies said that by July 1 they will also
                 comply fully with state law that since the beginning
                 of the year has forbidden tobacco billboards within
                 1,000 feet of a school or playground anywhere in
                 California.

                 "This is remarkable. I've got to give them credit for
                 doing the right thing,"  said San Francisco
                 Supervisor Gavin Newsom, author of the city
                 ordinance he called "the most restrictive in the
                 nation. '  I




                 A Chronicle story in March revealed that the state
                 law was being widely flouted throughout California.

                Yesterday's agreement includes all tobacco
                advertising displayed by the two companies on
                billboards, bus shelters and BART and Muni stops
                in San Francisco.

                When the signs are replaced, the city will be the


               first major metropolis in America to be cleared of
               tobacco billboards. Cigarette billboards are not
               permitted in Salt Lake City, but they never gained a
               toehold there among its largely nonsmoking
               Mormon population.

               "This is a huge step forward for public health,"      said
               San Francisco City Attorney Louise Renne, who
               brokered the agreement along with Newsom.

               The advertisers' decision goes beyond the
               requirements of the city ordinance, which allows
               some tobacco signs along the Highway 101
               corridor after the rules take effect on July 16.

               But George Broder, a spokesman for the Oakland
               offices of Eller Media, said his company decided
               not to find the few spots where the biilboards could
               still be posted.

               "We were not going to get into hair-splitting
               subjectivity, such as where's the center of the
               property line, what's a playground, what is not,"
               said Broder. "There will be no more tobacco
               advertising on billboards in San Francisco.' ,

               Broder said that the company believes that the
               tobacco billboard restrictions could be vulnerable
               to a challenge under the First Amendment's
               guarantee of free speech. However, neither Eller
               nor Outdoor Systems plans to make a case of it,
               but such a challenge might still be mounted by the
               tobacco companies.

               The San Francisco ordinance that takes effect in
               July also bans tobacco advertising in store
               windows. However, taxicabs are exempt and will
               still be able to carry the ads their roofs. Neither
               Eller nor Outdoor Systems owns any taxicab signs.

               Civic leaders praised the billboard companies
               yesterday, but critics are miffed that the state
               billboard law is being ignored for at least one more
               month.

               "I'm a little uncomfortable patting people on the
               back for complying with a law that came into being
               six months ago, " said Dan Reeves, chief of staff for
               Assemblywoman Carole Migden, D-San
               Francisco, author of the state law.

               Reeves stressed, however, that the decision to
               comply with state law was an important milestone
               in the battle against tobacco use.

               Broder said that although the billboard companies
               were aware of the state law, they were waiting for
               the state to clear up ambiguities such as defining a
               playground -- does that mean any city park, or only
               the areas with outdoor swings and other play


                equipment?

                After the Chronicle story, the state health
                department held two informational meetings with
                billboard operators. The state acknowledged that it
                had neither the manpower nor the resources to
                enforce the restrictions, but intended to do so July
                1.

                Michael Green, executive director of the San
                Francisco-based Center for Environmental Health,
                said complying with state law in July isn't enough.
                "They should have done it six months ago,"   he
                said.

                Green's organization filed suit March 23 against the
                two companies in an attempt to force compliance.
                He said it would be appropriate restitution to have
                the companies run anti-smoking billboards in the
                same locations.

                At any rate, the decision was good news for a small
                band of saboteurs who had vandalized tobacco
                advertisements within the zone forbidden by state
                law. "Cool,"   said James Reid, a 48-year-old
                building contractor who was arrested last month for
                defacing a Lucky Strike billboard.


