RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD l    )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-MAY-1998 11:48:07.00

SUBJECT:   Gorton amendment

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here are some talking points on why we oppose the Gorton amendment (which
is still in the McCain bill) and also a letter that either the President
or Interior can send out. Could you please review? Interior has been
calling saying that we should send a letter. Also Lynn Cutler has been
getting calls from various tribes.  ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D18)MAIL46387483Z.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504370040000010A02010000000205000000DF1000000002000088FE199AD845D4EEB2B2D6
C352859BA8DAFE3FD5896E4E34B68AFOD6EBD08659D67B9FB85013llC63B02BCF7EOOA7D02CA5A
DRAFT                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

                              THE GORTON AMENDMENT

Q:      What does the Gorton Amendment do?

A:   The Gorton Amendment modifies Section 604 of the McCain bill to require Indian tribes
     and tribal corporations to collect state taxes on sales of tobacco products to non-members
     of the tribe or corporation and then remit those taxes to the federal government, which
     then must return those funds to the states.

Q:      Can the states tax sales of tobacco products on Indian lands?

A:   Since the formation of the Union, the United State has recognized Indian tribes as
     "domestic dependent nations" that exercise governmental authority over their members
     and their territory. The Constitution vests the federal government with authority over
     relations with Indian tribes. Because Indian tribes and Indians are governed by tribal and
     federal law, states have no authority to tax Indian tribes, Indians, or Indian property on
     indian lands in the absence of express congressional authorization. States may tax
     non-Indians who buy pre-packaged goods that have been brought onto Indian lands for
     resale, but may not tax sales to non-Indians when the value of the goods are generated on
     the reservation ..

Q:      How does the Gorton Amendment interfere with tribal sovereignty?

A:   Where Indians manufacture tobacco products on their own lands, state taxes on
     reservation-generated tobacco products would normally be pre-empted under the tribal
     self-determination doctrine; the Gorton Amendment interferes with this fundamental
     principle. Even with respect to state taxes collected on sales of pre-packaged goods to
     non-Indians, the Gorton Amendment violates traditional principles of comity and
     fcderalism, which demand that state-tribal relations be developed based on dialogue and
     cooperation between states and tribes. The Gorton Amendment, by imposing a federally
     mandated tax collection scheme to replace the cooperative agreements currently used by
     states and Indian tribes, violates these principles. Some of these state-tribal agreements
     are authorized pursuant to state statute.

Q:      Why is the Gorton Amendment burdensome?

A:   The Gorton amendment establishes a complex scheme to address a problem that states
     and Indian tribes have already resolved. Dual tribal and state taxation of prepackaged
     goods sold to non-Indians is possible, but many states have agreed that it is not
     preferable. To that end, eighteen states have entered into state-tribal tax agreement with
     numerous Indian tribes. These agreements ensure that a single tax is imposed, provide a
     stable tax framework, and ease tax administration significantly. There appear to be over

                                              1
DRAFT
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
        200 existing state-tribal tax agreements in these 18 states.

     By unilaterally requiring Indian tribes to collect the state taxes and also adding the federal
     government as an intermediary, the Gorton Amendment enormously increases the burden
     of collecting taxes, without any benefit to the states or the Indian tribes. Federal
     accounting, oversight, and administrative costs will increase to implement this new
     legislative scheme. However, nothing more than anecdotal evidence has been presented
     to support this overreaching legislative mandate.

Q:      Has the administration taken this position previously?

A:   Yes, most recently before the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs in a hearing on tribal
     sovereign immunity on March 11, 1998. In the administration's view, agreements are the
     best mechanisms for mutually satisfactory resolution of tax collection issues between
     states and tribes. Even if states and tribes are unable to reach agreement, however, states
     may impose their taxes at the wholesale level to collect taxes on goods that are destined
     for sale to non-Indians. Moreover, reliance on agreements preserves tribal governmental
     authority and sovereignty.

Q:      What should the McCain bill do about Indian tribes and state taxes?

A:   As originally drafted, the McCain bill did not disturb the current system, which has
     worked for both the tribes and the states. It permitted the states and the tribes to work
     together to collect the state's revenues and to share revenues if they so desire. Moreover,
     it vindicated the federal government's trust responsibility to Indian tribes and recognized
     their status as domestic dependent nations.




                                                  2
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion



                                            May 18, 1998


Dear Senator McCain,

        I support your efforts in helping to pass comprehensive tobacco legislation which
dramatically reduces youth smoking and to remove Section 604 which requires Indian tribes to
collect state taxes on sales of tobacco products.

         Since the formation of the Union, the United State has recognized Indian tribes as
"domestic dependent nations" that exercise governmental authority over their members and their
territory. Where Indians manufacture tobacco products on their own lands, state taxes on
reservation-generated tobacco products would normally be pre-empted under the tribal
self-determination doctrine; Section 604, as currently drafted, interferes with this fundamental
principle. Even with respect to state taxes collected on sales of pre-packaged goods to
non-Indians, Section 604 violates traditional principles of comity and federalism, which demand
that state-tribal relations be developed based on dialogue and cooperation between states and
tribes.

          Section 604 establishes a complex scheme to address a problem that many states and
  Indian tribes,have already resolved. At least eighteen states have entered into state-tribal tax
  agreement with numerous Indian tribes. These agreements ensure that a single tax is imposed,
  provide a stable tax framework, and ease tax administration significantly. By unilaterally
. requiring Indian tribes to collect the state taxes and also adding the federal government as an
  intermediary, Section 604 enormously increases the burden of collecting taxes, without any
  benefit to the states or the Indian tribes. Federal accounting, oversight, and administrative costs
  will increase to implement this new legislative scheme.

        Agreements are the best mechanisms for mutually satisfactory resolution of tax collection
issues between states and tribes. Even if states and tribes are unable to reach agreement,
however, states may impose their taxes at the wholesale level to collect taxes on goods that are
destined for sale to non-Indians.

        As originally drafted, the McCain bill did not disturb the current system, which has
worked for both the tribes and the states. It permitted the states and the tribes to work together
to collect the state's revenues and to share revenues if they so desire. Moreover, it vindicated the
federal government's trust responsibility to Indian tribes and recognized their status as domestic
dependent nations.

        I hope that you will continue to work to remove Section 604, as currently drafted, from
the legislation. Thank you for your important work in this area.
Sincerely,   Hex-Dump Conversion


