 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-MAY-1998 11:23:00.00

 SUBJECT:   5/22 Complete Weekly Report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP· [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D67)MAIL49806414W.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D60F0000010A02010000000205000000E64E000000020000E2C965DDB0182DF1A21888
D75C703D5AA2BFF9CA34928ABF82600D6D4C95904342841608CF3FOD774364F50CD5FAB72F67B4
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


                                          May 22,1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report


       Tobacco -- Senate Update: On Monday, the Senate began consideration of the
McCain bill. Members filed approximately 100 amendments and debate has proceeded at a
slow pace. The following amendments were considered:

·      Faircloth amendment to impose a $250 per hour cap on attorney fees. Rejected.
·      Kennedy amendment to increase the price to $1.50 per pack phased in over three years.
       Rejected: 58-40.
·      Ashcroft amendment to strike the $1.1 0 per pack price increase. Rejected: 72-26.
·      Gregg-Leahy amendment to remove the $8 billion liability cap and other liability
       protections. Adopted 61-37.
·      Gramm to eliminate the tax code's marriage penalty.
·      Durbin amendment to increase the company-specific penalty and reduce the industry
       wide-penalty.
·      Amendment to strike Senator Ford's LEAF Act (and keep the Lugar farm provisions.)

        Given the slow speed at which they are proceeding, it is currently unclear whether the
Senate can wrap the bill up before the Memorial Day recess, or whether debate will continue
after they reconvene in June. [THIS IS SUMMARY AS OF 4:00PM THURS; WILL NEED TO
BE UPDATED.]

         Tobacco -- MMWR Study: The Centers for Disease Control released on Thursday new
statistics on teenage smoking patterns and addiction. The data found that: (1) teenagers find it
difficult to quit smoking -- 86 percent of teens who smoke daily and try to quit are unsuccessful;
(2) teenagers underestimate the addictiveness of nicotine -- 75 percent of teenage daily smokers
who expect to quit are still smoking five years later; (3) casual smokers become hooked -- 42
percent of young people who smoke as few as three cigarettes per month go on to become regular
smokers. Currently, 36.4 percent of high school students smoke.

       Immigration -- H-IB visas: Last Wednesday, the House Judiciary Committee approved
by a vote of23-4 a bill, authored by Rep. Lamar Smith, increasing the cap on H-IB visas while
making substantial reforms to protect qualified U.S. workers from being displaced or passed over
 contain a training component. Prior to the mark-up, Secretaries Daley and Herman and the
 Attorney General senta letter to Chairman Hyde indicating that the Administration would
 support the bill if it were modified to include a meaningful training provision and a more modest
 increase in the cap.

       Last week, the Senate passed a similar bill that temporarily increases the cap and
authorizes money for increased training through Title IV of the JTPA, but does not include any
meaningful reform of the H-IB program. OMB sent a Statement of Administration Position
(SAP) that related if the final bill did not include meaningful reform of the H-IB program, the
Secretary of Labor would recommend a veto.

         Immigration -- INS Reform: Last Wednesday, Rep. Rogers introduced an INS
restructuring bill that generally tracks the recommendations of the United States Commission on
Immigration Reform. The bill was referred to the Judiciary Committee. INS has prepared draft
legislation that would implement our restructuring plan, which we plan to have introduced soon
after the Memorial Day break (possibly by Rep. Watt or Sen. Kennedy). Sen. Abraham has
announced his intention to hold hearings starting in June on INS restructuring, though he has.
stated it is unlikely that a restructuring plan would be in place by the end of this Congress.

        Crime -- COPS Event: Next Friday, we have an event tentatively scheduled to: 1)
celebrate the milestone of the 75,000th cop funded under your COPS initiative; and 2) launch a
new pilot project to target COPS funding toward distressed neighborhoods. The first phase of
the pilot will fund more than 500 officers; the COPS office is currently finalizing the list of
participating cities which they expect will include 10 large and 10 small cities across the country.

        Crime -- Police bills: Last Friday, the Congress passed two bills strongly supported by
law enforcement and the Administration. One bill creates a grant program to help local law
enforcement agencies purchase additional bulletproof vests; the other helps fund counseling
services for dependents of slain officers. We are working with Rahm Emanuel and Legislative
Affairs to schedule a signing ceremony for these bills as part ofthe COPS event, or at some later
date.

         Drunk Driving -- .08 BAC: Last weekend, conferees to the highway bill agreed to
  include a new $500 million incentive grant program for states with .08 BAC laws instead of
. imposing sanctions on states that fail to pass .08 laws. MADD and others such as Senator
  Lautenberg and Representative Lowey were extremely disappointed with the outcome on the .08
  issue. Conferees and committee staff are pushing hard to complete their work to allow the
  Congress to vote on the final bill prior to the Memorial Day recess.

       Health Care -- Patients' Bill of Rights Update: There were reports this week that
Speaker Gingrich is trying to stop any patients' bill of rights legislation from moving this
year by stalling and diluting the efforts of his Republican task force led by Rep. Hastert.


                                                 2
DingeU about a possible discharge petition to bypass the House Republican Task Force and
the Committees of Jurisdiction. We are extremely encouraged by these discussions and
are pursuing this and other strategies to move this legislation. To increase momentum on
this issue, you are scheduled to participate in an event next week to release a state-by-state
analysis to illustrate how many Americans are not covered by state patient protection laws,
even where they exist (125 million). This event will also highlight why the patients'
protections are so important to women -- women are larger consumers of health care than
men and reports now confirm that complaints made by women are seen as less urgent than men
and consequently, women are less likely to be referred to specialists. Nancy Dickey, the
neWly-appointed first women chair of the American Medical Association, is also scheduled             >
                                                                                                   ~ s
to participate in this event.
                                                                                                   6 el.
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                           a


        Campaign Finance Reform -- Free TV Petition: Today, the Federal Communications             ~
                                                                                                   (')
                                                                                                          (1)
                                                                                                          c..
                                                                                                          :;<:j
                                                                                                   g      no
Commission (FCC) will place into circulation a Notice of Inquiry (NOI), opening a proceeding              n
                                                                                                          ...
                                                                                                          0
on free and discounted air time for candidates. The NOI is expected to pass within the month at    ~.
                                                                                                   a     ...
                                                                                                          ~
                                                                                                         .....
which point it will become open for public comment. The FCC will conclude the NOI and              =>    g
submit a report to Congress by the end of the year. The recommendations of The President's               ~
Advisory Committee On the Public Interest Obligations of Digital Broadcasters will be included           3
                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                         (1)
                                                                                                         :::1
in the FCC's final report to Congress.
                                                                                                         VOl
                                                                                                         '<

        Education -- Bilingual Education: The House Subcommittee on Children, Youth and                  g
Families reported out a bill offered by Rep. Riggs that would replace the current bilingual and
immigrant education programs with a block grant to states to help LEP students master English
within two years. States would be required to cut off funds to any local program that does not
meet the 2-year deadline for all students, and would be prohibited from exempting any students
from state testing programs in English if the student has been in school for two years. Funds·
under this bill would be less effectively targeted to high need communities than in the
current program. The bill also ends funding for teacher training. In addition, this bill
would void existing compliance agreements between the Education Department's Office of Civil
Rights and local school districts regarding the provision of services to LEP students, and would
prohibit the Department of Education from entering into additional agreements until it proposes,
and Congress ratifies, guidelines and compliance standards for Title VI. DPC staff have been
working closely with other WH offices and the Education Department to develop a strategy for
addressing the Riggs bill, and to prepare alternative legislation that could be introduced if
appropriate, which fully reflects the principles for strengthening programs for LEP students you
approved along with the decision to oppose the Unz Initiative. We will send you a more
detailed status report on this issue this coming week.

Note to Elena: You may recall that we have been talking about linking any veto threat to the
Riggs bill to the introduction of an alternative bill reflecting our anti-Unz principles-despite
the wishes of the Hispanic Caucus that we threaten to veto but not propose an alternative.
The bill that was marked up today is a new Riggs bill, including civil rights and testing


                                               3
new Riggs bill may change our calculations about linking the veto threat and alternative
legislation, because the civil rights provisions seem to be so objectionable on their own. I've
written the paragraph above to give us the room to consider this possibility, and hope that your
final version will do the same.

        Education -- Class Size: Congressional Democrats and the NEA, AFT and other
education groups are upset that the agreement we reached with NGA on spending the state share
of tobacco funds did not include your class size reduction proposal, and some fault us for
walking away from this initiative. In response, we met with Sen. Patty Murray, the prime Senate
sponsor, and agreed to look for ways to help keep this issue alive, including looking for offsets
that would enable her to bring this to the floor for debate. Even though the chances of
enactment are slim, our ability to mobilize the education groups behind our overall education
agenda as we head into the Fall depends in part on continuing to press for funding for your class
size proposa\.

        Education -- New Orleans Schools: Several weeks ago you expressed concern about a
controversy involving the Education Department's Office of Civil Rights and the New Orleans
schools, regarding the use of IQ tests for admission to the Benjamin Franklin High School, a
selective magnet school. OCR has been working with the local school board to resolve a
complaint about the use of IQ test cutoff score as an admissions requirement regardless of grades
or other indicators of academic performance. The local school board has already agreed to halt
that practice, and to develop a new approach that would still maintain high admissions standards.
 The immediate controversy revolved around a decision by the local school board to rescind
admission decisions that had already been announced for the next school year. OCR has told the
board not to rescind its admissions decisions for the coming year, but instead to focus on
developing new admissions criteria for the following school year. OCR understands the
importance of working with New Orleans to resolve this in a fashion that enables the school to
maintain high standards, and that does not undermine the Administration's commitment to high
standards and testing.

        Welfare Reform -- Welfare-to- Work Celebration: A series of activities are scheduled for
May 27th to celebrate the success of the welfare-to-work effort, with a particular spotlight on the
Welfare-to-Work Partnership and on the importance of job retention. As part of the celebration,
you will join a small working meeting of CEOs from the Board of the Partnership and key
Cabinet officials in the Roosevelt Room, wh~re you will have a chance to congratulate these
businesses for their extraordinary success in both hiring and retaining welfare recipients, and
urge them to sustain their commitment. Over the last year, the Partnership has grown from 100
businesses to 5,000 today, and their business partners have hired 135,000 welfare recipients. In
a recent survey of these businesses by the Wirthlin group, 75% found welfare recipients to be
good, productive employees. United Airlines and others have found that the people hired off
welfare have higher retention than other new employees.



                                                 4
the program by the VP, Eli Segal, Jerry Greenwald from United, and a welfare-to-work success
story. At the event, you will announce the first round of Welfare-to-Work Competitive grants
and the latest welfare caseload reductions, and you will challenge the Partnership to double the
number of people hired by their business partners in the coming year. In the front row will be
the success stories you met in Wichita and St. Louis, along with new success stories from
United, UPS, and other companies. Other invitees include a group of Welfare-to-Work
Competitive grant winners (from local governments, PICs, and non-profit organizations).
In conjunction with the event, the Partnership will release a report called the Road to
Retention, which profiles the retention successes of 16 large and small businesses. The
Partnership will also release welfare-to-work PSAs.




                                               5
 ·

