RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-MAY-1998 11:50:49.00

SUBJECT:   Complete Weekly 5/29- Paul has edited

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D14)MAIL44085515L.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750433AOF0000010A020100000002050000004150000000020000D340DC3C1AEFAB4EDC99BC
6CAA1BOF7A08EF427C65212246941C9ED5045072ACBB9AC3214D067BC78008318790C71F74BB65
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion



                                          May 29,1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            I?PC Weekly Report


         Tobacco -- Senate Update: When the Senate returns from recess, it is scheduled to
return to the McCain legislation and resume consideration of an amendment by Sen. Durbin to
increase look back penalties and an amendment by Sen. Gramm to devote most of the bill's
revenues to a tax cut for married couples with income ofless than $50,000 per year (advertised as
an elimination of the marriage penalty). The Gramm amendment would provide a significant
tax cut to low- and middle- income people, but would require a 78 percent cut in spending for
public health, medical research, farmers, and the states. Weare still deciding whether to
develop and/or support a smaller tax cut proposal. Such a proposal would take the pressure off
Democrats to vote for the Gramm amendment and if passed, would enhance the attractiveness of
the bill to Republicans; inevitably, however, the proposal would diminish the funds available for
spending on i:lealth research and public health programs.

         Tobacco --Tobacco Farmers: This week the Senate may begin consideration of those
provisions of the tobacco bill relating to tobacco farmers. The legislation currently includes a
provision drafted by Sen. Lugar that would buy-out all farmers from the quota program within 3
years at a cost of $18 billion, eliminating the government program and creating a free market in
tobacco in its place. The legislation also includes Sen. Ford's measure, which the
Administration supports, to preserve the program and give farmers the option of being bought
out, at a total cost of $28.5 billion spread over 25 years. USDA calculates that the Lugar
approach would lead to dramatic increases in the amount of tobacco grown in the U.S., and a
reduction in the cost of tobacco for companies. Last week, the Washington Post ran an article
that included USDA's calculation that tobacco companies will save $800 million a year or $20
billion over the next 25 years if Lugar becomes law. In addition, OMB estimates that the Lugar
provision would necessitate a 69% cut in the research and other public health programs called for
in the McCain legislation. Armed with these numbers, public health groups like the Campaign
for Tobacco-Free Kids have lobbied the Senate for the Ford measure. Procedurally, the next
move is for both Sens. Ford and Lugar to try and strike the other's measure from the bill. Along
with USDA, we will continue to work with Sens. Ford, Robb, and Hollings to build support for
their farmers provision and simultaneously seek to fashion a compromise that might gamer
significant Republican votes.
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
        Welfare Reform -- State Reinvestment ofTANF Savings: During your meeting with
Welfare-to-Work Partnership Board members last week you stressed the importance of states
reinvesting their welfare savings in child care, transportation and training. We will work with.
HHS to analyze state expenditure data for T ANF and child care. Unfortunately, this data is not
as timely as we would like. In the meantime, there is some encouraging information in the NGA
Fiscal Survey of States released on May 27th. The report indicates that States are shifting the
spending of their welfare funds from cash to work-related supports. Comparing expenditures in
1996 with planned spending for 1998, the percent of welfare spending on cash assistance
dropped 27 percent (roughly comparable with caseload declines), while spending on child care
increased by 55 percent and spending on work activities increased 34 percent. Total welfare
spending declined by 9 percent, but given caseload reductions, this actually represents increased
spending per person.

         Education -- Gov. Carper's Testing Program: Prior to your speech to the Delaware
State Legislature, Gov. Carper related to you that Delaware's testing program tests students
against both state and national standards, by combining test items aligned with state standards
with items from NAEP. He reiterated this point in a recent letter following up your trip. We
have followed up with Gov. Carper's staff to get more information about the state testing
program. While it is true that Delaware does have a "hybrid" testing program, it is more
accurate to say that it tests students against ni\tional norms, rather than national standards.
Approximately 25% of the items on the Delaware test are taken from the SAT 9 (the Stanford
Achievement Test), and this is sufficient to tell how an individual student ranks compared to
other students nationwide. It does not, however, provide information on student performance
relative to national standards, such as those in NAEP. You may recall that the National
Academy of Sciences is studying the feasibility of statistically linking state tests with NAEP, so
that state tests could in fact test students against national standards. Preliminary indications are
that the NAS report, due July 1, will indicate that few state testing pr.ograms will meet the
technical requirements for this kind oflinking.

        Education -- GAO report on national testing: Next week the GAO will issue a report,
requested by Rep. Goodling, on the relationship between the Education Department and NAGB
in developing the tests, and the procedures for awarding contracts for test development. The
report affirms that the Education Department has honored the requirements of the law which
placed control of test development with NAGB. In addition, GAO stated it had no concerns
with regard to contracting procedures. While we do not expect the report will alter Rep.
Goodling's position, it does negate one set of arguments he had planned to utilize.

        Education -- Adult Education: You recently asked what the Administration had
accomplished with respect to Adult Education, literacy training and the GED, and whether we
need to take additional steps. The Senate and House Workforce bills, which are expected to be
passed by July 1, provide for the reauthorization of Adult Education programs. Your FY 1999
budget requests a $16 million increase in adult education for state grants, which funds local
literacy, GED and adult education programs. It also includes a request for funds to develop


                                                 2
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


model English as a second language programs for adults, since 40% of adult education
participants are in such programs. The Education Department has also funded a PBS series,
"Crossroads Cafe" that is a "Sesame Street" for adults learning English. The program is now
shown in 35 states (and 50 countries) and will be expanded shortly. DPC will work with NEC
and the Education Department to explore how we can best highlight the efforts we already have
underway, and what additional steps would be appropriate.

        Health Care -- Assisted Suicide Update: Next week we plan on releasing the Justice
Department interpretation that concludes that the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) has
no legal authority to prohibit physicians from prescribing drugs with the intention of
hastening death. As you will recall, Senator Hatch and Congressman Hyde had requested
that the DEA/Justice determine if there was any Federal authority to address Oregon's
assisted suicide law, which permits physicians to provide medications for the purposes of
aiding in an assisted suicide. Consistent with your instructions, we will release this
interpretation, but will also make clear that you maintain your longstanding position of
opposition to assisted suicide and remain open to workable legislative approaches that
address this issue. We expect that Senator Hatch and Congressman Hyde will respond by
introducing legislation that provides DEA the explicit authority to press charges against
physicians who assist in suicide. As you know, we believe that a DEA approach is
ill-advised. We will carefully roll-out the announcement of your position on this issue with
both Members and interested organizations, such as the Catholic Health Association and
the American Medical Association and will keep you advised of legislative developments.

        Health Care -- HCFA Letter to Ravenswood Hospital in Chicago: Last week, 15
year old Christopher Sercye died of gunshot wounds just 35 feet from Ravenswood
Hospital in Chicago, where friends had brought the young man for help. Hospital
workers did not leave their posts and apparently would not even give police officers a
stretcher to help the young man. In response, the Health Care Financing Administration
sent out a letter to the President of Ravenswood Hospital on Friday stating that the hospital
will lose its Medicare funding on June 19, 1998, unless the facility takes steps to ensure that
the events that led to the tragic death of Christopher Sercye will not be repeated. You
released a statement to highlight the Administration's strong action. In addition, your
statement urges all hospitals to follow the recently released guidance by the American
Hospital Association that advise hospitals to change any policies that prevent taking
appropriate actions in a medical emergency.

        Health Care -- Medicare Commission: Next M~mday, the Medicare Commission
will be holding another meeting to respond to its Members concerns thid they have not had
enough time to have intensive discussions about the major issues of benefits, costs,
eligibility, administration, and financing. Senator Breaux, troubled about the perception
of the Commission's irrelevance, has asked Sens. Lott and Daschle to open up the meeting
with words of encouragement on the charge and the potential of this Commission. The
Democrats, including our Commission members, are becoming increasingly nervous that


                                              3

                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
     the Commission's staff and Congressman Thomas are focusing much too heavily on highly
     speculative, numbers-driven policy and much too little time on how best to reform the
     Medicare program to respond to the delivery challenges it faces in the next century. We
     expect they will urge the Commission to dedicate as much time to program design as to
     program financing. Our members are increasingly seeking answers from us as to how
     comfortable we are in allowing them to engage in serious discussions about controversial
     policy reforms on benefits ( including requiring higher cost sharing and more benefits like
     prescription drug coverage), eligibility age changes, income-related means-testing, and the
     possibility of putting new revenues on the table. In general, we believe that it would be
     constructive for the Commission to engage in general discussions on all of these issues with
     the exception of new revenues. We believe our members should only address the revenue
     issue only if it is determined that traditional saving approaches alone will be insufficient to
     satisfactorily address the program's fmancing challenges. We are working closely with
     Gene Sperling and the NEC to assure we have a coordinated message.

             Health Care -- Long Term Care: Aging and disability advocates are increasingly
     pressing us to address the issues surrounding long-term care. The demographic changes
     in the population make clear that, in the absence of major new breakthroughs in cures and
     treatments, there will be an extraordinary increase in demand for services targeted to the
     nation's aging and disability population. Because of cost and other limitations, both the
     public and private sectors have been slow to develop responses to this challenge. Although
     comprehensive solutions are politically and financially unrealistic, we believe that we
     should begin a series of targeted policy options to begin to address this problem. These
     could include, requiring FEHBP to offer (but not pay for) private long-term care policies,
     educating Medicare beneficiaries that Medicare does not cover long term care and advising
     them of other options, developing policy options that provide more flexibility to States to
     provide home and community-based personal care options for Medicaid elderly and
     disabled eligibles, and developing possible tax incentive approaches that could potentially
     increase the purchase of private long-term care policies. We believe that you may want to
     take steps in this area relatively soon and capture at least part of an issue that has
     extraordinary political and policy dimensions.

              Community Empowerment -- Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC): This week
     staff from the DPC and the NEC meet with representatives of LlSC and ~he Enterprise
     Foundation on ways to secure passage of the LlHTC. Legislation that would implement your
     proposal to expand the credit by $1.6 billion now has 50 cosponsors in the Senate and almost 200
     hundred in the House. We asked both organizations for suggestions on how build more support
     for the legislation. They are planning to get back to us in the next two weeks.




                                                    4


