RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-MAY-1998 16:03:06.00

SUBJECT:   cleaned up draft

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D83)MAIL41446615Q.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750430C050000010A02010000000205000000543F000000020000CE03A156F2AB360A46162D
DC6552FE52CF7D8DAOEC6EC7E99C9AA6D73C8BBD7081DF32p3CB20E70971CF41BF2A50C9D30036
8B2900B33C90E8B5FOFBF31F702728115EB8C2756C7B37DCC26198B3A4492A290588F08C56CCA5
DRAFT                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion


                                            May 29, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                  BRUCE REED


SUBJECT:               Riggs Bilingual Education Bill


        On Thursday May 21 the House Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Youth 'and Families
reported H.R. 3892, the English Fluency Act, introduced by Rep. Frank Riggs. This bill raises
many of the same programmatic issues and political dynamics as the Unz Initiative in California,
as well as additional civil rights enforcement concerns. We expect the bill to be taken up at the
full committee either on June 4 or June 11.

        The purpose ofthis memo is to update you on our strategy for addressing this bill.
Because few members have focused on this bill yet, the political context in which it will be
considered is still quite fluid. The Unz vote in California next week as well as the mark-up
shortly after the recess will focus attention on this issue, and we will reassess the situation and
our strategy after these and other significant events.                                        .

I.     Summary and Analysis of the Proposed Legislation

        The bill would eliminate the existing Bilingual Education and Emergency Immigrant
Education programs and (1) establish a formula block grant program to states to provide
assistance to LEP and immigrant students in English language instruction, (2) require states to
withdraw funding from local programs in cases where students do not master English within two
years; (3) set a 3-year limit for serving any individual student with these program funds; (4)
require parental consent before a student could be placed in a program that uses native language
instruction; and, (5) prohibit states from exempting LEP students who have been in the same
school system for 2 years from statewide testing in academic subjects in English, by withdrawing
funds under this program from states that do not follow this policy.

        In addition, the bill would void existing compliance agreements between the Department's
Office for Civil Rights (OCR) and States and local school districts, if those agreements require
those States and school districts to develop, implement, provide, or maintain any form of
bilingual education. Similarly, the bill requires OCR to publish in the Federal Register all
enforcement guidelines and compliance standards that relate to the provision of English language


                                                  1
entering into any new compliance agreements based on those guidelines or standards until those
guidelines and standards, themselves, are approved by a subsequent stanIte.

        This bill is seriously flawed in a number of respects, even though it attempts to promote
the more rapid mastery of English. Like Uoz, its punative approach is likely to result in fewer
rather than more students mastering English. It is simply unrealistic to expect that all students,
or even a large proportion of them, will master English within 2 years. And in cases where this
timetable is not achieved, the sole remedy is to cut off funds. The bill makes no provisions to
provide extra help to individual students who lack English proficiency after two years. Nor does
it provide a mechanism or resources to strengthen local programs that do not meet the two year
standard.

        The proposed state block grant would replace the existing discretionary grant program
that targets funds to the local school systems with the greatest need and highest quality proposals.
 There would be no formula for allocating funds to local school districts within each state.
Under this arrangement, funding would be less effectively targeted to communities with the
greatest need, especially large cities such as Los Angeles, San Francisco, New York and Chicago.
 These communities generally receive less than their fair share of funds in other programs (e.g.,
Goals 2000 and the Technology Literacy Challenge Fund) that allow states to distribute funds on
a discretionary rather than formula basis. In addition, the bill lacks maintenance of effort and
supplement-not-supplant provisions to prevent States and school districts from substituting
federal funds for state and local funds.

          The Riggs bill is likely to exacerbate the current shortage of qualified bilingual
education and ESL teachers nationwide. It would eliminate the professional development
program which h~lps strengthen the skills of existing teachers and train new ESL and bilingual
education teachers. In contrast to your FY 1999 proposal to double funding for teacher training,
this bill would limit state use of funds for teacher training and force teacher training to compete
for funds for service delivery at the local level.

         Finally, the civil rights provisions could effectively end--or at least seriously
delay--enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as it applies to the education of
language minority children, through the use of voluntary compliance agreements.            The use of
compliance agreements is one of OCR's most important (and, by far, the most commonly used)
enforcement tools regarding the provision of appropriate educational programs for such children.
   Title VI, itself, requires OCR to attempt to resolve all compliance problems under it, including
those relating to the education of language minority children, through voluntary means before
employing other, more adversarial, means, such as funding terminations--preceded by
administrative litigation--and referral to the Department of Justice for court litigation. If H.R.
3892 were enacted, OCR enforcement of Title VI as it applies to the education of language
minority children would necessarily have to rely far more on litigation than it currently does, and
States and school districts would necessarily endure far more costly and time-consuming

                                                 2
 private parties, as well, because States and school districts would no longer be ably to rely on
 voluntary agreements with OCR as evidence of their compliance with Title VI.

 II.    Congressional Outlook and Strategy

        The bill was reported out of subcommittee on a party-line vote. We expect the bill to be
 taken up at full committee shortly after recess, on either June 4 or June 11. We expect
 Democrats will remain uniformly opposed to the bill at committee.

          The Congressional Hispanic Caucus is adamantly opposed to the Riggs bill. Shortly
 before subcommittee mark-up they met with Secretary Riley and pressed him very hard for a veto
 threat from the Administration. While Secretary Riley would in fact recommend a veto of this
 bill, he told the Caucus that a veto threat would need to be accompanied by an alternative bill, in
 order to reinforce the Administration's principles for strengthening bilingual education
 articulated in his statement opposing the Unz Initiative, and to provide cover to Democrats
 voting against Riggs. However, Caucus members are also firmly opposed to the introduction of
 any alternative bill, and we will have difficult gaining strong Democratic support for our
 alternative over the opposition of the CHC. They prefer to delay consideration of changes in the
 program until next year's scheduled reauthorization. In addition, they are not comfortable with
 the prospect of translating our 3-year goal for students to become proficient in English into
 legislation. For subcommittee mark-up, the CHC preferred that we stay silent on the bill rather
 than signalling opposition short of a veto threat, or coupling a veto threat with an alternative
 bill. We did not comment on the bill before subcommittee mark up, but will need to take a
 position before full committee.

         We have been working with Mr. Gephardt's office to gauge the bill's prospects on the
House floor. However, few members beyond the subcommittee and the Hispanic Caucus have
focused on it, so it is difficult to predict how this will play out. While the civil rights
provisions may help keep Democrats together, we expect that many conservative Democrats,
particularly those without sizeable Hispanic constituencies, will find it difficult to oppose this
legislation, especially in the wake of the anticipated Unz vote, without some alternative to vote
for.

          There is no indication at present that the Senate Education and Labor Committee intends
  to take up the Riggs bill. While there is always a chance of a floor amendment, we think the
, odds that such a move would succeed are quite slim. Thus, it is very unlikely that a bill to
  overhaul bilingual education will pass the Congress this session.

         Our primary objective therefore is to oppose Riggs while avoiding the appearance of
defending the status quo. We also have an opportunity to set the stage for the reauthorization of
the bilingual education pro gam in the next Congress, if we can effectively advocate for our own
reform approach without splitting Democrats on the issue. Our effectiveness toward these ends


                                                 3
  depend heavily on the extent to which other Democrats express the need for an alternative bill,
  the extent to which the Caucus continues to want a strong veto threat on this bill, and our
, willingness to condition a veto threat on CHC support for our alternative legislation.
          To accomplish our objectives, we will stay in close touch with the CHC and with Mr.
  Gephardt's office, and are planning the following steps:

 ·      Prepare an alternative legislative proposal. The Education Department is drafting
        legislation, in the form of amendments to the existing bilingual education program, based
        on the principles articulated by Secretary Riley's statement of opposition to Unz. While
        the legislation can be ready shortly, we have not yet determined the best time to introduce
        the bill. As indicated above; if an alternative were introduced at committee mark-up
        next week, we could not count on broad Democratic support due to CHC opposition.
        We believe the situation could well change when the bill comes to the floor, when many
        Demcrats may feel the need for an alterntive to vote for in order to vote against Riggs. If
        this situation materializes, we b'elieve the Hispanic Caucus will likely change its position
        and support our alternative. If not, we would again face the prospect of offering a bill
        that is opposed by a significant number of Democrats, and would recommend against
        taking this step.

 ·      Continue to link the possibility of a veto threat to support for our alternative
        proposal, at least through full committee mark-up. In our conversations with the
        Hispanic Caucus leading up to the full committee mark-up, we will continue to take the
        position that we cannot issue a veto threat unless we also put our alternative on the table,
        with their support. In the short run, the most likely result of this approach is that we
        indicate our "strong opposition" to the Riggs bill before mark-up, rather than issueing a
        veto threat, though the outcome of the Unz vote could affect how caucus members view
        the value of an alternative bill, even before the mark-up. When the bill goes to the floor
        we will be able to better guage the desirability of a veto threat and alternative legislation,
        and will reassess our strategy accordingly.

 ·      Consider nonlegislative steps to highlight your committment to reforming bilingual
        education. In order to ensure that your opposition to Riggs is not equated with a
        defense of the status quo, we are exploring several steps you could take to underscore'
        your committment to reform. One would be to issue a directive to the Education
        Department or NPR, to identify models of effective approaches to helping kids become
        proficient in English within your 3-year goal. A second approach would be to begin to
        reframe the debate over bilingual education. In addition to stressing the necessity of LEP
        kids becoming proficient in English within 3 years, you could also call for efforts to help
        more native English speakers become proficient in a second language, in order to be
        competitive in the global economy. In California, each of the gubernatorial candiates has
        taken this approach, stressing the value of all students leaving school fluent in English
        and another language.


                                                  4



         Automated Records Management System
         Hex-Dump Conversion




     5


