RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 29-MAY-1998 14:14:56.00

SUBJECT:   Reed/Sperling Education memo for Podesta

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a memo requested by Karen Tramontano to serve as background
for the WH participants in Monday afternoon's meeting with Bob Chase and
Sandy Feldman. Karen asked that we get it to John by COB today, for
circulation on Monday.

Bob Shireman has sent this same version to Gene.==================== ATTACHMENT    1
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D35]MAIL48402615B.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D8050000010A02010000000205000000C12C000000020000A20801B96A7E4FC5CD2BBF
6002727CE7450AAOF1BCD57FF2EAA5959CE9AF8CB7047E4FC580AE158C6A1B21C872CF7B1763AD
                                                                                  Hex-Dump ConversIon



                                  DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT
                                       May 29,1998

MEMORANDUM TO JOHN PODESTA
               ANN LEWIS
               LARRY STEIN
               RON KLAIN
               KAREN TRAMONTANO

FROM:                     GENE SPERLING
                          BRUCE REED
                          MIKE COHEN
                          BOB SHIREMAN

SUBJECT: MEETING WITH BOB CHASE AND SANDY FELDMAN


The primary focus of the meeting should be how we work to achieve our common agenda of
increasing the Federal investment in education.
       For us, the main struggle is finding hooks for engaging the Congress and getting press
        attention on these issues.
       From them, we should ask for a report on their current and planned activities with
        Congress and in the field.
We should also touch on some of the areas where the Congress has attempted to put Democrats
on the defensive.

I. The Common Agenda

The NEA and AFT are strong supporters of our efforts on education, especially:
     school modernization
     class size reduction
     increased spending on discretionary programs (we differ on special education, which our
      budget essentially straight-lined and Republicans plan to increase).

Status: The Republicans this year have made a greater effort to appear to be/or something,
rather than just opposed to our pro-education efforts. That has made it more difficult, at least so
far, to draw the stark distinctions that have helped us to define -- and win -- the debate in prior
years. Our efforts to substitute school construction for the Coverdell bill yielded strong votes,
but no victory. We have been unsuccessful in getting class size as part of the tobacco deal
(though the NIH funding would relieve pressure on appropriations). And the allocation for
Labor-HHS-Education appropriations, while basically consistent with the BBA, will not support
our investments.


                                                 1
 session. So far, however, observers in the press do not see education as a major item of
 dissention that will need to be worked out this year. Our chances of succeeding are low unless
 we begin raising the temperature now so that Congress feels intense heat on this issue. We can
 do that through the bully pulpit, and Democrats in Congress can help by offering amendments
 and using the legislative process in other ways to force the issues. In short, we must take every
 opportunity to emphasize our education priorities. Some of the opportunities include:

       Signing of Highway Bill: building on the President's prior statements about the need to
        invest in the education infrastructure, challenge Congress to pass the school
        modernization bill (which provides bonds worth just 10% of the highway investment).
       House budget resolution: Criticize, cuts to education that would be required (treat
        Kasich's original assumptions as real); insist on investment, not just maintaining current
        levels.
       Veto of Coverdell bill: push modem schools and smaller class size as the logical,
        constructive approach.
       Tax bill: Insist on school construction as a part of any bill.
       Labor/HHS appropriations mark-ups: Pounce on them immediately for failing to
        invest.
       Puttmg Class Size Reduction back in play: With tobacco funding no longer viable, we
        need to put the class size proposal back onto the agenda by proposing an offset. OMB is
        searching for any offsets we could possibly use, though this will be difficult.
       Finding additional cosponsors for School Modernization: Now that there is a
        Republican cosponsor of the School Modernization bill (Rep. Leach, thanks to NEA's
        efforts), escalate our cosponsor-gathering activities.

 We need help from the Democrats in Congress. In order for the above to succeed, we need
 Democrats to join with us in these efforts. If Democrats cut their own deals -- e.g. on
 appropriations -- then it will be much more difficult to make the case for the overall investments.

,II. Defensive Efforts

 Republicans will continue to press us on a number of issues, including:

       Coverdell (education savings accounts for private K-12 education). At some point -- but
        not to be discussed Monday -- we may need to think about versions that we might
        ultimately find acceptable, in exchange for other of our priorities.
       Block Grants. As the Republican proposals get more sophisticated, some Dems may
        find that they need an alternative to support. While the NEA & AFT are not thrilled with
        our "Ed-Flex" proposal, it does offer that alternative.
       Special Education. In appropriations and other battles, Republicans have essentially
        started a "special education first" mantra, creating the impression that they are not against
        education investments, they are just for different investments.

                                                  2


          Bilingual Education. Riggs bill, to be marked-up at full committee first or second week
           of June, will radically change bilingual education. Administration is opposed to the bill;
           POTUS will want to have an alternative on the table during the debate.

    III. Other important issues to mention
          National Tests: we simply need to reiterate that this remains high priority for POTUS,
           and we will fight to get continued funding for it in appropriations.
          Reading Initiative: We will push for Congress to pass a bill before July 1, so we can
           use $210 million advance appropriation before it is turned over to special education.
           While we are not enthused about the TAG provision (sort of an after-school tutoring
           voucher), it is drafted in a way that we can accept, and we hope NEAlAFT won't let it
           stand in the way of our getting a bill.
          Higher Education ActlMaster Teachers: POTUS will fight hard to prevent any damage
           to the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. (In HEA, the High Hopes
           for College initiative and teacher training proposals are also of interest to NEAlAFT).

    IV. Other issues that may come up:

          Charter School Legislation: Bipartisan legislation expanding current charter school,
           program has passed the House and will be marked up in Senate in near future; neither
           AFT nor NEA support this legislation. No need to highlight this in the meeting.
          Workforce Development Act/G. I. Bill for America's Workers: A conference
           agreement may be on the President's desk by the end of June. We will fight any final
           language that would undermine school-to-work or vocational education.




                                                   3


