RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen (. CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1998 17:03:32.00

SUBJECT:   Reinventing bilingual ed

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 As you know, POTUS requested to VPOTUS to look into reinventing bilingual
ed:
Morely held a meeting on this a week ago (Karen, Maria and I met with
Morley and Jennifer Muller on his staff). My approach at that meeting was
to make sure Morley understood the context in which we are already
operating and that anything he did fit within our larger effort.

I also understood that the POTUS request to VPOTUS indicated that he may
not be entirely satisfied that the principles he signed off on--and
legislation translating them into action-- constitutes the complete set
of actions needed to strengthen bilingual ed,

None of us has a clear sense of what a "reinvention effort" for bilingual
ed would look like, particularly since the principles we have
developed--focus on result (3-year goal), increased accountability,
greater local flexibility, and an emphasis on quality (including better
trained teachers) are already a big step toward reinventing the program.
Nonetheless, we thought we owed it to both POTUS and VPOTUS to think about
it some more before throwing in the towel. We are meeting again tomorrow
afternoon to see if we can figure anything out .

.
While I don't believe there is anything uniquely "reinvention" about this,
NPR (with proper guidance and continued close connection to DPC) could
potentially develop several issues that would further our efforts:

1.  Further specification of goals and indicators. We have not been very
clear about what we mean by;' learning English within 3 years." The
experts basically say that you can get most kids to be fluent in
speaking English in less than 3 years, that it will take longer than
that to get many kids to grade level in reading comprehension in English,
and that reading in English really well enough to learn science and other
academic subjects is a task that takes forever, even with kids whose
native language is English.   Further, the bilingual experts in particular
would claim that the only goal worth pursuing is the most demaning one;
anything less sells the kids short. By taking this position they also
reinforce the notion that they are in no rush for kids to learn English in
any form--thereby digging the hole they are in even deeper.

I think it could be helpful having someplace that is less tied to the


     experts than the Education Department make some effort to sort this out,
     and propose a set of goals and indicators that are sound politically and
     programati~ally.


     2. Highlighting what works.   NPR could look for examples of places that
     are meeting the goals, as further specified, which we could highlight to
     help build support for our legislation.

     3. Broadening the view of bilingual education. While we have viewed
     bilingual ed as a program to help LEP learn English, we periodically
     encounter an argument that we ought to be encouraging more kids in this
     country to become proficient in two languages, or order to help them and
     us be competitive in a global economy. This is an argument that all of
     the Dem. gubernatorial candidates in CA made during the debate over Unz;
     it also generally fits the President's theme of One America--at least
     insofar as it recognizes that immigrants and others whose first language
     is not English bring some assessts.    While I've always been concerned
     that coming out in favor of having many kids speak two languages is a bit
     too transparant as a last ditch defense of bilingual ed, I also think
     there is real merit in encouraging and helping more kids in this country
     to learn another'language.  It would be good to have somebody thinking
     this through as part of our overall approach.

      NPR is not uniquely situated to address these, but might be able to
     help. Any guidance on these issues, or on whether to carve out a role for
     NPR?


