     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JUN-1998 23:53:29.00

     SUBJECT:     Preliminary Draft.

    TO: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Judith A. Winston ( CN=Judith A. Winston/OU=PIR/O=EOP @ EOP [ PIR 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN .

    TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Paul E. Begala ( CN=Paul E. Begala/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Ann F. Lewis     ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Sylvia M. Mathews ( CN=Sylvia M. Mathews/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Ruby Shamir ( CN=Ruby Shamir/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Dawn L. Smalls ( CN=Dawn L. Smalls/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    What follows is a preliminary draft of the Portland State speech. We will
    circulate a revised draft early tomorrow morning (Tuesday), but we wanted
    you to see this earlier.  Our goal is to send a revised draft to the
    President that incorporates your comments by tomorrow afternoon.


    Draft 6/8/98 11:45am

    PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
    'J&THE NEW IMMIGRATION:
    BUILDING ONE AMERICA IN THE 21ST CENTURY08
    PORTLAND STATE UNIVERSITY
    JUNE 13, 1998

                Acknowledgments: TK

            I am delighted and honored to be here to address the Portland State
    University graduating class of 1998. You opened your doors at the end of


     World War II, when the G.I. Bill gave thousands of Americans an
     unprecedented opportunity togo to college.   Since then, you have
     broadened your mission to reach out to all kinds of students who might not
     otherwise have a chance to go to college -- older students, minority.
     students, students from struggling families and foreign lands. And I thank
     you.

             At its heart, Portla~d StateD,s mission is the mission of America:
     to widen the circle of opportunity for all our people, to deepen the
     meaning of our freedom, and to form a m6re perfect union.   Our history can
     be understood as a struggle to live up to those ideals in changing times,
     and to make the promise of America real for generations to come. Today,
     at the dawn of a new century, at a time of great prosperity and even
     greater change this is still our greates·t challenge -- and it will be up
     to all of you to help us meet it.

             Last· month I ·spoke to graduates at the u. S. Naval Academy about what we
     must do to defend American interests -- and American principles -- against
     the threat of terrorism. Last week, I challenged students at MIT and all
     Americans to make sure that the Information Age expands opportunity. for
     all of our people, not just a privileged few.

             One year ago tomorrow, I called on Americans to embark on a serious
     examination of the lingering problems and limitless possibilities of our
     growing diversity.  Today, I would like to continue that conversation by
     talking about the driving force behind our growing diversity --
     immigration -- and our shared responsibility to make sure that it
     strengthens our nation in the 21st Century.

             More than any other nation on earth, America has drawn its
     strength and its spirit from a constant flow of immigrants.  For more than
     two centuries, America has attracted the most restless, the most
     adventurous, the most industrious people of the world to our shores. We
     have been held together, above all else, by a shared faith: we are all
     created equal. We believe that all our people, whether their ancestors
     came here in slave ships or on the Mayflower; whether they landed on Ellis
     Island or LAX; whether they arrived at the dawn of this decade or have
     been here for thousands of years, are born with the spark of possibility
     and an equal right to strive and work and rise as far as they can go.

             Each new wave of immigrants -- of strangers -- has tested the
     strength of these ideals. And out of two centuries of testing, we have
     built the strongest, most prosperous, and most diverse democracy the world
     has seen.

             Now, these ideals are being tested again -- by a new wave of
     immigration, larger than any since the turn of the century, more diverse
     than any in our history. More than 700,000 people come legally to our
     nation each year. Nearly one in ten people living here was born in
     another country. For the first time since 1850, immigrants and their
     children account for half of New York Cit yO,s 8 million residents.

             And todayO,s immigrants come from every corner of the globe, especially
     Asia and Latin America.  Fewer than one in five come from Europe. Within
     [xl years, largely because of immigration, there will be no.majority race
     in California -- and within fifty years, no majority race in America.

             Demographic change this large, this sweeping, can have profound
     consequences for any nation.  Fundamentally, it forces us to ask: what can
     we do to hold our nation together?



            Let me state unequivocally: I believe the new immigration is good
    for America.   It is revitalizing our cities.  It is building our new
    economy, and strengthening our ties to the global one.   It is energizing
    our culture and broadening our view of the world.   It is renewing our
    values.   And it is reminding all of us what it truly means to be an
    American.

            Among the the people here today are three members of the same immigrant
    family: Mago, Oscar, and Eddi Gilson. Twelve years ago, Mago Gilson came
    to this country from Mexico.  She didnD,t have a high school diploma. But
    she not only went on to get a GED, she graduated from college. Today she
    will receive a Masters in Education so that she can begin teaching.  Her
    son Eddi joins her here as a graduate today, after working full time for
    nine years to put himself through college. And her son Oscar will soon
    receive his own Masters Degree.

            We look at the Gilsons, we look at the child from Korea who does
    his homework at the cash register at his familyO,s store ... or the
    teenager from Jamaica who rushes home after school to babysit so her
    mother can work the night shift. . .. or the father from El Salvador who
    takes his daughter to the public library everyday to practice reading.
    When we look at all these new immigrants, we see the spirit that built
    America -- the drive to succeed, the commitment to family, the hope for a
    better life. When we look at these new immigrants, we see our
    grandparents ... we see ourselves ... we see Americans.

            But too many people do not.  They see the change around them, they hear
    new accents on the street, the new faces in their classrooms and they.are
    unsettled. They worry that the new immigrants come to our shores not to
    promote our prosperity but to live off our largesse. They are afraid the
    America they love is becoming a foreign land.

            This is understandable.   But it is wrong, profoundly wrong.

             No American should tolerate illegal immigration that flouts our
    laws and strains our tradition of tolerance. We must strictly enforce the
    immigrati.on laws, and we have acted to bring the rule of law to our
    borders.

            But we should remember: four out of five immigrants are here
    legally. And in every measurable way, the new immigrants give more to our
    society than they take. They have moved strong and stable families into
    neighborhoods that were all but abandoned.   On average, immigrants pay
    $1,800 more in taxes than they receive in government benefits. And legal
    immigrants are paying into Social Security at record rates [ck], helping
    to offset the millions of Americans who will be retiring in the next 20
    years.

            And they benefit our nation in ways that are not as easily
    measured.

              We should all be proud that a person in an isolated village in a
    far corner of the. world recognizes the Statue of Liberty. We should be
    honored that America-- whether it is called the D+city on ahill,D, the
    ::J+old gold mountain,D, El Norte -- is seen around the world as a land of
    freedom and opportunity and new beginnings.

            My fellow Americans, it is simply wrong for people whose ancestors
    passed through the portals of Ellis Island to lock the door behind them.


    And it is wrong for those who were denied the rights of citizenship simply
    because of the color of their skin to deny them to others because of the
    country of their birth. We should treat these new immigrants as we would
    have wanted our own grandparents to have been treated.

            I believe that every American is honor-bound to share our country
    with immigrants, not to shun them or shut them out.  But even as we
    celebrate our differences, we cannot be blind to the fact that demographic
    change of this sweep and scope can undermine our unity. Around the world,
    we have seen what can happen when people who live o~ the same land put
    ethnicity before country.  If America is to remain the worldD,s most
    diverse democracy, if immigration is to strengthen America as it has
    throughout our history, then all Americans must recommit to ourselves to
    the common values -- common heritage -- common culture -- that are
    essential to our common future.

            We are part of a dynamic culture and a civic tradition that any
    person who comes here from any corner of the world can shape and possess.

             So we must recommit to the civic duties that are at the heart of
    true citizenship. We want all immigrants to seek to become citizens; but
    all Americans, wherever they were born, must act as citizens, taking full'
    responsibility for the greatest nation on Earth. It -is right and
    appropriate that new citizens learn the Declaration of Independence, the
    structure of our government, the history of our nation.   But it is wrong
    that all citizens donD,t share that obligation.

            We must recommit to the principle that our public schools are not only
    places where our children learn to read-, but where they learn to be
    American, where they make American heroes -- from George Washington to
    Abraham Lincoln to Rosa Parks -- their own. But today, too many Americans
    -- and far too many immigrants -- attend crowded, failing inner city
    schools. Too many young people -- and far too many Hispanic young people
    -- drop out of high school altogether.

            So we must all work together to renew our public schools, with
    high national standards of academic excellence, smaller classes,
    well-prepared teachers, computers in every classroom. We must keep
    schools open after school to keep children off the streets while their
    parents are at work. And we must continue to expand college opportunity,
    with tuition tax credits, more scholarships, more work-study slots, and
    expandedIRAD,s to help families save for college.

            And we must support our public schools[J, efforts to ensure that
    our children master English. One out of five children in our nationl-:, s
    schools are immigrants, or the children of immigrants.   They come from 150
    different countries and speak more than a hundred languages -- languages
    their parents have every right to want their children to remember.    But
    unless these young people learn English, they will never make the full
    contribution to American life we know they are capable of.   But let me be
    clear: meeting this challenge does not mean adopting rigid bilingual
    education programs that fail to take into account the fact that our
    children learn at different rates.  It means adopting sensible, flexible
    bilingual education programs that are tailored to help our children to
    succeed, not to set them up for failure.

             [Finally, we must recommit to the idea that in America, what counts is
    not where we come from, but where we are going.   Last winter, the U.S.
    Olympic Team roster, read something like this: Kwan, Lipinski,Rodriguez,
    Ruggiero, Jones, Street, MOseley -- names from all countries all around


      the world. Names that on the eve of the 21st Century are as American as
      Washington, Adams, and Jefferson.

              We must build one America. ThatD,s why I launched the Race
      Initiative last year.
              If we donD,t speak frankly about who we are and how we see each other, if
      we ban certain topics from our conversations out of fear of giving
      offense, if we fail to listen to each other with open minds, then we only
      deepen our divisions. We must use dialogue to debunk the false
      stereotypes, to move past the old resentments, to discover what we still
      need to do to build One America. MORE TK

              That is the America you must aspire to build; that is the America you
      must have the conscience and the courage to create; that is the America
      that is within our reach.)

              Thank you, congratulations, and God bless you.
t'!   .·t


