RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JUN-1998 18:37:16.00

SUBJECT:   Revised bilingual memo

TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is the revised bilingual memo, with two options as discussed.
Also note I've drafted the memo from Bruce and Larry, mainly to raise the
issue as to whether you want to send it this way.

Before we staff it out, I would like to give Karen, Maria and Janet an
opportunity for input; since they have been involved in the discussions
from the outset. Are you ok with this, and if so, let me know how to
handle Larry Stein's name on the memo.

 I also think I need to reach out to Riley and see if he wants to support
one of the options.   ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
"ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D3)MAIL45823495Z.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750435C030000010A02010000000205000000D63000000002000055A72A41C81A8A453778C2
4051C90E78BOCFFD3El1205F60A61ACBE1674FB1B159A02E5996509585B3BBED3E888C766F28D8
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

DRAFT

                                           June 8, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          BRUCE REED
               LARRY STEIN (DO YOU WANT TO INCLUDE HIM ON THIS MEMO AS
               REQUESTED?)

SUBJECT:       Bilingual Education


       On June 4, the House Education and Workforce Committee reported H.R. 3982, the
English Fluency Act, introduced by Rep. Frank Riggs. This bill raises many of the same
programmatic issues and political dynamics as the Unz Initiative in California. The purpose of
this memo is to update you on our strategy for addressing this bill.

I.     Overview of Riggs Bill

        The bill would eliminate the existing Bilingual Education and Emergency Immigrant
Education programs and would (1) distribute funds through a block grant that is not targeted
toward school districts with the highest quality programs and greatest funding need; (2) require
states to withdraw funding from local programs in cases where students do not master English
within two years and set a 3-year limit for serving any individual student, though it would not
provide any extra help for students or corrective action for programs that need it; (3) not require
States to maintain their· own efforts; and (4) eliminate professional development programs
designed to prepared qualified ESL and bilingual education teachers. The bill also seeks to
sharply curtail the enforcement powers of the Education Department's Office of Civil Rights by
voiding existing voluntary compliance agreements between OCR and local school districts with
regard to educating LEP students and by requiring OCR to publish -- and the Congress to ratify --
new guidelines and compliance standards for Title VI enforcement. These provisions would
weaken enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and result in increased litigation.

II.    Development of Administration Alternative

       We are on track to have an alternative bill based on the principles you approved and
Secretary Riley articulated in his statement of opposition to the Unz Initiative completed and
ready for transmittal to Congress by the end of this week. This bill would amend (rather than
replace entirely) the existing bilingual education program. Specifically, it would require (1)
school districts to establish a goal of preparing LEP students to enter successfully regular English



                                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

    classrooms in not more than three years, (2) annual assessments of student's English proficiency;
    (3) additional help for students not on track to English proficiency; (4) a corrective action plan, to
    be approved by the Secretary, from programs in which a significant percentage of students do not
    meet the 3-year goal. The bill would also guarantee local flexibility by removing the existing
    cap on programs that do not use the students native language.


    III.   Congressional Dynamic

           H.R. 3892 was reported out of committee on a straight party line vote (22-17).
    Notwithstanding the success of the Unz Initiative, Committee Democrats did not feel compelled
    to offer an alternative to Riggs's bill during committee markup. Moderate Committee
    Democrats (e.g., Reps. Romer and Kind) as well as the four Members of the Hispanic Caucus on
    the Committee (reps. Martinez, Romero-Barcelo, Hinojosa and Sanchez) decided to vote against
    the Riggs bill even without a Democratic alternative.

            It is not clear when the bill will be scheduled for House floor consideration, although it
    could well be scheduled before the end of June. There is no hint of movement in the Senate. It
    is quite possible that House Democrats will feel compelled to offer an alternative when the bill
    hits the floor so that they can vote for reform of bilingual education. Leaders of the Hispanic
    Caucus, including Caucus Chairman Becerra and Education Committee Member Hinojosa, have
    quietly acknowledged that, for the greater good of the Democratic Caucus, such a floor
    alternative might become necessary. However, up until now they have been adamantly opposed
    to a floor alternative, and remain to be convinced that one is necessary for a successful floor
    strategy. Moderate Democrats themselves are not yet clear if one is needed. In addition to their
    own apprehensions, Hispanic Caucus members are under substantial political pressure from
    bilingual advocates to steer clear of an alternative.

    IV.    Options

    Option 1.      Transmit Administration Bill Within the Next Week

           We could be ready to transmit an Administration alternative to Riggs in concert with the
    Portland State commencement address, perhaps leaked before a day or two before the address, or
    following up the address shortly thereafter.

            Sending up a bill in the near future would demonstrate your clear committrnent to
    reforming bilingual education, and would position you in the reasonable center of the emerging
    national debate, between those such as Unz and Riggs who are proposing extreme and punative
    approaches on the one hand, and those who are defending the status quo that was rejected by a
    large margin of the public, at least in California. From this point of view it would be preferable
    to send the bill up well in advance of the floor vote, so that your proposal is not seen merely as
    a legislative gambit in reaction to Riggs. A bill sent up now may not gamer much support


                                                      2
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

among Democrats or even be introduced. However, we believe that the chances of legislation to
reform bilingual education reaching your desk this year are slim in any event. Over the longer
term, by staking out a clear and independent Administration position now, you can have a
significant impact on next year's debate.
         There are significant legislative downsides to introducing an Administration bill now,
without taking the longer time necessary for consultation with House Democrats and key
constituency groups. In particular, introducing an alternative within the next week or so would
be perceived by the Hispanic Caucus as jumping the gun strategically, and preempting
meaningful consultation regarding the substance of an alternative. It would generate a hostile
reaction from the Caucus, and is likely to recreate the same divisions among House Democrats
we saw last year on national testing. The prospects that the Black Caucus would ally itself with
the Hispanic Caucus and Republicans in opposition to your bill are high. Under these
circumstances, there is a good chance that your proposal would not find a Democratic sponsor, or
if introduced and allowed to come up on the floor as an alternative to Riggs, would be defeated
by a large, bipartisan margin. Opposition by the Hispanic and Black Caucus would almost
certainly spill over into renewed opposition to continued funding for the national test (though the
prospects of support from the two caucuses is slim at best in any event), and perhaps to other
legislative battles as well.

Option 2.      Defer to the Congressional Democrats on the Timing of Transmittal

        The alternative course of action would be to proceed immediately to consult with
members of the Hispanic Caucus and other Democrats on the shape of an alternative bill, using
the Administration bill as the starting point, and making our 3-year goal and strengthened
accountability as nonnegotiable principles which must be incorporated into any legislation we
would support. While there is no guarantee that Democrats in general and the Members of the
Hispanic Caucus in particular will endorse our approach, we can gain leverage in these
negotiations by making clear that a veto threat remains dependent upon the introduction of an
alternative consistent with our principles. Since no bilingual education bill is likely to pass this
year, we can also make clear that we will transmit a reauthorization bill next year that is fully
consistent with these principles.

        If we determine together· with House Democrats that an alternative is strategically
necessary when the bill comes to the floor, we could then introduce a bill consistent with our
principles that would unite, rather than divide Democrats. Alternatively, if House Democrats
either do not want an alternative when the Riggs bill reaches the floor, or will not support an
approach based on our principles, we can reassess our position at that time and either send up our
own alternative or choose to wait until next year's reauthorization.

        This approach is more likely to unite the Democrats over a potentially divisive issue, keep
them united for the larger education and other battles over the coming months, and enable those
of us in the Administration to focus our time and energy on fights with Republicans rather than
on infighting within the Democratic Caucus.


                                                 3



                                                                           Autoi11amd ~eeord5 Managen:'ent System
                                                                                   He~.D\lmp ConversIon


               There are clear downsides to this approach as well. It gives a large measure of control
        over the timing and, to some extent the content, of your own proposal in the hands of Members.
        who do not share your views about the need or way to reform bilingual education.
        Consequently, the chances are high that you would not transmit legislation at all this year, and
        you would therefore be unable to position yourself or to effectively define the debate.

               Recommendation: Your advisors are split on this issue. On policy grounds, Bruce Reed
        favors Optionl, though he recognizes that your final determination may depend more upon
        political than policy calculations. Maria Echeveste, Janet Murguia, Mickey !berra and Karen
        Skelton recommend Option 2. [need to find out where Riley, Sperling, and Stein are before
        staffing this.]


        ___Option 1            ___Option 2           - - -Discuss
           Send Now              Defer to House
                                 Democrats on Timing




                                                      4


