RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-JUN-1998 11:23:45.00

SUBJECT:   Here is the Sessions-Jeffords liability amendment

TO: Cynthia Dailard   CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D94]MAIL46208706Y.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504350040000010A020100000002050000007D5400000002000062164F11A587EF6E766C93
D7B7465C42CD2A38E91BOOCA43076D89C198B0557AC331EB10518E2F2731632F2C62864B22160F
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
               SESSIONS (AND OTHERS) AMENDMENT NO. 2459

  (Ordered to lie on the table.)

   Mr. SESSIONS (for himslf, Mr. Jeffords, Mr. Enzi, and Mr. Faircloth)
submitted an amendment intended to be proposed by them to the bill, S.
1415, supra; as follows:

      Beginning on page 435, strike line 12 and all that follows
    through line 4 on page 442, and insert the following:

    SEC. 1413. NATIONAL TOBACCO COMPENSATION PROGRAM.


      (a) Administration by Secretary.--The Secretary of Health
    and Human Services (referred to in this section as the
    "Secretary") shall administer the Voluntary National
    Tobacco Compensation Program (referred to in this section as
    the "Program") established under this section.

      (b) Voluntary Payments by Industry.--
      (1) Certain tobacco product manufacturers.--The amount of
    the voluntary contributions described in this subsection for
    each year during which the Program is in existence shall
    equal, in the aggregate, $8,000,000,000, to be apportioned as
    follows:

      (A) Phillip Morris Incorporated--65.8 percent.
      (B) Brown and Williamson Tobacco CorPoration--17.3 percent.
      (C) Lorillard Tobacco Company--7.1 percent.
      (D) R.I. Reynolds Tobacco Company--6.6 percent.
      (E) United States Tobacco Company--3.2 percent.
      (2) Contributions in future years.--If contributions under
    paragraph (1) result in amounts in the fund exceeding
    $25,000,000,000 in any fiscal year, any such excess amount
    shall be made available to the States as provided for in
    section 452.

     (3) No contribution from other tobacco product
    manufacturers.--No other tobacco product manufacturer may
    make contributions under this subsection unless such
    manufacturer is the successor or assign of one or more of the .
    manufacturers described in paragraph (1).

      (4) Commencement ofprogram.--The Program shall commence
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
operations on the date on which at least 1 manufacturer has
paid the full share of its contribution under this
subsection. The Program shall only be available to those
manufacturers that have contributed their full shares under
this subsection.

  (c) Responsibility of Secretary.--The Secretary shall
administer the Program pursuant to the guidelines established
by the National Tobacco Compensation Commission established
under subsection (d).

  (d) NationalTobacco Compensation Commission:--
  (1) Establishment.--There is hereby established a
commission to be known as the "National Tobacco Compensation
Commission" (referred to in this subsection as the
"Commission").

 (2) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of7
members, of which--

  (A) 1 member shall be appointed by the President;
  (B) 2 members shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of
the Senate;

  (C) 1 member shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of
the Senate;

 (0) 2 members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the
House of Representatives; and

  (E) 1 member shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of
the House of Representatives.

  (3) Time for appointment, terms and vacancies.--The members
of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 90 days
after the date of enactment of this Act. A vacancy in the
Commission shal1 not affect the powers of the Commission and
shall be filled in the same manner in which the original
appointment was made.

  (4) Compensation and expenses.--Members of the Commission
may not receive compensation for service on the Commission.
Such members may, in accordance with chapter 57 of title 5,
United States Code, be reimbursed for reasonable travel,
subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
carrying out the duties of the Commission, notwithstanding
the limitations contained in sections 5701 through 5733 of
such title 5.

   (5) Establishment ofprogram.--Not later than 90 days after
the expiration of the period described in paragraph (3), the
Commission, in consultation with the Secretary and the
Congress, shall establish a Voluntary National Tobacco
Compensation Program to provide compensation to claimants who
have a total disability or terminal disease, as classified
under the list developed under subsection (e)(2), that is
directly attributable to the use of a tobacco product in
accordance with subsection (e)(3). Such program shall,
subject to the payment of contributions under subsection (b),
continue in operation for the 25-year period beginning on the
date of enactment of this Act, or until the provisions of
this title are repealed, whichever occurs first. Congress may
at any time act to reauthorize and extend the Program
established under this section.

  (6) Duties.--The Commission shall--
  (A) annually meet and review the most recent scientific
developments and research relating to tobacco use and update
the comprehensive list described in subsection (e)(2);

  (B) develop rules and procedures for the administration of
the program established under this section;

  (C) develop procedures for paying compensation to claimants
under this section, including procedures to provide for the
payment of such claims over more than 1 year if sufficient
funds are not available under subsection (b) for the year in
which the c,1aim is made;

  (D) develop procedures for the submission of conflicts to
binding arbitration;

  (E) procedures for waiving the compensation limitations
described in subsection (e) in cases of extraordinary
circumstances;

  (F) procedures for the conduct of internal reviews under
subsection (e)(8)(A);

  (0) carry out any other activities determined appropriate
    by the Commission; and                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion .

      (H) at its discretion based on the remaining funds make a
    determination as to the availability of the Program for
    individuals with a partial disability that is directly
    attributable to the use of a tobacco product in accordance
    with subsection (e)(3), while assuring that claimants
    suffering from a total disability or terminal disease that is
    directly attributable to the use of a tobacco product have a
    priority when applying for compensation under the Program.

      (7) Report.--
      (A) In general.c-Not later than 180 days after the
    expiration of the period described in paragraph (3), the
    Commission shall prepare a report that describes the
    establishment, guidelines and operations of the Program, that
    recommends adjustments in the contribution levels under
    subsection (b), that provides the list of illnesses described
    in subsection (e)(3), and that provides the procedures
    described in subsection (e)(5).

      (B) Submission.--The report described in subparagraph (A)
    shall be submitted to the--

      (i) President and the Secretary;
      (ii) Majority and Minority Leaders of the Senate;
      (iii) Committees on Commerce, Labor and Human Resources,
    Finance, and Judiciary of the Senate;

     (iv) Speaker and Minority Leader of the House of
    Representatives; and

      (v) Committees on Commerce, Judiciary, and Ways and Means
    of the House of Representatives.

[*S5703]


      (8) Information.--Each department, agency, and
    instrumentality of the executive branch of the Federal
    Government, including independent agencies, shall furnish to
    the Commission, upon request by the Commission, such
    information as the Commission determines to be necessary to
    carry out its functions under this section.
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
   (9) Use of services and facilities.--The Commission may
 utilize the services and facilities of any Federal agency
 without reimbursement, may accept voluntary services
 notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code,
 and may enter into contracts with any public or private
 person or entity for reports or research in furtherance of
 the work of the Commission.

   (10) Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the
 date that is 5 years after the date on which the final report
 of the Commission is submitted under paragraph (7). Congress
 may at any time act to reauthorize and extend the Commission
 established under this subsection.

    (11) Authorization of Appropriations.--Subject to the
 limitation described in subsection (e), there is authorized
 to be appropriated not to exceed $1,000,000 for each of the
 fiscal years during which the Commission is in operation,
 from the National Tobacco Settlement Trust Fund to carry out
 this section.

  (e) Procedure.--The Commission, in developing the National
Tobacco Compensation Program under subsection (d), shall
establish--

   (1) procedures under which an individual with a disease
 described in subsection (d)(5) may file a one-time
 administrative claim per separate and distinct disease with
 the Secretary seeking compensation for any and all diseases
 and conditions appearing on the comprehensive list described
 in paragraph (2);

   (2) procedures to ensure that such claims are submitted on
 a form to be developed by the Commission that shall contain--

   (A) the name and address of the individual;
   (B) a description of the disease or condition for which the
 individual is seeking compensation; and

   (C) any other supporting documentation that is determined
 appropriate by the Commission or the Secretary;        .

    (3) in consultation with the Centers for Disease Control
. and Prevention, the Department of Health and Human Services,
  and appropriate committees of Congress, a comprehensive list
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
of diseases and conditions which constitute total disability
or are terminal for purposes of paying claims brought under
this section on an equitable basis, taking into consideration
age and tobacco product use history, including tobacco use in
conjunction with exposure to asbestos and black lung disease;

  (4) procedures to require that a claimant provide
supporting documentation that such claimant has a compensable
disease that is directly attributable to the use of tobacco,
including documentation pertaining to the claimants tobacco
use history and exposure to asbestos or black lung disease;

  (5) procedures, in order to make a determination with
respect to a claim under paragraph (2), or to make a
determination with respect to the amount of compensation for
which a claimant is eligible, for the requesting from a
claimant of additional information relating to the disease or
condition involved;

  (6) procedures for the implementation of a schedule to pay
claims in a manner that ensure the full payment of claims;

   (7) streamlined procedures so as to ensure that a claimant
is not required to be represented by an attorney;

  (8) procedures to provide forthe resolution of disputes
regarding determinations of the Secretary concerning the
eligibility of the claimant for compensation, or the amount
of compensation to be paid, under which the claimant may--

  (A) obtain an internal review of the determination of the
Secretary;

  (8) after a review under subparagraph (A), submit the
dispute to arbitration as described in subsection (d)(6)(D)
under procedures to be established by the Commission; and

   (C) after an arbitration hearing under subparagraph (8),
file a civil action against the manufacturer involved;

  (9) procedures to provide for the collection of voluntary
contributions under subsection (b); and

 (10) procedures to ensure that the liability of
manufacturers for claims under this section are separate
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
based on the illnesses involved and the nature of the tobacco
product involved.

  (f) No Judicial Action.--Except as provided in subsection
(e)(8)(C), upon the contribution of funds as provided for
under subsection (b), an individual may not commence a
tobacco claim in any Federal or State court against a tobacco
product manufacturer who makes such a contribution.

  (g) Administration and Attorneys Fees.--
  (l) In general.--The procedures developed under subsection
(e) shall ensure that amounts paid from the Program in
connection with administrative costs do not exceed an amount
equal to 10 percent of the amounts available under the
program is each fiscal year.

  (2) Attorneys fees.--
  (A) In general.--Procedures developed under subsection (e)
shall provide that, whenever the Secretary renders a
determination favorable to a claimant under the Program and
that claimant was represented by an attorney, the Secretary
may determine and allow as part of its determination a
reasonable fee for such representation, not in excess of 10
percent of the total of the benefits to which the claimant is
entitled by reason of such determination. In case of any such
determination, no fee may be payable or certified for payment
for such representation except as provided in this paragraph.

  (B) Limitation.--Any attorney who charges, demands,
receives, or collects for services rendered in connection
with proceedings to which subparagraph (A) applies, any
amount in excess of that permitted under such subparagraph
(A) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or
imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or both.

   (h) Time for Payment.--The Secretary shall take steps to
ensure that, to the maximum extent practicable, claimants
receive compensation in accordance with this section not
later than 90 days after the date on which the claim involved
is filed.

   (i) Limitation With Respect to Prisoners.--No individual
incarcerated in a Federal, State or local prison or jail may
file a claim with the Program under this section.




                                                                      Aulllmalad Records Management System
       CD Applicability.--This section shall apply as provided                 Hex-Dump Conversion
     for under subsection (b)( 4). The provisions of section 14 i 2
     shall apply only if the voluntary contributions are not made
     in any year or are less than the amount described in
     subsection (b) in any year.

       (k) Effective Date.--The Secretary shall implement the
     compensation program under this section not later than 90
     days after the date on which the report of the Commission is
     submitted under subsection (d)(7).
                                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

NATIONAL TOBACCO POLICY AND YOUTH SMOKING REDUCTION ACT (Senate
                     - June 09, 1998)


Mr. JEFFORDS addressed the Chair.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Vermont is recognized.

Mr. JEFFORDS. Mr. President, Senator McCain has said I may yield myself such time as I may
consume.

The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator is recognized.

Mr. JEFFORDS. Mr. President, I am here today to talk about the tobacco bill. As we all know,
under the present circumstances, we don't seem to be making much progress. On the other hand, I
have been here long enough to know that sometimes we go through these phases where we come to
situations where we have sort of a partisan battle on how we should proceed, and then finally, after
we do that for a while, we recognize that we both oUght to sit down and try to reconcile our
differences and join together to make sure we do not let this opportunity pass that we have before
us, where we could do so much to help, on the one hand, stop teenagers from starting to smoke .
and, on the other hand, help those who are addicted to tobacco and do what we can to ensure that
they are taken care of.

One of the most sticky problems we have is what to do as far as how to compensate the victims of
tobacco. We tried initially to have a system set up where the amount of money that would be subject
to lawsuits and claims would be capped. That was killed with the Gregg-Leahy amendment. I have
been involved in a number of issues over the years involving these kinds of matters, not the least of
which was examining the situation with respect to asbestos, black lung disease, and other matters.

And it seemed to me and to others that we ought to look at it as an opportunity to find a solution
other than through the court system.

I am here today to. talk about an amendment that Senator Sessions, Senator Enzi, and I plan to
offer in the Senate--in fact, it has already been placed on file--to see what we can do to try to find a
more humane system to solve this very difficult situation. Hours, days, and weeks have been spent
arguing about liability, per-pack tax levels, States rights, and other issues.

But why are we really here?

No.1, to reduce teen smoking; and, most importantly, to assure that teens don't start smoking,
because we know if they don't start smoking, the odds are they never will smoke. Also, to
strengthen the public health program and to ensure that victims of smoking ate compensated fairly.
That is what I would like to concentrate on today. The amendment that we have will bring logic to
the system of compensating individuals.
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

As I mentioned earlier, throughout my time in Congress I have authored legislation to prevent
smoking, supported increasing cigarette prices and requiring manufacturers to disclose the
ingredients in cigarettes, and worked to reverse the impact of tobacco on the health of Americans. In
fact, the present bill contains a substantial amount of the language that came from our committee in
these areas. It has been adopted by the McCain bill. We have some very good provisions in the
basic bill. We have a foundation to build upon. I have done all of these things hoping that together
we could end the blight that cigarettes have brought to the lives of millions in this Nation.

Any legislation that Congress approves must ensure that families and individuals harmed by tobacco
receive compensation in a timely and equitable manner. I fear, though, that this legislation we are
finally considering will not achieve that goal. I am sure it won't. That is why I am here today.

With this bill, States are granted funds to begin to pay the health costs associated with smoking.
Individuals, however, are left on their own to seek justice through the court system. You can only
imagine the consequence of 50 million people bringing lawsuits. That is the number of potential
claimants that you have. I know many lawyers out there are only all too ready to participate in this
action. With up to 40 percent of the compensation going directly into their pockets, on the average,
the lawyers in this Nation are happy to see this situation occur. But I am not sure that is the most
equitable and fair way of doing it. Billions of dollars are at stake, and millions of people's lives are at
stake.

But if the legal profession benefits, who loses? Those truly deserving of compensation--smokers and
their famiiies facing serious health consequences from smoking--will be left counting pennies. Our
amendment attempts to hand these funds to those Americans who must recover from the tragedy of
their addiction, and their families.


