RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:15-JUN-1998 19:11:03.00

SUBJECT:   draft Q&A for review

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
IREAD:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=wHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This is for tomorrow's event.     Sorry we're running late.   Thanks.

==================== ATTACHMENT . 1 ================~===
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D91]MAIL49689766A.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043CE05D000010AD2010000DD0205000D00512C00000002000045067E364B529054DCD346
7349AB8291D8D4E2B454C4053BCAD1D2BE259CFF763C3A388B72D2BC1A9AB33BB1EBA2CC85835A
4C11CE35677F3D5B304415BE25E5ED7DB8D4C8BOEEFC8F718F7F17E99A9716D5CC7279B265176C
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

                           Law Enforcement Bill Signing Event
                                     June 16, 1998
                                Questions and Answers


Q.    What were the bills the President signed today?

A.    The President signed two bills to provide needed assistance to law enforcement and their
      families: The Bulletproof Vest Partnership Grant Act, and the Care for Police Survivors
      Act.

             (1) Bulletproof Vest Bill: The FBI estimates that the risk of a gun-related fatality
             for an officer not wearing an armor vest is 14 times higher than one who does;
             however, more than 25% of state and local law enforcement officers do not have
             bulletproof vests. The Bulletproof Vest Partnership Grant Act of 1997, sponsored
             by Senators Leahy and Campbell and Representative Visc1osky, establishes a
             new grant program at the Justice Department to help state and local departments
             provide vests for their officers. Grants will fund up to half of the cost of the vest,
             with state and local governments responsible for the remaining costs. The Act
             authorizes $25 million each year to fund the vest program from FY 1999 to FY
             2001.

             (2) Counseling Support for Survivors of Slain Officers: The President will sign
             the Care for Police Survivors Act, sponsored by Representatives McCollum and
             Schumer and Senators Biden and Hatch. The legislation guarantees that a
             minimum level of funding made available to maintain and enhance counseling
             programs that assist the families of public safety officers who die in the line of
             duty.

 Q.    Did the President announce anything new?

A.    The President made two additional announcements at the bill signing event. First, as
      part of an ongoing effort to make our schools safer, the President called on the Attorney
      General and the Secretary of Education to report back to him with an action plan before.
      the next school year to ensure that COPS funding would be available to all schools
      interested in creating partnerships with their local law enforcement agencies. To
      complement this effort, the President announced his support for legislation introduced by
      Representative James Maloney (D-CT) to promote the deployment of community police
      officers to work in and with local school districts.

      Second, the President announced $27 million in COPS grants to 73 state and local law
      enforcement agencies across the country to hire 383 new officers. Today's COPS grants
      will bring the total number of officers funded through the Clinton COPS Program to over
      76,000.
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

Q.    Could you provide more detail on what the President directed the Attorney General
      and the Secretary to do with regard to police in schools?

A.    In March, the President announced that the Justice Department, through our COPS
      program, would make $17.5 million available for schools to work more closely with local
      law enforcement and others in the community to reduce crime and violence in and near
      schools. But the demand for these resources has turned out to be much greater than the
      funds set aside for this purpose.

      To help meet the demand, the President instructed the Attorney General and the
      Secretary of Education to present him with a plan before the beginning of the next
      school year to ensure that COPS funding would be available to bring community
      policing techniques to all interested schools.

      We believe additional assistance can be provided to schools with current resources
      from our COPS program -- and this Administration will do everything in its power to
      make sure these resources are available to help our schools. But the President also
      sought strong bipartisan support from Congress to put this plan into practice; to this end,
      he called on Congress to take the additional step and pass the legislation introduced by
      Rep. Jim Maloney to guarantee that funds from the COPS Program can be used to deploy
      more community police in our schools as well as for other related purposes.


Administration's Response to School Violence

Q.    What came out of the President's meeting with school violence experts in April? Is
      the President or the Administration taking any action in response?

A.    As a follow up to the horrible tragedy in Jonesboro, in April, the President sat down with
      youth violence experts -- from principals to parents to prosecutors -- to discuss what we
      can do at all levels to keep these tragedies from occurring in the first place.

      We learned that kids killing kids with guns in multiple school shootings is occurring with
      greater frequency, but remains relatively rare. And while school shootings are a limited
      problem, we must continue efforts to help ensure that no school is forced to endure the
      type of senseless and brutal violence that occurred in Springfield and Jonesboro.

      That is why the President is committed to making sure that parents, communities, and the
      schools themselves: 1) have better information on the school violence problem; and 2) the
      tools they need to help address the problem. In the aftermath of the West Paducah
      shooting, the President called on the Attorney General and Secretary Riley to develop an
      annual report on school safety to provide assistance on both of these fronts. The report
      will be released at the beginning of the next school year. Moreover, in March, the
      President announced funding for a new community policing program the COPS Office
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

      focused on reducing violence on or near school grounds. And in his radio address last
      Saturday, the President directed the Secretary of Education and the Attorney General to
      develop a guide to help teachers and principals identify and respond to the early warning
      signs of troubled youth that can lead to school violence.

      At the round table, there was also broad agreement that we should be focused on tackling
      the larger problem of youth violence. That is why the 'President continues to challenge
      the Congress to pass his strategy on youth violence before they adjourn for the year. The
      President's plan takes on youth access to guns, tough punishment for violent youths and
      gangs, and provides additional adult supervision in the after school hours when violent
      juvenile crime is most likely to occur,


Extension of the Waiting Period for Handgun Sales

Q.    On Sunday, Rahm Emanuel indicated that the Administration supports extending
      the waiting period past its expiration this fall. Is the Administration going to
      support legislation to accomplish this?

A.    This Administration has been on record in support of the 5-day waiting period for
      handgun purchases since 1993 -- the year the President fought for and signed the Brady
      Bill into law. During this time, we believe that the waiting period has been a useful
      measure in helping to prevent unauthorized handgun purchases by felons, fugitives, and
      stalkers.

      But our current priority continues to be working with the states to implement the
      Insta-Check system mandated by the Brady Law. The Justice Department has provided
      significant funding and technical assistance to states to ensure that when the Insta-Check
      system becomes operational in November 1998, it has the most complete and accurate
      criminal history records as possible.

      Moreover, we are continuing to urge Congress before it adjourns this session to extend
      the Brady Law to violent juveniles -- to make sure that violent youths are barred from gun
      purchases for life; to pass comprehensive juvenile crime legislation; and to increase
      resources to combat gun trafficking.
I
