RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 12-JUN-1998 19:13:55.00

SUBJECT:   Abortion Memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D13]MAIL46602066J.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750439D050000010A02010000000205000000953100000002000082B2147F202056A8C5E20F
4632EF028A510183EB918134B95C2803A881570CD031AED44COC9EA20F3D8090565DBCB323F556
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


                                        June 12, 1998




MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

FROM:         Bruce Reed, Charles F.e. Ruff

SUBJECT:      Hyde Amendment Application to Medicare and Abortion Coverage Requirements
              for Catholic Provider Sponsored Organizations


As you know, some women of child-bearing age qualify for Medicare because they receive
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI). Senator Nickles has asked HHS whether the Hyde
Amendment's restrictions on government funding of abortion apply to the Medicare program.
He also has asked whether health plans that refuse, on religious grounds, to provide abortion
services can still become Provider Sponsored Organizations (PSOs).

We believe that we must respond quickly to Senator Nickles to have any chance of avoiding
another legislative confrontation over abortion policy. This memo provides background
information and policy options for your consideration.

Background

Earlier this year, the Catholic Health Association (CHA) contacted HHS and the White House
about a ruling by a HCFA regional office that a Catholic-run PSO could participate in Medicare
only if it agreed to cover qualified abortions for women with disabilities. The CHA vehemently
objected to this ruling and asked if we could intervene administratively. At the same time, the
CHA contacted Senator Nickles' office. The CHA discussed with Nickles both whether the
Hyde Amendment applies to Medicare and whether Catholic PSOs can decline to provide all
abortions (even those permitted under Hyde). The Senator, clearly sensing another abortion
wedge issue, wrote to Donna Shalala to obtain the Department's formal position on both of these
issues.

Medicare and Abortion coverage.   Five million non-elderly disabled Americans -- including two
million women -- receive Medicare coverage by virtue of their ssm eligibility. The Medicare
program currently covers about 500 abortions each year, while denying claims in another
100-200 cases. These figures are consistent with those from the Reagan and Bush
Administrations.

In 1991, HCFA issued a reimbursement directive stating that Medicare would cover abortion
-,                                                                              Automated Records Management Systerr
                                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


     services only in cases where the life of the mother was endangered. (Prior to this time, there
     was no clear guidance on the subject.) This directive, which comported with the then-existing
     Hyde Amendment, is actually more restrictive than the current Hyde amendment, because it fails
     to cover abortions arising from rape and incest. The directive, however, has not been modified,
     and remains the only policy guidance on abortion coverage un~er the Medicare program.

       Although we believe that most Medicare carrier medical directors have largely complied with this
     . directive, some may have covered other kinds of abortions -- ~, abortions arising-from rape or
       incest, abortions involving deformed fetuses, or other medically necessary abortions. In
       particular, carriers may have decided to cover some very difficult cases involving the one-third of
       women on Medicare disability who have some serious mental impairment (about 700,000
       women). Such individual coverage decisions may help explain why no one on the pro-choice
       side of the abortion debate has ever complained about our coverage policy.

     Legisladve and Political Environment. The Nickles' letter has started yet another controversial
     abortion debate. The CHA is working with Senator Nickles and others on drafting legislation
     to make clear that Hyde applies to Medicare, as well as to exempt organizations with ethical or
     religious scruples from any abortion coverage requirements. (CHA and Nickles have gotten the
     impression from HHS that Hyde does not apply to Medicare and that the religious convictions
     of Catholic PSOs cannot be fully accommodated.) Absent administrative action, there is no doubt
     that we will see this issue raised on some appropriations bill. At the same time, the womens'
     groups have been tipped off to this issue and are urging the Administration to adopt a generous
     Medicare abortion coverage policy.

     Opdons to Respond to the CHA and Senator Nickles. All of your advisors (HHS, OMB, and
     DPC) agree that we should offer the CHA a new administrative option that allows Catholic
     health plans to participate in Medicare without covering any abortions, so long as they accept a
     slightly reduced capitated payment. We do not know whether CHA will accept this offer, but
     think it may do so, particularly if the offer is combined with CHA's preferred outcome on the
     Hyde issue.

     The outstanding question is whether Hyde applies to Medicare. Since the "life of the mother"
     interpretation contained in the most recent guidance is more restrictive than the current Hyde
     amendment, we all agree that the guidance should be modified to cover at least abortions arising
     from rape and incest. We have not reached consensus, however, on whether we should also
     cover any other abortions (i.e., any abortions that Hyde generally bars from federal funding).
     We see two viable options:



      Option 1:      Rule that the current Hyde Amendment (allowing funding where the life of the

                                                       2
      .
      ,


                                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                      woman is in danger or in cases of rape and incest) applies to Medicare. Under this
                      option, we would take the position that since some Hyde-covered appropriated
                      funds are deposited into the Medicare Trust Fund, all Medicare expenditures must
                      abide by the Hyde restrictions. We then would update our Medicare coverage
                      policy to reflect the current, comparatively expansive Hyde Amendment. This
                      position is supported by OMB and DPC.

                      Pros:

                             This option is most likely to avoid a legislative showdown on abortion
                              funding issue we are unlikely to win.

                             This option is consistent with our current position on Medicaid funding.

                             This option increases our ability to reach an agreement with the CHA on
                              the PSO abortion coverage issue.

                      Cons:

                             This option may reduce the number of abortions covered (assuming some
                              carriers are simply ignoring the current reimbursement directive, but will
                              have to comply with an updated directive) and expose us to criticism about
                              non-coverage of extremely sympathetic cases involving vulnerable and
                              disabled women.

                             This option will anger womens' groups, which would prefer us to provide
                              Medicare coverage of the widest possible range of abortions, even if doing
                              so would provoke the Republicans to enact contrary legislation.


          Option 2:   Rule that Medicare can cover abortions necessary to protect the health of the woman
                      (in addition to abortions allowed by Hyde) by segregating appropriated funds from
                      non-appropriated funds (payroll tax, premiums, etc.) in the Medicare Trust Fund and
                      using the non-appropriated (and hence unrestricted) funds to pay for the health-related
                      abortions. ,

                      Pros:

                             This option will ensure that all abortions necessary to protect a woman's
                              health are covered, and thereby avoid criticism arising from non-coverage


                                                        3
                                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

                                     of highly sympathetic cases involving vulnerable and disabled women.

                                    This option will assuage the womens' groups by providing for Medicare
                                     coverage of a larger class of abortions.

                             Cons:

                                    This option will virtually guarantee a legislative battle with Senator Nickles
                                     and his allies on the appropriateness of using public funds to pay for
                                     abortions. (This fight is not worthwhile unless we are willing to engage
                                     in a veto strategy.)

                                    This option might well undermine our ability to reach agreement with the
                                     CHA on the PSO abortion coverage issue.


              At this time, HHS opposes both of these options. HHS supports covering abortions necessary
              to protect health (as in option 2), but wants to do so without separating appropriated from
              unappropriated monies in the Medicare Trust Fund. HHS argues that no such segregation is
              needed to escape restrictions on appropriated funds when these funds have been commingled
              with non-appropriated monies.

              White House Counsel, OMB and Justice believe the HHS approach raises serious legal
              questions. OMB takes the position that HHS must segregate funds in the Trust Fund in order
              to expend any non-appropriated funds in ways not allowed by Hyde. White House Counsel
              and the Justice Department believe that HHS needs to defer to OMB's direction. . Therefore, we
              believe it would be inappropriate to forward the HHS option. We believe you should be
              aware, however, that the Secretary opposes both of the options we are providing.

              As noted, DPC and OMB support Option 1, because (1) it is most consistent with this
              Administration's prior practice on government funding of abortions and (2) it stands the best
              chance of avoiding a high-profile legislative battle on both the Hyde and PSO issues that we are
              unlikely to win. Counsel's Office takes no position as between the two legal options presented
              above.




                                                               4


