RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:12-JUN-1998 11:37:36.00

SUBJECT:   Complete Weekly Report 6/12 - Paul has reviewed

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D52]MAIL43955456Y.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043ECOE0000010A020100000002Q5000000775A0000000200005BE4E51EFE98EF9F8D324D
1B21A54F1BEC9842AB54FA7E75184CF53FACABEA5AE1E5601DA2BA008AB065AEB2F9B90ED44C1D
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion



                                            June 11, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT·

FROM:           Bruce Reed
                Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report


        Tobacco -- Senate Update: The Senate passed two amendments to the McCain bill this
week. The first, approved by a 52-46 vote, is a Craig-Coverdell amendment which authorizes
about $2 billion per year for anti-drug efforts, creating another competitor for the diminishing
pool of public health dollars. The amendment also includes a permanent prohibition on the use
of federal monies for needle exchange and a program to allow education vouchers to students
who have been the victims of school violence. A Democratic alternative to the Craig-Coverdell
amendment, which spent less money and did not contain the permanent needle exchange ban or
voucher provision, was defeated by a vote of 53-45.

        The Senate also passed by a vote of 50-48 the Gramm tax-cut amendment. The Gramm
amendment costs $16 billion over the first four years, an additional $30 billion in the next five
years, and one-third of the funding under the bill after that. The amendment provides all couples
with annual incomes below $50,000 a new tax deduction of $825 this year, rising to $3,300 in
2008, and would provide full deductibility of health insurance for the self-employed. The
Senate rejected a less costly substitute offered by Senator Daschle by a vote of 55-43.

         As a result of these votes, key groups have expressed concern over the diminishing
dollars available for other purposes under the legislation. The Governors have drafted a letter
objecting to the state financing section of the bill because the funding level has dropped below
the $196.5 billion over 25 years originally contained in the bill to settle state suits (the same level
 contained in the June 20, 1997 settlement agreement with the Attorneys General). Public
health groups such as the Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids, the American Cancer Society, and
the American Heart Association, are concerned that funding will not be available for public
health programs. Secretary Shalala, Erskine, and we met with them on Friday and explained that
the bill would not move through the Senate without funding for tax cuts and anti-drug provisions,
and have urged them to work hard over the next few days to achieve final passage.

        Key amendments are still expected on hot-button issues such as attorneys fees, resolving
the disputed proposal on farmers, as well as two Republican substitute bills. We are hopeful
that the Senate will move on to final passage by the end of the week.
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
      On Monday, you will be speaking to 200 high school Presidential scholars in the East
Room, where you will have an opportunity to urge swift passage of the tobacco legislation.

        Education -- National Testing: There are several new reports which support our
efforts on national testing. First, GAO has confirmed in a letter to Goodling and Ashcroft,
that the Education Department already has sufficient authority to develop and conduct
national tests, and does not require additional Congressional authorization. Second, on
June 12 the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) will release an interim report on the
Goodling-proposed study, required by the compromise legislation last fall, examining the
feasibility of statistically linking scores from existing commercial and state tests to each
other and to NAEP. The NAS has concluded that it is not technically feasible to compare
student scores across different tests to each other or to the NAEP standards. This
conclusion completely undermines Goodling's argument that existing tests could be used to
accomplish the purpose of the national test. While both of these reports bolster the case
for our testing initiative, they are not likely to dampen Goodling and Ashcroft's opposition.
 Earlier this week, they received assurances from Gingrich and Lott that an anti-testing·
rider would be added again to the Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations bill.

         Crime -- Kids and Guns in Schools: On June 18, the National Parents' Resource
Institute for Drug Education (PRIDE) will release their annual survey on teen drug use and
violence for the 1997-98 school year. Over 154,000 students grades 6-12 were interviewed for
the survey. While we have not yet seen the data on illicit drug use by teens, PRIDE has shared
some of their findings with us on school violence. One key finding is that the percentage of
students who reported carrying a gun to school decreased by over a third since the 1994-94
school year -- from 6% to 3.8% (3.8% represents nearly I million students). However, of those .
students who brought a gun to school, almost half did so 6 or more times; over half threatened to
harm a teacher; and nearly two-thirds threatened to harm another student. Moreover, monthly
drug use was very high for students carrying guns: 30% used cocaine; 32% used stimulants such
as methamphetamine; and 31 % used hallucinogens. In addition, the survey reaffirms the
effectiveness of involving kids in after school programs and school activities. Students who did
not bring guns to school were 53% more likely to be involved in after school programs and 34%
more likely to be active in school activities such as band and sports than gun-carrying students.

       Child Care -- House Legislation: On June 9, The First Lady and Secretary Shalala
joined House Democrats as they unveiled a comprehensive child care bill that includes all
the pieces of your child care initiative, as well as other proposals, such as a stay-at-home
tax credit. The over $20 billion package will be sponsored by more than 100
Representatives. The proposal does not specify funding sources.

       Health Care -- Patients' Bill of Rights: On Wednesday, Larry Stein, Chuck Brain,
and Chris Jennings met with Congressman Dingell to discuss the patients' bill of rights.
He informed us that he wants to work closely with the Administration should any serious
discussions commence between Congressman Norwood and himselfto develop a unified bill


                                               2
                                                                             Hex·Dump Conversion
to be the vehicle for a discharge position. For the moment, Mr. Dingell believes (and Mr.
Norwood and we agree) that he should stay strong on his state-court liability enforcement
provisions and take the position that a "right is not a right without a remedy." The
patients' bill of rights advocates should be able to maintain their strong position on
enforcement as long as CBO does not come out with a high estimate of the costs associated
with this provision, which could be reported as early as next week. CBO staff are now
informally advising us that they are getting more pressure on these costs estimates than
was the case during the worst days of the Health Security Act. They are also telling us
that the Republican leadership is insisting on reviewing their estimates before they are
released.

        Health Care -- Vice President's Announcement of the Quality Forum: Next
Wednesday, the Vice President is scheduled to unveil a planning committee to establish "a
quality forum", a private sector entity designed to develop a plan to ensure the widespread
availability of comparative information to hold health plans more accountable in providing
high quality care. The "forum" was included in the final recommendations of the Quality
Commission and you asked the Vice President to launch this process. In conjunction with
this announcement, we are releasing a report that highlight~ the many shortcomings of the
current system. For example, one study estimates that preventable errors in hospital care leads
to 180,000 needless deaths each year, and 23 percent of tympanostomy tube insertions for
children with ear infections were found to be inappropriate. Developing consistent
information has great potential to improve health outcomes, increase confidence in the
health care system, and save costs. We will cast this as the next logical step beyond the
patients' bill of rights to improve and monitor rapid changes in the health care delivery
system.

       Health Care -- FDA Commissioner: Should the tobacco legislation be adopted by
the Senate early next week, we hope to announce the nomination of the new FDA
commissioner --Jane Henney. Preli~nary, informal calls have elicited neither major
objections nor overwhelming support for this nomination. While Henney should be
confirmed on her merits, this confirmation may be a challenge, particularly if
Republicans portray her as a Kennedy choice and a David Kessler protegee. One positive
development is that Senator Domenici has agreed to accompany her on courtesy visits to
Republican members of the Senate Labor Committee.

        Health Care -- False Clai~s Act and Fraud and Abuse: Senator Bond and Senator
Hollings are including in appropriations legislation language to water down the False
Claims Act (FCA). It would, for example, prevent the government from pursuing a false
claims' act case against any provider that insitituted a fraud prevention training program
even if the senior management ignored the billing rules that were recommended by the
program. Their action is in response to the hospital industry's criticisms that the Justice
Department has enforced this Act far too aggressively. While there are some legitimate
concerns related to enforcement, the Department is addressing these concerns through


                                               3
                                                                                Hex·Dump Conversion


administrative actions. OMB, HHS, and DPC feel strongly that undermining the
enforcement provisions of the FCA would be extremely counterproductive to our
anti-fraud enforcement activities. We recently authorized a Justice Department letter
recommending a Presidential veto, which received strong support from a Washington Post
editorial. This may be an issue that we should push back extremely hard on to illustrate
our strong commitment to fight fraud and abuse, the issue that most
American's--particularly seniors--believe is one of the primary contributors to an
escalation of health care costs.

        HousinglWelfare Reform -- Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers: On Tuesday, the
Senate VA, HUD Appropriations Subcommittee provided $40 million for new incremental
"self-sufficiency" housing vouchers targeted for people moving from welfare-to-work. The
demonstration program would provide grants to seven sites -- New York City, Los Angeles,
Cleveland, Miami-Dade, Anchorage, Charlotte, and Prince George's County. While providing
substantially less vouchers than the Administration's request -- 7,000 instead of 50,000 -- this is
a small but important victory for the initiative. We are hopeful that the House Subcommittee
will fund more vouchers in the Senate, since Chairman Lewis has indicated some interest in this
program.

       Welfare Reform _. Portland Shows Strong Evalua.tion Results: HHS is preparing to
release an evaluation of Portland, Oregon's welfare reform program showing impacts on
employment, earnings, and reduced welfare expenditures that are among the strongest for
a large-scale mandatory program, comparable to those of the Riverside program. After
two years, participants had 35 percent higher earnings, 11 percent higher employment
levels, and received 17 percent lower welfare payments than those in the control group.
These gains were sustained for two years and are expected to persist into the third year.
Even in this high quality program, 41 percent of the participants were receiving welfare
after two years although this compares favorably with 53 percent for the control group.
The study, by MDRC, tracked over 5,500 recipients from 1993 through mid-1996 and is
part of HHS' seven site national evaluation of welfare-to-work strategies that began under
the JOBS program.

       Portland's program had a strong employment focus, with a particular emphasis on
job quality. Compared to some other programs that emphasize taking any job, Portland
participants were encouraged to look for and take "good jobs" -- full time, paying above
the minimum wage, with benefits and potential for advancement. Follow-up results show
that participants were more likely to be working in full-time jobs, at higher earnings and
with employer-provided health benefits than those in the control group. While the
program emphasized job search and job placement, a significant number of participants
also participated in short-term education and training. The program had strong positive
impacts both for those with few barriers to employment and those considered "harder to
place". Participation in the program"was required, and 21 percent of participants were
sanctioned for failure to comply (in the mid-range of sanction rates in other programs).


                                                 4
                                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                                                       Hex·Dump Conversion

    Families with children older than one were required to participate (compared to age 6 in
    the Riverside demonstration) and staff emphasized child care arrangements in their case
    management. Not surprisingly, the program had higher child care usage and costs than
    other programs, but this did not result in higher total program costs.

           Welfare Reform -- New Jersey Family Cap Study: Secretary Shalala ~as sent you a
    memo on the New Jersey family cap policy, providing helpful background information
    regarding the Rutgers University evaluation that received considerable press attention last
    week. The press reports focused on evaluation findings that the family cap policy resulted
    in a "small but non-trivial" effect on abortion rates (an additional 240 abortions per year
    over what would be expected based on population trends in NJ). Both the state and HHS
    have pointed out serious methodological concerns with the Rutgers study and believe it is
    too early to draw conclusions about the family cap policy's impact on abortions. The
    report will be revised, but it is likely that researchers and interest groups of various kinds
    will continue to debate the implications of future research findings and of the policy itself.

            New Jersey was the first state to receive a waiver, under the previous
    Administration, to implement a family cap policy. We granted waivers to 14 more states
    to test the policy. The federal welfare reform law left it up to states to decide whether to
    implement a family cap, and a total of 22 states have now adopted such a policy.

            Welfare Reform -- Assisting the Disabled Return to Work: Last week, the House
    passed a bill sponsored by Reps. Bunning and Kennelly to implement an Administration
    initiative to move people on theSSDI and SSI rolls into the workforce by using a "pay for
    performance" approach. Currently, SSDI and SSI beneficiaries get rehabilitation services
    through state vocational rehabilitation agencies, which are reimbursed for their costs and
    have a mixed record of success. Under this bill, SSDI and SSI beneficiaries could choose their
    own public or private rehabilitation providers. Providers who successfully assist beneficiaries in
    leaving the rolls and returning to work would be paid a percentage of the disability benefits
    saved. These payments would continue only as long as the person remained off the rolls, up to
    a maximum of five years. Because providers would be rewarded for results rather than for their
    costs, this should encourage providers to have a continuing interest in their clients' long term
    success.

           The bill's fate in the Senate is uncertain. Senators Jeffords and Kennedy don't
    want to move it unless it is paired with their legislation to extend Medicare and Medicaid
    benefits to those leaving SSDI or SSI. We have a number of problems with their initial
    proposal, including its complexity, its partial Medicaid benefit package, its cost to the
    Medicare trust fund, and its overall cost of $1 billion per year, and are working to develop
    alternatives to the Jeffords-Kennedy approach.




                                                    5


