RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Ingrid M. Schroeder ( CN=Ingrid M. Schroeder/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-APR-1997 12:11:16.00

SUBJECT:     S. 543 - Volunteer Protection Act - DRAFT SAP

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Just wanted to make sure that you have seen the most recent version of the
draft SAP on S. 543.

Please let me know ASAP if you have any comments.    We are trying to get
this up to the Hill early today.

Thanks
---------------------- Forwarded by Ingrid M. Schroeder/OMB/EOP on
04/28/97 12:13 PM ---------------------------




           Ingrid M. Schroeder
           04/28/97 09:59:15 AM

Record Type: Record

To: Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject: S. 543 - Volunteer Protection Act - DRAFT SAP

FYI - S. 543 is scheduled for Senate Floor action this week. Opening
statements on Monday and possibly a vote as soon as Tuesday, April 29th.
Attached is the draft SAP that we are working on.  I understand that Bill
Marshall (WHC) has consulted with Elena Kagan on this (because it ties in
with the product liability issues that she worked on in the WHC's
office). We want to try to wrap up the SAP today.   If you have any
comments please let me know ASAP.


DRAFT-- NOT FOR RELEASE

April 28, 1997
 (Senate)


S. 543 - Volunteer Protection Act of 1997
(Coverdell (R) Georgia and 7 cosponsors)·

Although the Administration strongly supports community service and
volunteerism, it opposes S. 543, the "Volunteer Protection Act of 1997,"
for at least two reasons.

First, the development of tort laws has traditionally been left to the
States in the exercise of their police powers and this tradition has been
par~icularly strong with respect to volunteers, nonprofit organizations,
and government entities.  The Congress has occasionally enacted


legislation in areas traditionally left to the States, but it has done so
only where there has been a problem of national scope, that could not be
dealt with effectively by the States either individually or collectively.
The proponents of this bill have not met the burden of demonstrating the
need for Federal legislation that would override critical features of the
liability laws of the States as they apply to volunteers, nonprofit
organizations, and government entities.

Second, even were there evidence to support Federal legislation in this
area, the Administration has consistently opposed provisions, such as
Section 5 of the Bill, that would abolish joint-and-several liability for
noneconomic damages (e.g., pain and suffering).  This provision would
unfairly discriminate against the most vulnerable members of our society
-- the elderly, the poor, children, and nonworking women -- whose injuries
often involve mostly noneconomic losses.  Noneconomic damages are as
important to victims as economic damages and must not be relegated to
second-class status.

* * * * *


