    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

    CREATION DATE/TlME:16-JUN-1998 13:18:34.00

    SUBJECT:   bilingual memo

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Attached is an updated version of the memo; Broderick Johnson is touching
    base this afternoon with Tim Roemer to see if there is movement from
    moderate Dems on the need for an alternative, and is also trying to get a
    better handle on the prospects for floor action.next week.  However,
    neither of us anticipate his efforts will require changes in the attached
    memo;  there has otherwise been no sign that the moderates have felt the
    need for an alternative, and we don't expect to get a definitive word on
    next week's floor schedule.   Therefore, I thought I'd send this along
    now.  If there are unexpected developments, I'll get back to you.

    ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D51]MAIL429623766.126 to ASCII,
     The following is a HEX DUMP:

    FF57504380040000010A02010000000205000000D632000000020000576AB1D67F771129854D45
    80D36489E4F11353564688410A3098BF5F6FFA763311B90F3F2D888AC34BDABAA68BFEAFF9D3B9
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT

                                            June 16, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          BRUCE REED
               LARRY STEIN (DO YOU WANT TO INCLUDE HIM ON THIS MEMO AS
               REQUESTED BY JANET?)

SUBJECT:       Bilingual Education


        On June 4, the House Education and Workforce Committee reported H.R. 3982, the
English Fluency Act, introduced by Rep. Frank Riggs. This bill raises many of the same
programmatic issues and political dynamics as the Unz Initiative in California. The purpose of
this memo is to update you on this proposal and the development of an Administration
alternative, and to present you with options for how to proceed.

l.      Overview of Riggs Bill

         The bill would eliminate the existing Bilingual Education and Emergency Immigrant
Education programs and would (1) distribute funds through a block grant that is not targeted
toward school districts with the highest quality programs and greatest funding need; (2) require
states to withdraw funding from local programs in cases where students do not master English
within two years and set a 3-year limit for serving any individual student, though it would not
provide any extra help for students or corrective action for programs that need it; (3) not require
States to maintain their own efforts; and (4) eliminate professional development programs
designed to prepared qualified ESL and bilingual education teachers. The bill also seeks to
sharply curtail the enforcement powers of the Education Department's Office of Civil Rights by
voiding existing voluntary compliance agreements between OCR and local school districts with
regard to educating LEP students and by requiring OCR to publish -- and the Congress to ratify --
new guidelines and compliance standards for Title VI enforcement. These provisions would
weaken enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and result in increased litigation.

II.    Development of Administration Alternative

        We are on track to have an alternative bill based on the principles you approved and
Secretary Riley articulated in his statement of opposition to the Unz Initiative completed and
ready for transmittal to Congress by the end of this week. This bill would amend (rather than
replace entirely) the existing bilingual education program. Specifically, it would require (1)
school districts to establish a goal of preparing LEP students to enter successfully regular English
classrooms in not more than three years, (2) annual assessments of student's English proficiency;
(3) additional help for students not on track to English proficiency; (4) a corrective action plan, to
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
be approved by the Secretary, from programs in which a significant percentage of students do not
meet the 3-year goal. If student performance does not improve after a year, no additional funding
would be provided. The bill would also provide incentives for districts that make outstanding
progress toward the three year goal, by providing them with an additional 2-4 years of funding.
In addition, the bill would guarantee local flexibility by removing the existing cap on funding for
programs that do not use the students native language, and would remove the competitive priority
currently given to programs designed to maintain native language while helping students learn
English.


III.    Congressional Dynamic

        H.R. 3892 was reported out of committee on a straight party line vote (22-17).
Notwithstanding the success of the Unz Initiative, Committee Democrats did not feel compelled
to offer an alternative to Riggs's bill during committee markUp. Moderate Committee
Democrats (e.g., Reps. Romer and Kind) as well as the four Members of the Hispanic Caucus on
the Committee (Reps. Martinez, Romero-Barcelo, Hinojosa and Sanchez) decided to vote against
the Riggs bill even without a Democratic alternative.

       It is not clear when the bill will be scheduled for House floor consideration, although it
could still be scheduled before the end of June. There is no hint of movement in the Senate. It
is quite possible that House Democrats will feel compelled to offer an alternative when the bill
hits the floor so that they can vote for reform of bilingual education. Leaders of the Hispanic
Caucus, including Caucus Chairman Becerra and Education Committee Member'Hinojosa, have
quietly acknowledged that, for the greater good of the Democratic Caucus, such a floor
alternative might become necessary. However, up until now they have been adamantly opposed
to a floor alternative, and remain to be convinced that one is necessary for a successful floor
strategy. Moderate Democrats themselves are not yet clear if one is needed. In addition to their
own apprehensions, Hispanic Caucus members are under substantial political pressure from
bilingual advocates to steer clear of an alternative.

       If the bill is not brought to the floor before the end of this month, there is a good chance
the Republicans will try to add the bill as a rider to the Labor/HHS/Education appropriations bill.

IV.    Options

Option 1.      Transmit Administration Bill Before Recess

         Sending up a bill in the near future would demonstrate your clear committment to
reforming bilingual education, and would position you in the reasonable center of the emerging
national debate, between those such as Unz and Riggs who are proposing extreme and punative
approaches on the one hand, and those who are defending the status quo that was rejected by a
large margin of the public, at least in California. From this point of view, it will be important to
transmit the bill as soon as possible, preferably before this week is out, in the event that the Riggs
bill is taken up next week. A bill sent up now may not gamer much support among Democrats
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

or even be introduced. However, we believe that the chances of legislation to reform bilingual
education reaching your desk this year are sl.im in any event. Over the longer term, by staking
out a clear and independent Administration position now, you can have a significant impact on
next year's debate.

        There are' significant legislative downsides to introducing an Administration bill now,
without taking the longer time necessary for consultation with House Democrats and key
constituency groups. In particular, introducing an alternative within the next week or so would
be perceived by the Hispanic Caucus as jumping the gun strategically, and preempting
meaningful consultation regarding the substance of an alternative. It would generate a hostile
reaction from the Caucus, and is likely to recreate the same divisions among House Democrats
we saw last year on national testing. The prospects that the Black Caucus would ally itself with
the Hispanic Caucus and Republicans in opposition to your bill are high. Under these
circumstances, there is a good chance that your proposal would not find a Democratic sponsor, or
if introduced and allowed to come up on the floor as an alternative to Riggs, would be defeated
by a large, bipartisan margin. Opposition by the Hispanic and Black Caucus would almost
certainly spill over into renewed opposition to continued funding for the national test (though the
prospects of support from the two caucuses is slim at best in any event), and perhaps to other
legislative battles as well.

Option 2.      Defer to the Congressional Democrats on the Timing of Transmittal

        The alternative course of action would be to proceed immediately to consult with
members ofthe Hispanic Caucus and other Democrats on the shape of an alternative bill, using
the Administration bill as the starting point, and making our 3-year goal and strengthened
accountability as nonnegotiable principles which must be incorporated into any legislation we
would support. While there is no guarantee that Democrats in general and the Members of the
Hispanic Caucus in particular will endorse our approach, we can gain leverage iIi. these
negotiations by making clear that a veto threat remains dependent upon the introduction of an
alternative consistent with our principles. Since no bilingual education bill is likely to pass this
year, we can also make clear that we will transmit a reauthorization bill next year that is fully
consistent with these principles.

         Ifwe determine together with House Democrats that an alternative is strategically
necessary when the bill comes to the floor or is taken up by the appropriations subcommittee,
we could then introduce a bill consistent with our principles that would unite, rather than divide
Democrats. Alternatively~ if House Democrats either do not want an alternative when the Riggs
bill reaches the floor, or will not support an approach based on our principles, we can reassess
our position at that time and either send up our own alternative or choose to wait until next year's
reauthorization.

        This approach is more likely to unite the Democrats over a potentially divisive issue, keep
them united for the larger education and other battles over the coming months, and enable those
of us in the Administration to focus our time and energy on fights with Republicans rather than
on infighting within the Democratic Caucus.
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

       There are clear downsides to this approach as well. It places a large measure of control
over the timing and, to some extent the content, of your own proposal in the hands of Members
who do not share your views about the need or way to reform bilingual education.
Consequently, the chances are high that you would not transmit legislation at all this year, and
you would therefore be unable to position yourself or to effectively define the debate.

        Recommendation: Your advisors are split on this issue. On policy grounds, Bruce Reed
favors Option 1, though he recognizes that your final determination may depend more upon
political than policy calculations. Maria Echeveste, Janet Murguia, Mickey lberra and Karen
Skelton recommend Option 2. [need to find out where Riley, Sperling, and Stein are before
staffing this.]


___Option 1             ___Option 2           - - -Discuss
   Send Now               Defer to House
                          Democrats on Timing
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 078 - FOLDER -008


[06/16/1998 - 06/17/1998]


