      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:18-JUN-1998 13:19:18.00

      SUBJECT:   EEOC -- update and question

      TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP ['WHO 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      Elena,
      Ellen Vargyas (EEOC legal counsel) had a conversation with Fawell's
      staffer (David Frank) this morning.  The CJS appropriations subcommittee
      folks + the Speaker's folks have authorized him to begin discussions with
      EEOC about a letter as compromise. As long as they are assured that EEOC
      is trying to work with them on this in good faith, they will not include
      any "no tester" legislative language at the subcommittee mark-up (next
      Tuesday).  Frank indicated that: (1) the letter should not indicate why a
      compromise is being made; and (2) there may also want report language that
      the issue of testers was resolved with a letter from EEOC. '

      Frank would like resolution on the letter issue by July 1st. The full
      committee mark-up could be as early as July 14th. Ellen is going to begin
      to work on a draft letter; however, Frank was still not clear on whether
      they would be satisfied with a committment to not employ testers with FY99
      money or whether they would also want to preclude the agency either from
      using FY99 money (staff time, really) to analyze their pilot OR from
      bringing cases that are based on tester evidence.  It is also not clear
      what precisely the "quo" would be on this deal -- an agreement that
      Gingrich (and others) would support the full appropriation? plus an
      agreement of no rider and no language?

      According to Don Payne's staffer (ranking member on the authorizing
      subcommittee), Payne has had conversations with Dixon, Stokes, Clay,
      Lewis and Gephardt to inform them of the issue and that he is engaged.
      Payne's general position is: (1) we can defeat a "no tester" rider in the
      House; and (2) Congress should not dictate to agencies how best to enforce
      the law.  Payne's staffer's gut is that he would be opposed to any
      compromise on testers.  Rep. Norton has strongly indicated that she does
      not want a floor fight on testers.  Her position is that we would lose, so
      we should (as quickly as possible) have EEOC send a letter to Fawell
      assuring no use of testers.

      Martha and Broderick want to spend a little more time today figuring out
      whether Payne or Norton has a better read on our strength in the House
      (including a better read on the CBC folks) and on what the Dem. rxn. would
      be to a compromise. They are still of the view that we will either end up
      with a letter that does not signal a lack of faith in the testing
      enterprise OR with a rider on the appropriations bill that we fight on the
      floor.

      Martha and Broderick would like us (DPC) to call a meeting tomorrow to
      finalize the Administration's view on the balance between getting the
      money and the issue of testers (in the context of the broader CJS
      appropriations bill, the PIR, etc.). They recommend that this meeting


  include: DPC (us) , Leg. Affairs (Martha & Broderick); COS (Maria?);
  Counsel (Eddie and/or Chuck?); and PIR (Judy). Should I ask Laura to set
  this up? Are there others that should be included? Thanks.

  Julie
·'
