 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:19-JUN-1998 18:00:57.00

 SUBJECT:   Modified Weekly Report

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Includes additional crime piece on brady==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ========
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D88)MAIL45615327V.126 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043FEOF0000010A02010000000205000000D54E0000000200004FE163F8BC1C4C6AAED32E
 7A1COB5951BEF84744EBC96418DF1F8EC8F84DF5B116E438E2D7EE46D1720EE9E94FFA459F11B9
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion



                                            June 19, 1998


 MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

 FROM:          Bruce Reed
                Elena Kagan

 RE:            DPC Weekly Report



        Health Care --Gore's Family Conference: Next week, the Gores' will be hosting
 their annual family conference on the subject of health. You and the Vice President will be
 announcing a new Executive Directive on children's outreach and a multi-faceted national
 health initiative for older Americans, which includes: new preventive benefits for Medicare
 beneficiaries; a national Internet site for Medicare beneficiaries; and a new nationwide
 public/private Medicare council with over 80 organizations to ensure older Americans have
 the information they need to select health plans and to encourage prevention and wellness.
 To highlight the new Medicare preventive benefits, the First Lady will also announce a new
 public service announcement on osteoporosis, featuring her and Mrs. Gore. You will also
 renew your call to pass a patients' bill of rights and reiterate your commitment to continue
 to push Congress to pass comprehensive, anti-tobacco legislation.

         Drugs -- Drug Courts: In response to your interest in drug courts, we are working with
 Rahm Emanuel on preparing to time the release of Justice Department drug court grants for an
 event the week of July 6. Approximately 150 jurisdictions will receive $27 million in grants to
 help plan, implement, enhance, or evaluate drug courts. Some of the cities receiving grants
 include San Francisco, Omaha, Little Rock, Washington, D.C., and Atlanta. The drug court
 grants could be announced at the event to launch the national roll out of the youth anti-drug
 media campaign tentatively scheduled for July 9.

           Drugs -- PRIDE Survey: On Thursday, the National Parents' Resource Institute for
  Drug Education (PRIDE) released the findings of its survey on teen drug use for the 1997-98
  school year. The annual PRiDE report is a survey of 154,350 students grades 6-12. Overall,
. drug, alcohol, and tobacco use by teens dropped -- the first across-the-board declines since the
  1990-91 school year. The key exception to the declines were students in the 12th grade, who
  reported slight increases in their use of cigarettes, cocaine, uppers, and downers. However, for
  the first time in the 11 years of the PRIDE survey, cigarette use by junior high students fell (from
  32% in 1996-97 to 29% in 1997-98). Marijuana use among both junior and senior high students.
  also fell from last year's levels (from 15% to 13%, and from 36% to 33%, respectively).
                                                                        Hex·Dump Conversion

        Drugs -- Pulse Check: On June 25, ONDCP will release Pulse Check, its biannual
report on the use and distribution of illicit drugs in 30 cities. The infonnation contained in Pulse
Check is gathered from ethnographers, law enforcement officials, and drug treatment providers.
Some of the report's key findings include: (1) methamphetamine has continued its spread
eastward and is now considered an emerging drug in Baltimore, and Columbia, MD; (2) heroin
use is stable or rising, with young users who snort or smoke the drug increasing across the
country; (3) crack is failing to attract new users, although powder cocaine use is rising among the
affluent in a few areas; and (4) marijuana use is widespread, crossing economic and social
groups. Director McCaffrey is planning to unveil Pulse Check with DEA Administrator Tom
Constantine and NIDA Director Alan Leshner.
        Crime -- Brady Handgun Checks: This Sunday, the Justice Department will release a
report on presale handgun checks conducted in 1997. Last year, 2.5 million background checks
of potential handgun buyers were conducted, preventing 69,000 purchases by prohibited
purchasers. The vast majority of the 69,000 rejections -- roughly 62% -- were for felony
convictions or current indictments; 9% were for domestic violence misdemeanors; 6% were
fugitives; and 2% were for domestic violence protection orders. The report confinns the
importance of Brady background checks: from February 28, 1994 (Brady Law effective date)
through the end of 1997, 242,000 handgun sales to prohibited purchasers were blocked due to
infonnation yielded through checks. We have previously used a higher figure of 300,000 sales
blocked, based on an earlier Justice Department estimate that 6,600 fireanns sales are prevented
monthly due to background checks. This estimate, however, also covered long guns since
Justice could not separate out handguns from the data provided by states.

        Crime -- Modified Assault Weapons: This week in the Senate Treasury-Postal FY 99
appropriations markup, we successfully fought off an attempt to undennine the Administration's
recent decision to bar the importation modified assault weapons. Opponents of the
Administration's decision had previously attempted to offer an amendment -- which was later
withdrawn -- to grandfather more than a hundred thousand of these weapons into the country.
To prevent such a broad-based amendment from passing, the Administration helped craft an
amendment that passed to reimburse importers for a limited number fireanns that were already in
or en route to bonded warehouses (roughly 2,000-3,000 weapons). The weapons will then be
destroyed.

        Crime -- Drunk Driving/Zero Tolerance: As you know, the zero tolerance for
underage drinking and driving provision you signed into law in 1995 required states to adopt this
tough standard by October 1, 1998. On June 29, South Carolina will become the 50th state to
enact a zero tolerance law. We would note, however, that Delaware's zero tolerance law does
not fully comply with the federal standard and needs to be amended.


      Education -- Teacher Education: Sen. Bingaman has proposed an amendment to the
Higher Education Bill to be taken up by the Senate next week, that would impose new
accountability requirements on teacher education programs. The bill would require


                                                 2
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

teacher education programs to publish the pass rate for students on state teacher
certification tests and would ultimately cut off student financial aid to students in programs
with less than a 70% pass rate. The amendment has the strong support of the NEA, is
opposed by the higher education community, and by Sens. Jeffords, Kennedy, Coats and
Dodd. We have been working with Bingaman and Kennedy to try to find an approach
that retains the strong accountability emphasis without penalizing students for the low
quality of their program.

        Education -- Charter Schools: The Senate Human Resources Committee will
mark-up a bill to expand the charter schools program when the Senate returns from the
July 4th recess. The House passed a similar bipartisan bill last summer, which you
supported. We are working with Sen. Kennedy to bolster his support for this bill, and to
ensure that it provides incentives both for the more rapid expansion of charter schools and
for strong accountability measures.


       Welfare Reform --   u.s. Conference ofMayors Report:      At its meeting in Reno on Friday,
the USCM is releasing a report called "The Welfare Challenge Facing America's Cities." The
report presents the results ofa 125-city survey of mayor's views on welfare reform. The tone of
the report is more positive than the report they released last June. They take a pragmatic view:
while many mayors are concerned about the impact of welfare reform, they are working hard to
facilitate the transition from welfare to work for their residents. They see some cause for
optimism after the first 18 months, but also see the challenge of creating enough jobs and
connecting people to those jobs. They cite concerns about adequate child care, transportation,
skills training, and affordable housing near employment.

        The report also estimates low-skills job gaps in many urban counties, based on
projections by Regional Financial Associates, an economic consulting firm. RF A compared the
number of low-skilled job seekers with the projected growth in low-skill jobs over the next five
years, and concluded that there could be two job seekers for every low-skilled job. Specifically,
the number of welfare recipients needing jobs over this period could exceed the number of jobs
available by 353,000.

        Projecting job gaps is difficult, and it appears that this study, like most similar studies,
ignores the fact that some welfare recipients are already working and that they can take advantage
of turnover in the labor market--not just new jobs. While the magnitude of the gap is hard to
validate, the study does underscore important regional variations. 10 areas such as Fort Worth,
Las Vegas, Little Rock, Miami, Phoenix, and San Francisco, projected job growth exceeds the
expected number of job seekers; in areas including Detroit, Providence, Newark and Cleveland,
the projected ratio of low skill jobs seekers to jobs is at least 10 to 1.

        Nevertheless, the implication is that we need to work hard to ensure that welfare
recipients can access employment opportunities created by our growing economy. We are


                                                 3
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion      .

    already spurring economic development in urban areas, through our Community Empowerment
    Fund, Community Development Financial Institutions, and a second round of Empowerment
    Zones. Our welfare-to-work transportation initiative and welfare-to-work housing vouchers will
    both go a long way to address this issue, as will the $3 billion in welfare to work grants we
    secured in the Balanced Budget Act and the Welfare to Work Partnership's successful welfare to
    work hiring efforts.

            Welfare Reform -- Federal Agencies to Issue Guidance to States on Civil Rights and
    Welfare Reform: After meeting with civil rights leaders several months ago, Secretary Shalala
    agreed to issue guidance to states on how civil rights laws apply to welfare reform, particularly
    the new parts of the welfare law relating to work and the time limit. As a result, HHS, DOJ,
    EEOC, DOL, and other agencies have finished draft guidance that they will share in the coming
    weeks with civil rights groups, states, and advocates. We share HHS's view that a user-friendly
    guide for states and caseworkers would be useful at this time. However, we want to ensure that
    states understand that these requirements are not new, and not misinterpret the guidance as
    imposing new requirements.

            The guidance does include our first interpretation of how states may run afoul of the law
    in issuing exemptions to the five-year time limit. Our civil rights experts are in agreement that
    our guidance should say that a racially neutral criterion that excludes a disproportionately
    greater number of minorities than non-minorities is permissible, so long as there is a
    substantial and legitimate justification for this criterion and there is no comparably
    effective alternative that excludes fewer minorities. We are working with HHS to ensure a
    smooth roll-out ofthis draft with the states.

             Immigration -- Agricultural Guestworkers: On March 12th, the House Judiciary
    Subcommittee on Immigration approved legislation sponsored by Rep. Bob Smith (R-OR) that
    provides fora new pilot program for the employment of temporary foreign agricultural workers.
    The bill includes provisions that would weaken or eliminate many of the worker protections
    provided for in the existing program (the H2A program). In a letter to the subcommittee, the
    Secretary of Labor stated that if the bill were presented to you, she would recommend a veto.
    However, in response to concerns expressed by growers and members of Congress (including
    Sens. Wyden and Graham and Rep. Bishop) about inefficiencies in the current H2A program, we
    initiated an inter-agency process to develop a streamlined proposal. We anticipate that several
    of the regulatory reforms contained in this proposal will be in place by the next growing season.
    Also, we intend to explore what substantive reforms we could effect to address the longstanding
    concerns by domestic farm workers that the H2A program does not adequately protect their
    interests.

           Food Safety Initiative -- Senate Update: Of the Administration's proposed $96 million
    food safety initiative for USDA and FDA, we received only $16.8 million in the House
    Appropriations Committee and only $2.6 million in the Senate. On Monday, the Senate is
    expected to begin voting on the Agriculture bill. Sens. Leahy, Harkin, and Daschle are willing


                                                    4
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

to work with us to offer amendments, but have indicated that they will only do so if we present
an offset. On Thursday, we suggested an offset involving user fees which was rejected by
Harkin's staff. OMB is working to develop some other possible offsets. In order to highlight
the problem offood safety and to shine light on some non-legislative solutions that the
Administration has already undertaken, the DPC is working on a possiJ:>le event for Wednesday.
Because summer is the most dangerous time of year for food safety, we believe that the July 4th·
radio address may be a appropriate time to raise the budget and other food safety issues that are
currently pending in Congress. In addition to your FY1999 budget, there are other legislative
proposals involving food safety currently pending. These proposals include mandatory recall for
meat and poultry, civil fines for violations, and increased FDA inspection authority for imported
foods.




                                               5
,

