    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:19-JUN-1998 08:25:47.00

    SUBJECT:   back up paper on kids report

    TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D29]MAIL44758517W.126 to ASCII,
     The following is a HEX DUMP:

    FF5750438A060000010A020100000002050000001A3400000002000067FCBFF17D98B6840F577E
    A2BD47128AA833168D5D909269DBE5AF5C03D791CAB5253D75F848AlF76AD7E1A284D005F92ED5
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

           PRESIDENT'S CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE OUTREACH
            EXECUTIVE MEMORANDUM AND INTERAGENCY REPORT
                               June 22, 1998

Today, in an Executive Memorandum, the President ordered eight Federal agencies to
enact over 150 initiatives designed to help enroll millions of uninsured children in Medicaid
or the new Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP). These initiatives are included
in a report to the President that is also being released today. This report and the
recommendations were produced by the Departments of Health and Human Services,
Treasury, Agriculture, Education, Labor, Housing and Urban Development, Interior and the
Social Security Administration.

Taken together, these actions represent an unprecedented, cross-government commitment
to provide affordable insurance to children. The American Academy of Pediatrics
characterized these initiatives as "representing the best of creative government and
absolutely critical to achieving our common goal of providing health insurance for all
eligible children."

HIGHLIGHTS OF THE REPORT. As the first step in his public-private children's health
outreach campaign, the President directed his own workforce to initiate an historic commitment
to enrolling uninsured children in State health insurance programs. In response, eight Federal
agencies developed plans in three areas: how to educate their workforce; how this workforce
can help educate families about State health insurance programs; and how to coordinate
cross-agency and public-private efforts to identify and enroll children in these programs.

Educating Federal Workers, State Workers, and Grantees about Children's Health
Many Federal and State workers, contractors or grantees have direct contact with families with
uninsured children. For example, the majority of uninsured children probably have participated
in a school lunch program, subsidized child care, or Head Start. Recognizing this fact, the
President ordered the Federal agencies to, among other actions:
   Send letters from the Cabinet Secretaries to about 350,000 Federal workers, describing
    this children's health outreach initiative, how to access it, and strongly encouraging them to
    help enroll uninsured children.
   Train the staff of Federal/State information clearinghouses, technical assistance
    centers, providers and eligibility workers about children's health. Targets include:
       National Health Service Corps and Area Health Education Centers that train about 21,000
        students and 50,000 providers
       Education Department's 40 parent assistance programs and 312 community learning
        centers serving over 50,000 students and community residents
       Regional and State coordinators for 1,800 State Employment Security Agencies that
        provide job placement, counseling, and labor market information to job seekers
Educating Families. Many Federal workers and grantees determine eligibility, counsel families
and provide services in non-health programs. This gives them an opportunity to educate
families and assist them in enrolling children in Medicaid or CHIP. The agencies have proposed
to:
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
        Distribute information on options and/or applications to families at:
            700 community health centers
            1,400 Head Start grantees, State Child Support and T ANF sites
            400 IRS Walk-In Centers and 8,600 Voluntary Income Tax Assistance sites
            1,300 Social Security Administration field offices
            3,000 employers, schools, education organizations, and community and religious groups
              that comprise the Education Department's Partnership for Family Involvement program
            185 Federally operated and Tribally contracted schools, 24 reservation-based community
              colleges, and over 500 Indian Child Welfare programs
            15,000 public housing projects and 81 field offices and information sites
            113 Job Corps Centers and 700 One-Stop Career Centers
     Coordinating Efforts Across Agencies and with the Private Sector. Efforts to enroll
     uninsured children will be more effective if coordinated. To facilitate this, agencies will:
        Link Internet sites, to provide both Federal workers and families using these sites with links
         to children's health insurance outreach site (e.g., America's Job Bank site, used by millions)
        Coordinate outreach campaign with major national associations, advocacy groups, and
         other private organizations in outreach. Each Department has a set of outside
         organizations that could be partners in this outreach initiative. These include:
            Elderly groups, to assist in enrolling uninsured grandchildren
            Historical,Iy Black Colleges and Universities, to develop strategies for minority children
            Earned Income Tax Credit outreach organizations, that target similar families
            National Education Association, to focus on school-based approaches
     Cross-Cutting Issues. Two topics were special focuses of the task force.
        Vulnerable children. Many children eligible for Medicaid or CHIP are difficult to reach
         due to sociocultunil and linguistic differences, low literacy levels, geographic isolation,
         homelessness, or transient living situations that make it difficult for them to enroll in health
         insurance. A number of activities are proposed to address these unique problems, including:
            Use of mapping to identify all service delivery sites for reservation-based sites that could
              be used for children's health outreach to Indian families
            Media campaign for Hispanic children developed through focus groups to identify
              barriers to enrollment and Spanish language material
            Use of "distance learning," such as new telemedicine communication capabilities, to
            educate rural providers about children's health insurance
        Coordinating program enrollment. Integration of health and non-health program
         enrollment can increase the number of children with insurance. Models identified include:
            Single application for multiple programs: Most States (e.g., Illinois, Iowa, Maryland,
              Michigan, Ohio) use joint applications for their social services programs
            "Adjunctive" eligibility (allowing eligibility for one program to fulfil some or all of the
              eligibility requirements for another): Children are automatically eligible for Florida's
              Healthy Start program if eligible for the school lunch program

                                      Full Report Available at www.hcfa.gov


