RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-JUN-1998 21:36:57.00

SUBJECT:   bilingual memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a revised memo, as we discussed.  Once you are comfortable
with it, it should be circulated for quick comment to:

Janet Murguia
Broderick Johnson
Mike Smith (and Ann O'Leary in his office)
Karen Skelton
Maria Echeveste
Morley Winograd
Barbara Chow

We need feedback from POTUS before he leaves for China (assuming he's not
going to deal with this once he departs). Otherwise we are going to have
a very tough time dealing with House Dems, as they look to us while
developing their strategy for dealing with Riggs.   I think this meams
that somehow, we need to get this to POTUS by COB Monday. ==================== ATTAC
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D94]MAIL45765337N.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504326060000010A0201000000020500000088620000000200001F2F10075D888B26D3B153
4D87BEA8B603506A3E17F563133AF5AF0133468B318D6D8D6D6EE5971FA5ED110E960A62915B6B
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
DRAFT

                                          June 20, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          BRUCE REED
               LARRY STEIN (DO YOU WANT TO INCLUDE HIM ON THIS MEMO AS
               REQUESTED BY JANET?)

SUBJECT:       Bilingual Education

        On June 4, the House Education and Workforce Committee reported H.R. 3982, the
English Fluency Act,. introduced by Rep. Frank Riggs. This bill raises many of the same
programmatic issues and political dynamics as the Unz Initiative in California. The purpose of
this memo is to update you on this proposal and the development of an Administration
alternative, and to present you with options for how to proceed.

I.     Overview of Riggs BilI

        The bill would eliminate the existing Bilingual Education and Emergency Immigrant
Education programs and would (1) distribute funds through a block grant that is not targeted
toward school districts with the highest quality programs and greatest funding need; (2) require
states to withdraw funding from local programs in cases where students do not master English
within two years and set a 3-year limit for serving any individual student, though it would not
provide any extra help for students or corrective action for programs that need it; (3) not require
States to maintain their own efforts; and (4) eliminate professional development programs
designed to prepared qualified ESL and bilingual education teachers. The bill also seeks to
sharply curtail the enforcement powers of the Education Department's Office of Civil Rights by
voiding existing voluntary compliance agreements between OCR and local school districts with
regard to educating LEP students and by requiring OCR to publish -- and the Congress to ratify --
new guidelines and compliance standards for Title VI enforcement. These provisions would
weaken enforcement of Title VI ofthe Civil Rights Act of 1964 and result in increased litigation.

II.    Development of Administration Alternative

        We are finalizing an alternative bill based on the principles you approved and Secretary
Riley articulated in his statement of opposition to the Unz Initiative. This bill would amend
(rather than replace entirely) the existing bilingual education program. Specifically, it would
require participating school districts to (1) establish a goal of preparing LEP students to enter
successfully regular English classrooms in not more than three years, (2) conduct annual
assessments of student's English proficiency; (3) provide additional help for students not on track


                                                1
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

to English proficiency; (4) develop a corrective action plan, to be approved by the Secretary, if a
significant percentage of students do not meet the 3-year goal.

        To ensure accountability for results, districts that fail to make adequate progress after
implementing a corrective action plan would not receive additional funding. Districts that make
outstanding progress toward the three year goal would receive an additional 2-4 years of funding.
 In addition, the bill would guarantee local flexibility by removing the existing cap on funding
for programs that do not use the students native language, and would remove the competitive
priority currently given to programs designed to maintain native language while helping students
learn English.

        This bill would be a solid first step to reform federal programs to help students become
proficient in English. The Education Department is working on a more thorough approach as
part of its planning for the reauthorization of ESEA next year. This approach would include a
more thorough overall of the bilingual education program, as well as an effort to make Title I a
more effective tool for helping LEP students learn English.

        In addition to this legislation, we believe a broader set of steps is necessary. The poor
performance of Hispanic and other students with limited English proficiency in mastering
English and in other academic subjects is not solely or primarily the result of bilingual education;
it has as much to do with the overall quality of their schools and teachers, and the level of
support they receive from the broader community. The Bilingual Education Program is not the
only federal resource at your disposal to strengthen efforts to help students learn English. Our
efforts, and the national debate, should not be focused solely on "fixing" one part of the
problem.

         Therefore, in preparation for the FY 2000 budget we are developing a larger package of
initiatives. We are working to get the package ready for you to announce in the near future.
Though there is still additional work to be done to put this package together, we expect that the
final version will address the following elements:

      A Legislative Proposal. You would transmit the Education Department's amendments
       to the Bilingual Education Act, and also announce that next year you will propose
       changes to Title I to make it a more effective vehicle for helping students become
       proficient in English. This is important because more LEP students are served under
       Title 1 than by federal bilingual education programs. If you chose not to send legislation
       this session, you would instead announce your intention to transmit legislation to
       overhaul bilingual education next year, and give enough detail so that the underlying
       principles are clear and your announcement is credible.

      A Directive to Identify National and International Models of Best Practice. You
       would direct the Secretary of Education to produce and widely disseminate a report by
       next Fall that would identify places in the U.S. and internationally that help students


                                                 2
                                                                  HeX-Dump Conversion

       become proficient in English (or another 2nd language as appropriate) within 3 years.

      An Initiative to Strengthen Teaching for LEP Students. The existing bilingual
       education program provides strong support for the recruitment, preparation and continued
       training of bilingual and ESL teachers. We are exploring ways to strengthen this
       component. Options include further funding increases, additional incentives to attract
       teachers to the field, and the creation of mentoring programs for beginning teachers.

      A Community-Based Initiative. We are exploring how best to promote community
       based efforts to provide extra help for LEP students to learn English through after-school
       tutoring, Saturday programs, and other approaches. Weare looking for ways to build on
       our work on America Reads, the 21 st Century Learning Program, and High Hopes to
       accomplish this.

      An R&D Initiative. We intend to propose an R&D initiative that can point the way for
       how best to strengthen practice. This might include studies and demonstrations of best
       practices for students of different ages (ranging from the early grades to i 8-24 year olds
       with little fonnal schooling), exploration of how technology can improve the delivery of
       services and the assessment of language proficiency, and other areas with the potential for
       high impact.
      A Proposal to Help English Speaking Students Learn Foreign Languages. This
       package provides an important opportunity to broaden the debate about bilingual
       education by recognizing the value of bilingualism in a global economy. In particular,
       we are .looking at ways to provide incentives and support for more schools to provide
       foreign language instruction in the early grades, when students are best equipped to learn
       a second language.

III.   Congressional Dynamic

        H.R. 3892 was reported out of committee on a straight party line vote (22-17). While the
bill will certainly move in the House, there is no hint of movement on the Riggs bill in the
Senate.

        In the House, the bill may well proceed on two parallel tracks: as a rider to the
Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations bill, and as a free-standing bill. The Appropriations bill
will be marked up in subcommittee on June 24, and the Riggs bill will be incorporated into it.
Subcommittee Democrats view the appropriations bill as so fundamentally flawed that they do
not plan on offering any amendments to try and improve it. The bill will provide approximately
$2 [Jon--check figure with Chow or Frost] billion less than you have requested for overall
education spending; make significant cuts in Administration priorities such as Goals 2000, and
contain a number of unacceptable riders including a prohibition on national testing and the
creation of one or more block grants out of existing programs.



                                               3
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

            House Democrats have not yet finalized a strategy for this bill at the full committee and
    when it comes to the floor. It appears likely that any amendments offered will be designed to
    promote a unified Democratic message rather than to materially improve the bill. We do not
    expect the Hispanic Caucus to mount an effort to strip Riggs from the bill.
                                               will
            It is also likely that the Riggs bill come to the floor as a free-standing measure shortly
    after the recess. Few Members have focused on this prospect yet, and the extent to which
    Democrats are prepared to oppose Riggs without the cover of an alternative bill to reform
    bilingual education is simply not clear. Mr. Gephardt's office will be alerting members this
    week to the prospective floor vote. However, their preferences may not become clear until they
    return from recess.

             Notwithstanding the success of the Unz Initiative, Committee Democrats (including
    moderates such as Reps. Roemer and Kind, and Hispanic Caucus Members Reps. Martinez,
    Romero-Barcelo, Hinojosa and Sanchez) did not feel compelled to offer an alternative to Riggs's
    bill during markup. However, as the prospect of a floor vote brings things into focus, this could
    change. Rep. Roemer now believes an alternative would be important. Leaders of the Hispanic
    Caucus, including Caucus Chairman Becerra and Education Committee Member Hinojosa, have
    quietly acknowledged that, for the greater good of the Democratic Caucus, such a floor
    alternative might become necessary. However, up until now they have been adamantly opposed
    to a floor alternative, and remain to be convinced that one is necessary for a successful floor
    strategy. In addition to their own apprehensions, Hispanic Caucus members are under
    substantial political pressure from bilingual advocates to steer clear of an alternative.

    IV.    Legislative Options

             In order to proceed we must determine when and under what conditions to transmit
    legislation to reform bilingual education. There are two basic options.

    Option 1.      Transmit An Administration Bill Independent of House Democrats

             Sending up a bill in the near future would demonstrate your clear commitment to
    reforming bilingual education, and would position you in the reasonable center of the emerging
    national debate, between those such as Unz and Riggs who are proposing extreme and punitive
    approaches on the one hand, and those who are defending the status quo that was rejected by a
    large margin of the public, at least in California. From this point of view, it will be important to
    transmit the bill as soon as possible in the event that the Riggs bill reaches the floor, or otherwise
    captures press attention as it moves forward. It will provide House Democrats with a
    ready-made alternative to Riggs if they feel the need for one. Even if this bill is not introduced or
     does not garner much support among Democrats, by staking out a clear and independent
    Administration position now, you can have a significant impact on next year's debate, when
    legislation to reform bilingual education is more likely to reach your desk.

           There are significant legislative down sides to introoucing an Administration bill now, if


                                                      4
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

House Democrats have otherwise concluded that they neither want nor need an alternative bill. In
particular, introducing an alternative at this time would be perceived by the Hispanic Caucus as
jumping the gun strategically, and preempting meaningful consultation regarding the substance
of an alternative. It would generate a hostile reaction from the Caucus, and is likely to recreate
the same divisions among House Democrats we saw last year on national testing. The prospects
that the Black Caucus would ally itself with the Hispanic Caucus and Republicans in opposition
to your bill are high. Under these circumstances, there is a good chance that your proposal
would not find a Democratic sponsor, or if introduced and allowed to 'come up on the floor as an
alternative to Riggs, would be defeated by a large, bipartisan margin. Opposition by the
Hispanic and Black Caucus would almost certainly spill over into renewed opposition to
continued funding for the national test (though the prospects of support from the two caucuses is
slim at best in any event), and perhaps to other legislative battles as well.

        Further, there is the outside chance that sending up an Administration alternative that
lacks support from Democrats could push Riggs to seek to narrow the differences between his
approach and yours. He has indicated privately that he does not see large differences between
his approach and the principles outlined in the Administration's opposition to Unz, and that he is
ultimately prepared to drop the civil rights enforcement provisions in his bill. If Riggs were to
modify his bill in order to more closely reflect the principles in ours, we would have a difficult
time opposing his bill and would risk infuriating Democrats if we cut a deal with him.

Option 2.      Defer to the Congressional Democrats on the Timing of Transmittal

        An alternative course of action would be to proceed immediately to consult with members
of the Hispanic Caucus and other Democrats on the shape of an alternative bill, using the
Administration bill as the starting point, and making our 3-year goal and strengthened
accountability as nonnegotiable principles which must be incorporated into any legislation we
would support. While there is no guarantee that Democrats in general and the Members of the
Hispanic Caucus in particular will endorse our approach, we can gain leverage in these
negotiations by making clear that a veto threat to Riggs remains dependent upon the introduction
of an alternative consistent with our principles. We can also make clear that we will transmit a
reauthorization bill next year that is fully consistent with these principles.

        If we determine together with House Democrats that an alternative is strategically
necessary when the bill comes to the floor or is taken up by the appropriations committee, we
could then introduce a bill consistent with our principles that would unite, rather than divide
Democrats. Alternatively, if House Democrats either do not want an alternative when the Riggs
bill or the Appropriations bill reaches the floor, or will not support an approach based on our
principles, we can reassess our position at that time and either send up our own alternative or
choose to wait until next year's reauthorization.

      This approach is more likely to unite the Democrats over a potentially divisive issue, keep
them united for the larger education and other battles over the coming months, and enable those


                                                5
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

    of us in the Administration to focus our time and energy on fights with Republicans rather than
    on infighting within the Democratic Caucus.

           There are clear down sides to this approach as well. It places a large measure of control
    over the timing and, to some extent the content, of your own proposal in the hands of Members
    who do not share your views about the need or way to reform bilingual education.
    Consequently, the chances are high that you would not transmit legislation at all this year, and
    you would therefore be unable to position yourself or to effectively define the debate.

    Recommendation: Your advisors are split on this issue. On policy grounds, Bruce Reed favors
    Option I, though he recognizes that your final determination may depend more upon political
    than policy calculations. [this is the language you and Bruce wanted a few weeks ago) Maria
    Echeveste, Janet Murguia, Mickey Iberra and Karen Skelton recommend Option 2. [need to
    determine Riley's and Stein's position--though if their staff are any guide, they will go for
    Option 2)


    ___Option I            ___Option 2           - - -Discuss
       Send Now              Defer to House
                             Democrats on Timing




                                                   6


