RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD!O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-JUN-1998 09:54:48.00

SUBJECT:   H2A -- meeting summary

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
At yesterday's H2A meeting, it was decided that the Labor Department will
draft a NPRM that includes the following six regulatory reforms:

Require employers' H2A labor certification applications to be submitted 45
(rather than 50) days prior to the employers' "date of need."
Reduce the deadline for employer-provided housing to be.available for
inspection from 30 to 15 days prior to the employers' "date of need."
Growers will no longer be required to use a registered farm labor
contractor (FLC or "crew leader") as a source of U.S. workers if the FLC
has a demonstrated history of employing illegal or unauthorized workers or
of other labor abuses.
Eliminate requirement that certi"fied H2A employers provide notice of H-2A
workers' departure for the place of employment.
INS to delegate H2A petition approval authority to DOL.
DOL will issue petition approval for replacement of certified H2A workers
upon proof of the worker's repatriation.

These last two reforms impact the INS, so they will also need to do
rulemaking.  Sally gave them (DOL and DOJ/INS) a deadline of COB Thursday
(June 25th) to give us drafts of these rules.

Also, the Labor Department will draft a letter to Sen. Coverdell that
expresses our intentions on these reforms. This letter will also commit
the DOL to initiating a process to address the more substantive areas of
concern with the program.  This last statement will likely.signal to
growers and farmworker advocates that we are planning to take on the wage
and housing issues.   We should see a draft of this letter tomorrow
(Friday) .

The general sense was that these reforms (particularly #5) will adequately
respond to growers' concerns re: timeliness in the processing of H2A
applications.  Our hope is that the letter's signal on the housing and
wage issues will indicate that we see this rulemaking as a first step and
that we intend to tackle the more difficult parts of the program that need
reform soon.

Julie


