RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JUN-1998 16:13:28.00

SUBJECT:   Executive Order on Native American education

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a draft of the executive order on Native American education,
along with a cover note to Jack Lew, to start the OMB vetting process on
this order.  Please review it.  It would be helpful to send th{s to OMB as
soon as possible because Mac Reed, who shepards the order through the
process, will be out of the office for the first two weeks of July, and we
would like to have the process completea by July 17.   We hope to announce
this order, along with some economic development policies being developed
by Julie, on August 5 at the Native American Economic Development
Conference.  ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D66]MAIL46075737X.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043C10C0000010A020100000002050000005C16000000020000C1FC6F7E8B5633724E4914
59DFE9C67E8A204681B4308A918D128CDDE598EC597C0177C9121A457DE8B513481D7C8B1A44FC
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

DRAFT June 22, 19984:30 PM


EXECUTIVE ORDER: AMERICAN INDIAN AND ALASKA NATIVE
EDUCATION

Preamble:
The Federal Government is committed to improving the academic performance and reducing the
dropout rate of American Indian and Alaska Native students. To help fulfill this commitment
consistent with tribal traditions and cultures, this Executive Order focuses special attention on
five goals: (1) improving reading and mathematics, the two gateway subjects for academic
success; (2) increasing high school completion and post-secondary attendance rates; (3) reducing
the influence of long-standing factors that impede educational performance, such as poverty and
substance abuse; (4) creating strong, safe, and drug free school environments conducive to
learning; and (5) expanding the use of science and educational technology.

Improving educational achievement and academic progress forAmerican Indian and Alaska
Native students is vital to the national goals of preparing every student for responsible
citizenship, continued learning, and productive employment. On the 1994 National Assessment
of Educational Progress (NAEP), over half of 4th grade American Indian and Alaska Native
students scored below the basic level in reading proficiency and almost half scored below the
basic level in math. According to the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES),
American Indians and Alaska Natives have among the highest dropout rates and lowest college
attendance rates of any group. Schools that serve American Indian and Alaska Native students
often do not provide college preparatory classes in all subjects and fail to meet their unique
educational needs.

The Federal Government has a special historic responsibility in the education of American Indian
and Alaska Native students, which includes the following: (1) providing operational support to ·
tribal and federal schools; (2) supplementing state and local support for public schools educating
children on Indian trust-status lands through Federal Impact Aid program; (3) assisting tribal
governments to develop their capacity to provide for the education of their members; and (4)
assisting schools in addressing these students' unique educational and culturally-related academic
needs so that they can achieve the same high education standards as all students.

To achieve its purposes, this order calls for a comprehensive and coordinated strategy across all
related agencies at the federal level; collaboration with tribal, state, and local governments at the
regional level; and the identification and demonstration of effective practices in school at the
local level.

Order:

The United States has a unique legal relationship with Indian tribal governments as set forth in
the Constitution of the United States, treaties, statutes, executive orders, and court decisions.
Since the formation of the Union, the United States has recognized Indian tribes as domestic
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

dependent nations under its protection. In treaties, our Nation has guaranteed the right ofIndian
tribes to self-government. As domestic dependent nations, Indian tribes exercise inherent
sovereign powers over their members and territory. The United States continues to work with
Indian tribes on a government-to-government basis to address issues concerning Indian tribal
self-government, trust resources, and Indian tribal treaty and other rights.

Therefore, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United
States of America, in affirmation of the unique political and legal relationship of the Federal
Government with tribal governments, and in recognition of the unique educational and
culturally-related academic needs of American Indian and Alaska Native students, it is hereby
ordered as follows:

Section 1. Federal Strategy. In order to meet the five goals of this order, a comprehensive
federal response is needed to address the fragmentation of government services available to
American Indian and Alaska Native students and the complexity of intergovernmental
relationships in the education of those students. The purpose of the federal activities described
herein is to build toward the development of a long term, comprehensive federal Indian education
policy that will accomplish the following goals of this order: (1) improve reading and
mathematics; (2) increase high school completion and post-secondary attendance rates; (3)
reduce the influence oflong-standing factors that impede educational performance; (4) create
strong, safe, and drug-free school environments conducive to learning; and (5) expand the use of
science and educational technology.

       Subsection A. Interagency Task Force. There shall be established an Interagency Task
       Force to oversee the planning and implementation of this executive order. The Task
       Force shall confer with the National Advisory Council on Indian Education (NACIE) in
       carrying out the activities of this order. The Task Force, in conjunction with the NAClE,
       shall consult with representatives of American Indian and Alaska Native tribes and
       organizations, including the National Indian Education Association (NlEA) and the
       National Congress of American Indians (NCAI), to provide advice on the implementation
       of activities of the Executive order.

       Subsection B. Composition of the Interagency Task Force. The membership of this
       Task Force shall include, but not be limited to, representatives of the Departments of
       Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Education, Energy, Health and Human Services,
       Housing and Urban Development, Interior, Labor, Transportation, and Treasury, as well
       as the Environmental Protection Agency, the Corporation for National Service, and the
       National Science Foundation. Within 30 days, each participating department and agency
       shall appoint a senior official who will be responsible for management or program
       administration to serve as a member of the Task Force. The official shall report directly
       to the agency head or designee on agency activity under this order. To the extent
       permitted by law and regulation, each agency shall provide appropriate information in
       readily available formats as requested by theTask Force. The Assistant Secretary of
       Elementary and Secondary Education of the Department of Education and the Assistant
       Secretary of Indian Affairs of the Department of the Interior shall co~chair the Task
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
Force.
Upon invitation of the Secretaries of Education and ofthe Interior, other agencies may
participate in the activities of the Task Force.
Subsection C. Interagency Plan. The Task Force shall, within 90 days, develop a
federal interagency plan with recommendations for immediate consideration in the fiscal
year 2000 budget request, including the identification of initiatives, strategies, spending
goals and ideas for future coordinated interagency action supportive of the goals of this
order.
Subsection D. Agency Participation. To the extent consistent with law, each
participating agency shall adopt and implement strategies to maximize the availability of
the agency's education-related programs, activities, resources, information and technical
assistance to American Indian and Alaska Native students. In keeping with the spirit of
the 1994 Executive Memorandum and the 1998 Executive Order on federal agency
cons.ultation with tribal governments (E.O. 13084), each participating agency of the Task
Force shall consult with tribal governments on their education-related needs; research
needs and priorities; and how the agency can better accomplish the goals of this order.
Within six months, each participating agency shall report to the Task Force regarding the
strategies developed to ensure participation and consultation.

Subsection E. Interagency Resource Guide. The Task Force shall identify, within
relevant federal agencies, all education-related programs that support the goals of this
order. Within twelve months ofthis order, the Task Force, in conjunction with the
Department of Education, shall develop, publish, and widely distribute a guide that
contains these resources.

Subsection F. Research. The Secretary of Education, through the Office of Educational
Research and Improvement and the Office of Indian Education, in accordance with the
Department of Education Organization Act (20 U.S.C. 2423c), and in consultation with
NACIE and the member agencies of the Task Force, shall develop and implement a
comprehensive research agenda that supports the goals of this order. The agenda shall
support the efforts of schools, tribal communities, states, and families to promote high
achievement, problem-solving abilities, and motivation among American Indian and
Alaska Native students. Such an agenda shall include plans for ensuring: (1) reliable,
consistent, complete, and accurate information on the academic status and progress of
American Indian and Alaska Native students; (2) data collection and analysis that is
representative of regional, cultural, and linguistic diversity among American Indian and
Alaska Natives; (3) reporting that is in a variety offormats and in a language that is
appropriate to a variety of American Indian and non-Indian audiences, including
practitioners, policy makers, data users, and the general public; (4) a comprehensive and
ongoing evaluation of the impact on academic achievement and retention of
research-based educational practices and school-wide reform programs, including those
emphasizing the role of the native language and culture in curriculum and instruction; (5)
that high priority needs identified through the above mechanisms be addressed through
coordinated interagency support of research and demonstration efforts in schools serving
American Indian and Alaska Native students; and (6) appropriate time lines and strategies
·                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

             for the implementation of plans. Within twelve months, the Secretary of Education shall
             report to the Interagency Task Force the development of a comprehensive research
             agenda including implementation time lines and strategies adopted.

             Subsection G. Comprehensive Federal Indian Education Policy. The Task Force
             shall, within two years, develop a comprehensive federal Indian education policy to
             support the accomplishment of the goals of this order. The policy shall consider ideas
             within the Comprehensive Federal Indian Educational Policy Statement proposal
             developed byNIEA and NCAI and be designed to: (1) improve federal interagency
             cooperation; (2) ensure access to information on federal programs and resources; (3)
             encourage intergovernmental collaboration; and (4) assist tribal governments in meeting
             the unique educational needs of their children, including the need to preserve, revitalize,
             and use native languages and cultural traditions. The Task Force shall develop
             recommendations to implement the policy including budget requests and ideas for future
             coordinated interagency action. As appropriate, participating agencies of the Task Force
             may develop memoranda of agreement with one another to enable and enhance the ability
             of tribes and schools to provide and coordinate the delivery of federal, tribal, state, and
             local resources and services to meet the social, educational, and health~related needs of
             American Indian and Alaska Native students.

       Section 2. Regional Partnership Forums. In conjunction with the Interagency Task Force, the
       Department of Education and the Department of the Interior shall convene, within eighteen
       months, a series of regional forums of federal, tribal, and state government interagency
       representatives to identify promising practices and approaches on how to share information,
    .. provide assistance to schools, develop partnerships, and coordinate intergovernmental strategies
       supportive of accomplishing the goals of this order. A report on each forum shall be submitted
       to the Task Force, which shall include any recommendations related to intergovernmental
       relations supportive of accomplishing the goals of this order.

     Section 3. School Pilot Sites. The Department of Education and the Department of the Interior
     shall identify up to eight Bureau of Indian Affairs-funded schools and public schools with
     significant concentrations of American Indian and Alaska Native students, which shall receive
     comprehensive technical assistance in support of the goals of this order. A special team of
     technical assistance providers, including federal staff, shall be convened to provide assistance to
     these schools. Special attention shall be given to accomplishing Comprehensive School Reform
     Demonstration Programs where applicable and comprehensive service delivery that connects and
     utilizes diverse federal agency resources. The team shall disseminate the effective and
     promising practices of the school pilot sites to other local education agencies educating American
     Indian and Alaska Native students .. The team shall report to the Task Force on the
     accomplishments and recommendations for improvement of its technical support to local
     education agencies.

     Section 4. Administrative Support. The Department of Education shall provide appropriate
     administrative services and staff support for the Task Force. With the consent of the
     Department of Education, other agencies participating in the Initiative shall provide
·                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

    administrative support to the Task Force consistent with statutory authority and shall make use of
    section 112 of title 3, United States Code, to detail agency employees to the extent permitted by
    law. The Task Force shall report annually the accomplishments of this order to the Director of
    the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).

    Section 5. General Provisions. This order is intended only to improve the internal management
    of the Executive Branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit,
    substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its
    agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person. This Executive
    Order is not intended to preclude, supersede or replace or otherwise dilute any other Executive
    Order related to American Indian and Alaska Native education.
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion




                                             June 23,1998


    MEMORANDUM FOR JACK LEW

    THROUGH:              MAC REED

    FROM:                 BRUCE REED
                          ELENA KAGAN

    SUBJECT:              EXECUTIVE ORDER ON NATIVE AMERICAN EDUCATION


           This is a formal request that you process the attached executive order pursuant to
    Executive Order No. 11030, as amended. Please process this order by Friday, July 17, 1998.

            This executive order is designed to improve the academic performance of American
    Indian and Alaska Native students in grades K-12. The order focuses special attention on the
    following five goals: (1) improving reading and mathematics; (2) increasing high school
    completion and post-secondary attendance rates; (3) reducing the influence oflong-standing
    factors that impede educational performance, such as poverty and substance abuse; (4) creating
    strong, safe, and drug-free school environments conducive to learning; and (5) expanding the use
    of science and educational technology. This executive order was developed at the initiative of
    the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI), the National Indian Education Association
    (NIEA), the National Advisory Council on Indian Education (NACIE), and the Native American
    Rights Fund (NARF).

          If you have any questions regarding this order, you can contact Mary Smith at 456-5571.
    Thank you for your assistance.


