    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JUN-1998 08:50:55.00

    SUBJECT:     departure statement draft 6/22 8:30am

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Draft 06/22/98 8:30am
    Jeff Shesol

    PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
    DEPARTURE STATEMENT ON TOBACCO LEGISLATION
    THE WHITE HOUSE
    June 22, 1998

            In a few moments I will be leaving for the Vice PresidentD,s
    Family Reunion Conference in Nashville, where I will speak about the
    health care concerns American families face.  Before I depart, I want to
    make clear: one of the most important health issues our families face is
    youth smoking.  3,000 children a day start 'smoking, and 1,000 of them will
    die early because of it. That is why, three years ago, through the FDA,
    we began to act to end the practice of tobacco companies marketing to our
    children. And that is why, for the past year, we have been working to
    forge an honorable, bipartisan compromise that protects our children from
    the dangers of tobacco.

             A majority of the Senate stands ready to join us in making
    progress; but last week, the Republican leadership placed partisan
    politics --'and tobacco companies -- above AmericalJ,s families.  Their
    vote was not just pro-tobacco; it was anti-family. The bipartisan bill
    they blocked would not only protect families from tobacco advertising that
    targets children; it would protect kids from drugs, and give low- and
    middle-income families a tax break by ending the marriage penalty.   It
    would also make an important investment. in cancer research.

             The congressional leadership seems willing to walk away from its
    obligation to AmericaD,s children.   But this issue is too important to
    walk away. We will continue to move forward on every regulatory front to
    protect the health of our children.   By the end of the year, the FDAD,s
    operation to enforce its ban on tobacco sales to minors will be active in
    nearly every state in America.   And while we wait for Congress to heed the
    call of AmericaD,s families, I am asking the Department of Health and
    Human Services to produce the first-ever annual survey on the brands of
    cigarette that teenagers smoke, and which companies are most 'responsible
    for this problem.   Parents, quite simply, have a right to know.  Public
    health officials can also use this new information to reduce youth
    smoking.

               The tobacco companiesD, automatic and angry dismissal of this new survey
·
         shows their continued disregard for childrenO,s health.  But once this
         information becomes public, tobacco companies will no longer be able to
         dodge their responsibilities -- and neither will Congress.  From now on,
         the new data will help to hold tobacco companies accountable for targeting
         our children.

                 Again, I urge Congress to pass a comprehensive, bipartisan bill --
         rather than a watered-down bill, written by the tobacco lobby, that aims
         not to save the lives of children but to save the political lives of the
         congressional leadership. AmericaO,s children deserve better than that,
         and I will continue to do everything in my power to ensure that they
         receive it.


