 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP      OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:23-JUN-1998 10:02:22.00

 SUBJECT:

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Elena:

 I am waiting for one piece from Sarah Rosen on a Consumer Financial Bill
 of Rights.  Call if you have any questions (x65367).
 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D82]MAIL40900247M.126 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043DDOF0000010A02010000000205000000244B000000020000D41E49753F47A8355188E1
 15361CDC914B62911FDEEOA9571936C6B4BCD32E2B528C37D5B00455D409174C01D45A177ED327
Education and Training:                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


      Declare End to Reading Wars -- Announce Summit. The National Academy of
       Sciences Report on "Preventing Reading Difficulties in Young Children" has been
       well-received across the political spectrum, but it is not well-known. One possible event
       would be for you to respond to the report by declaring an end to the reading wars -- the
       long-running fight between "phonics" and "whole language" advocates. At one of the
       tutor training sessions being held across the country over the summer, you could call for a
       September "Reading Summit" (already being planned by Education). You could also put
       some flesh on the $3 billion Early Learning Fund in the budget, perhaps calling it the
       Marshall Plan for the end of the Reading Wars.

[ELENA: Gene wanted to make sure that you were comfortable with this idea.)
    Bilingual Education and Pre-School. We could seize on the bilingual education
     backlash to advance the goal of working towards universal pre-school. Our goal
     would be to have pre-school programs to help non-English speaking 3-4 year olds
     learn to speak English (the younger they are, the easier it is to learn; we should be
     teaching them before they get to kindergarten and then they'll be ready to learn to
     read and add like other kids). We could try to re-program funds, use existing
     funds will flexible authority, or try to carve out pilot in an appropriations bill.

       DC Training Alliance. You could announce a Labor Department pilot program that
       would give a $1.2 million planning grant (the "metro-tech grant") to the DC, MD, and
       VA job-training systems to train workers to meet the demand in the high-tech industry in
       the DC, MD, and VA area. The pilot program will fund 100 workers. There is an
       expectation that this pilot will lead to a demonstration project serving 3,000 people at a
       cost of $17 million. This is ready to be announced anytime in the near future.

     School Construction and Smaller Class Size Day. We could begin preparing now for
      a back-to-school week day that would focus on school construction and smaller class
      sizes. We could ask parents, volunteers, Members of Congress, and community leaders
      to join together to help rebuild/renovate/modernize their local public school. You, the
      Vice President, Mrs. Clinton, and Mrs. Gore could all participant in this construction
      effort. This would be a terrific visual and would allow Members of Congress a chance to
      highlight this important issue for the fall.

     Report on Success of School-to-Work Program. A major study is expected to be
      released soon on one of your signature programs of his first year in office,
      School-to-Work. Ifit is as positive as hoped, and if the right-wing's opposition
      continues to be an issue, this might be an appropriate time to take on the right-wing and
      further energize the business community in support of Democrats' efforts. We are not
      sure of the timing of this report. Moreover, our budget scales back the school-to-work
      program (from $400 million to $250 million) as it sunsets according to law.


Individual Development Accounts:

      Endorse Coats-Harkin Bill. You could announce your endorsement of the
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

          Coats-Harkin IDA demonstration bill in Congress. One possible event idea would be to
          go to a community development bank and help a welfare recipient open a bank account --
          this would allow us to push for CDFI funding at the same time. Another idea would be
          to do a more simple Rose Garden event with the sponsors of the bill and welfare
          recipients, and push this as part of our welfare-to-work efforts ..


    Pensions:

         Pensions Proposals_ Your advisors have reached consensus on two pension proposals
          (in addition to the proposals announced in January). The joint and
          two-thirds/three-quarters survivor annuity proposal would increase benefits for some
          surviving spouses of pension plan participants, while the other proposal, initially
          advanced by Rep. Price (D-NC), would allow workers to count FMLA time toward
          pension vesting requirements. This would ensure that those (relatively few) workers
          close to the 1,OOO-hour minimum requirement for vesting do not lose a year of vesting
          because of time taken off under FMLA. This can be billed as a women's pension item.

    Rural Agenda:

         Rural Economic Development. There are several potential rural economic initiatives
          that the Administration could roll out over the summer or fall. These focus in particular
          on education, agriculture, housing, trade, and health care. We would work together on
          some of these and other potential initiatives.

          Rural Press ConferencelRegional Press Opportunities. We may want to consider
          announcing different elements of a rural economic development initiative through a radio
          press conference which you, the Vice President, and Sec. Glickman could jointly hold.
          We have done this successfully in the past, particularly with respect to budget initiatives.
          In addition, we might want to devote a weekly radio address to rural issues as well. Both
          of these hits could be part of a broader rural economic rollout in which we have Cabinet
          heads and subcabinet officials conduct media in targeted rural markets across the country.

    Housing:

         HUD-NAR "One America" Agreement. HUD and the National Association of
          Realtors (NAR) have reached a final agreement on the "One America Broker" program.
          Under the program, NAR will sponsor training for real estate professionals on how to
          better serve minority and immigrant home buyers. The training will address adherence
          to Fair Housing Act principles, as well as ways to expand the housing choices available to
          minorities and other underserved groups. Realtors who complete the course and commit
          to serving these groups would be able to use the "One America" logo in advertising and
          promotional materials, which could help them to attract additional clients. To be
          certified, realtors must be free of any Fair Housing Act violations. The agreement could
\
          be announcedlhighlighted by you or the Vice President at an event with,e.g., a minority
          or immigrant new home buyer who previously experience discrimination and (possibly) a
          realtor with an outstanding record serving underserved groups.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
[COMBINE WITH OTHER DISABILITY PROPOSAL]
   Initiative on Technology for Americans with Disabilities. New infonnation technologies
    can substantially increase the quality oflife for the 55 million Americans with disabilities.
    For example -- speech recognition, text-to-speech, computers that can be manipulated with
    eye movements as opposed to a mouse -- can all allow Americans with disabilities to lead
    more independent lives and increase their ability to get a job. The backdrop for this event
    could be demonstrations of the technology. Deliverables could be:
    o Announcement of Technology Task Force of President's Committee on
            Employment of People with Disabilities.
    o FY2000 budget initiative (R&D to develop better technologies, programs to
            educate engineers to design accessible technology).
    o Government commitment to purchase "accessible" technology [This is part of the
            "GI" bill.]



International Economics:

      Trade Adjustment Assistance. We could do an event on helping everyone benefit from
        a global economy. This event could have four different components, focused on both
       worker and community adjustment:
       o You could announce the consolidation and refonn of the Trade Adjustment
              Assistance (T AA) program and the NAFTA-T AA program. This would more
              than fulfill the President's promise to strengthen the TAAINAFTA-TAA
              programs during the fast track debate.
       o      A possible Executive Order establishing a coordinating committee on community
              adjustment issues. This could be modeled after the Executive Order on defense
              adjustment programs.
       o You would call on Congress to pass his EDA budget and NADBank budget, so
              that we can effectively deal with communities that have severe and sudden
              economic distress.
       o Memorandum of Understanding between NADBank and EDA so that they work
              better together. This is important to Rep. Torres and the Hispanic Caucus.
              NADBankiCAIP and EDA have done a lot of work together, but it could be an
              important symbolic message to the Hispanic Caucus for the relationship between
              the two to be fonnalized.

     Sanctions Policy. You could announce the release of a Presidential Decision Directive
      on Sanctions which would establish a joint NEC/NSC interagency sanctions review group
      to monitor and coordinate broad United States government sanctions policy. The group
      would ensure that prior to sanctions being implemented the Administration would
      conduct a costlbenefit analysis. The group could also review existing sanctions in place
      to detennine whether they are still serving an important purpose in fulfilling our policy
      objectives. The time could be ripe for such an announcement because of the keen
      awareness on the Hill and elsewhere about the proliferation of new sanctions regimes and
      their cost to the U.S. economy. An interagency process has been working on such a
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

           directive; work could be finalized in time for an announcement. Because the Glenn
           Amendment has crystallized opinion about the problems with unilateral sanctions, this
           can and should be done sooner rather than later (e.g., over the next couple of weeks).

         Major International Trade Speech. You could articulate U.S. trade objectives for the
          year leading up to the 1999 WTO Mi!listerial Conference, which we are hosting. You
          could also announce the selection of the city for such an announcement. Over 20 cities
          have expressed interest; the conference will bring international attention and over 10,000
          attendees from foreign government, business, press and NGOs. The policy initiative
          would be a refinement of the goals outlined at the May 1998 WTO Anniversary in Geneva.


    Financial:

    [NEED TO REVISE RE: SARAH ROSEN'S COMMENTS)
        Consumer Financial Bill of Rights. Working with the DPC, we could potentially
         develop a consumer financial bill of rights. One possible example could be to do
         something about ATM fees.


