     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:24-JUN-1998 15:51:23.00

     SUBJECT:   Executive Order Ideas

     TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @EOP [ WHO ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     This e-mail lists ideas for Executive Orders relating to tobacco which we
     are pursuing.   (The attached chart describes agency policy on filming
     privileges on federal property, mentioned below.) Any feedback on these
     ideas would be greatly appreciated.

     1)      Applying the FDA Rule to Federal Property -- An Executive Order could
     apply the FDA rule to Federal property, by directing agencies that
     contract with entities operating on Federal land to include provisions in
     their contracts requiring compliance with the FDA rule.  HHS likes this
     idea, and we plan to ask Justice to draft language for an Executive
     Order. We would also need to run this idea by Interior, DOD and other
     agencies that regulate federal property.

     2)      Prohibiting Underage Smoking on Federal Property -- DOJ is determining
     whether there is statutory authority to issue an Executive Order making
     underage smoking on federal property illegal. There would be no penalty
     for violations, other than confiscating the tobacco product. Justice
     likes this approach, but HHS is concerned about the way it would play in
     the press (they think the press would make fun of the idea). HHS also
     does not like anything that appears to punish minors because they believe
     it is ineffective in deterring youth smoking.

     3)      Smoking and Filming Privileges on Federal Property
             (a)  Prohibiting the Filming of Movies on Federal Property that Promote
     Smoking -- As you know, Senator McConnell said on the Senate floor that he
     would offer an amendment to the McCain legislation which would require
     federal agencies to prohibit the filming of movies on federal property
     which D&depict the use of tobacco or illegal drugs as healthy, desirable,
     or socially acceptable.DB He also said that the President could issue an
     Executive Order to this effect. McConnell does not target the portrayal
     of youth smoking, but smoking in general.

             We met yesterday with the Justice Department and the various
     Federal agencies which allow filming on federal property (Departments of
     Defense, Transportation (Coast Guard), Interior (Park Service), and
     Agriculture (Forest Service)) to learn more about their policies and
     procedures for granting filming rights, and to elicit their views on the
     McConnell amendment. As you can see from the attached chart, their
     policies and procedures vary a great deal.  For example, while the Park


 Service is explicitly prohibited from examining content in granting
 filming rights (they only seek to protect park resources and visitors),
 the DOD and the Coast Guard look closely at content. While the process
 for granting filming rights is very centralized for some agencies, it is
 very decentralized for others (ie. operating on a park by park basis) .

         All of the agencies raised objections to the McConnell amendment.
 The Park Service said that McConnell would directly contradict their
 policy which prohibits them from examining content.  A number of agencies
 expressed strong concern about this route being a slippery slope, that
 could result in prohibiting the portrayal of other behavior (gay
 relationships, etc.), down the road.  The DOD asserted that if they
 started engaging in this type of censorship, production companies would go
 elsewhere and O&they would be out of business.08 Of course, some of the
 agencies are concerned about the administrative burden involved with
 reviewing thousands of scripts in this kind of detail.

          The Justice DepartmentO,s initial reaction is that McConnellO,s
 amendment raises First Amendment constitutional concerns because it is not
 viewpoint neutral.   (They also privately expressed concern ,that current
 agency practice in granting filming privileges could be potentially
 unconstitutional as well.)   They are in the process of researching the
 issue. They also want to explore whether we could regulate this type of
 speech ,because it results from a form of government subsidy (under Rust v.
 Sullivan), although they think this may be a stretch.   They plan to give
 us an answer to these questions by the end of the week. The Supreme Court
 is expected to decide a case on Thursday or Friday on the National
 Endowment for the Arts which could shed some light on these questions,
 particularly in terms of free speech and government subsidies.

          (b) Prohibiting the Filming of Movies on Federal Property that Portray
 Illegal Smoking - We have also asked the Justice Department to explore
 other alternatives to the McConnell amendment that would be viewpoint
 neutral, such as narrowing McConnell to prohibit the portrayal of illegal
 youth smoking. We will let you know what they say as soon as we hear from
 them.

 4)      Requiring OSHA to Issue a Standard on Environmental Tobacco Smoke
 OSHA has been working on a standard for almost a decade which would
 regulate indoor air quality, including ETS, LegionnaireD,s disease, etc.
 The standard is still several years away from completion.   The President
 could issue an Executive Order directing OSHA to issue the ETS standard
 separately. OSHA believes that it would take two years to issue the ETS
 standard -- less time than completing the indoor air quality standard.
 OSHA is writing a memo providing us with the pros and cons of this
 approach.   (A BNA reporter called OSHA about this today, because ASH is
 pushing the idea.   OSHA had no comment.)==================== ATTACHMENT  1 ========
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D49]MAIL468444577.126 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF57 5 043 61 OEOOOO 010A02 01 00000002 05000000B02 2 00000002 000089 9DC1C5'8A002FBE77 A6 6B
 9B5C678097CADE9440F187428955AEF6D5089F6528E4D317B9615DD18A82D6AA40826BFE216D92

                                          Filming for Entertainment Purposes on Federal Property --
                                                               Agency Policy
                                                                June 23, 1998

Agency                 Is there a Written      Does Agency Issue       Does Agency            Does Agency           Does Agency Review Content?/
                       Policy?                 Permits?                Review Script?         Oversee Filming?      What is Content Policy?

Agriculture            Forest Service          Yes. There is a fee     Agency may             A Forest Service      Yes. Concerned only with scenes set on
(Forest Service)       generally uses          schedule. Process       request story boards   Officer may           park land. Ensures that content does not
                       guidelines adopted      for granting permits    in order to            monitor filming to    depict practices that are prohibited on
                       by Southern             is decentralized.       determine if           protect park          National Forest land; content also should
                       California forest                               activities are         resources and guard   not encourage unauthorized uses of
                       service.'                                       incompatible with      against fires.        National Forest land (ie. unauthorized
                                                                       Forest policy.                               vehicle use, littering, etc.) Also looks at
                                                                                                                    depiction of Forest Service employees.
                                                                                                                    They also have the discretion to consider
                                                                                                                    nudity/profanity.

Interior (Park         Yes -- Draft            Yes. Process for        No.                    No.                   No. Park Services issues permits to
Service)               guidelines. These       granting permits is                                                  protect park resources and the public's
                       are explicit that       decentralized.                                                       enjoyment of the park.
                       Park Service should
                       not regulate
                       content.

GSA                    N/A. Rules of           N/A.                    N/A.                   N/A.                  N/A.
                       occupying agency
                       apply for each
                       property.
                       Smoking is not
                       allowed on GSA
                       property.



       I   Smoking by film crews is prohibited in order to prevent forest fires.




 Agency                 Is there a Written    Does Agency Issue       Does Agency           Does Agency            Does Agency Review Content?/
                        Policy?               Permits?                Review Script?        Oversee Filming?       What is Content Policy?
 Defense                Yes.                  No. DOD enters          Yes.                  Yes. Project           Yes. DOD is concerned with how
                                              into license                                  officer monitors       military personnel are depicted. Looks
                                              agreements with                               compliance with        for illegal and improper activity
                                              production                                    script.                committed by military personnel
                                              company -- there is                                                  (murder, treason, drug use).2 Tries not
                                              no fee. Process is                                                   to be arbiter of morality when it comes to
                                              very centralized.                                                    violence/nudity/smoking. Will
                                                                                                                   determine whether portrayal of smoking
                                                                                                                   in a given setting is realistic (ie., on a
                                                                                                                   submarine).


 Transportation         No. Bases its         No. Coast Guard         Yes.                  Yes. A technical       Coast Guard reviews scripts for accurate
 (Coast Guard)          policy on DOD.        enters into licensing                         advisor ensures        portrayal of Coast Guard personnel. It is
                                              agreement with                                compliance with.       concerned about portraying the Coast
                                              production                                    script.                Guard in a negative light. It will also
                                              company.                                                             look at the overall context of the project
                                                                                                                   in terms of violence, nudity and levels of
                                                                                                                   profanity.




         2 DOD guidance also says, "The production should not appear to condone or endorse activities by private citizens or organizations when such activities
are contrary to US Government policy".


