 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:24-JUN-1998 17:22:10.00

 SUBJECT:   Talking points for a Rubin call to Bible

 TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena   Kagan/OU=OPD/O~EOP   @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Treasury prepared these talking points for a Rubin return call to Bible.
 I think they're fine -- please let me know by tomorrow morning if you want
 to review them (otherwise I'll give Gruber the go ahead.)

 The talking points reiterate our publicly stated position on price
 estimates, in response to a June 11th fax Geoffrey Bible sent Rubin of two
 "independent" analyses of the Treasury analysis of McCain (sent to
 Hatch).  ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable tq convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D6]MAIL495891674.126 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043870D0000010A020100000002050000000D4800000002000048B1246CCBOF92C16AEEE3
 256C34A9D9B3B47AA3CF3186E9BOE2B90C20C510C3882COB9272E5A451F2FE9A33C978A17A15E1
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                                     June 23, 1998

MEMORANDUM TO:                SECRETARY RUBIN.

FROM:                         JONATHAN GRUBER

RE:                          . Call to Geoffrey Bible

Action Forcing Event

Phillip Morris CEO Geoffrey Bible sent you a letter containing two critiques of the
Administration's analysis of S.141S, the McCain bill. The analysis to which he refers was
provided to the Senate Judiciary Committee on May 11, in response to a request from Chairman
Hatch to Deputy Secretary Summers. In your return call, you reiterate the broad position that we
presented in that analysis, while recognizing the uncertainties that underlie the study of this
difficult topic.

Background

At his testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee on April 30, Deputy Secretary Summers
was directly challenged by Chairman Hatch to justify in detail the Administration's conclusions
that the McCain bill would raise the price of cigarettes by $1.10 per pack (in real terms) in 2003.

      Tax Policy and Economic Policy worked together to produce this analysis over the next
       10 days, and it is attached as Tab C

      Subsequent to our analysis, the Joint Tax Committee issued an analysis which found that
       the price of cigarettes would actually rise by $1.68 (constant 1998 dollars) in 2003. This
       difference was largely based on different assumptions about the baseline quantity of
       cigarettes consumed, the amount of smuggling that would arise from this legislation, the
       response of state taxes to this federally mandated price increase, and retail and wholesale
       mark-ups.

      In the wake of this news, the McCain bill was augmented by adding a "volume
       adjustment" which would lower the government receipts as cigarette volumes declined, to
       guarantee that the price would not rise by more than $1.10 in 2003.

The letter that you received (attached as Tab B) contains two "independent" re-analyses of the
letter that was sent to the Judiciary Committee.

      The letters contain a large amount of sharp rhetoric, but the cover note from Mr. Bible
       asks you to ignore this and focus on the analysis.
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

      Their analysis is fundamentally flawed or confused in some areas, and in others areas
       differ from Administration analysis because of honest scientific uncertainty. On some
       topics where there is some uncertainty, the administration has staked out a clear position.

      An example of the fundamental flaws in the analysis is the consideration of youth
       smoking. There is a clear scientific consensus that youth smoking is highly responsive to
       price, but this is ignored by both reviewers.

      An example of a confused point is the first reviewer's criticism of the Treasury price
       analysis. He argues that the analysis assumes the price elasticity falls as price rises,
       when the opposite is true. The price differences he attributes to differences in behavioral
       assumptions are actually due to his confusion between real and nominal prices.

      An example of the honest uncertainty is analyses of how the price responsiveness of
       smoking will change as the price rises by a large amount.

      An example of the last category is smuggling. There is some legitimate uncertainty
       about the impact of the McCain bill on smuggling. But we believe strongly, and have
       stated repeatedly in testimony, that smuggling will not be a significant problem given the
       impressive new enforcement regime that we are putting into place.        .

I attach as Tab A talking points for your call to Mr. Bible.

Recommendation

That you call Mr. Bible, relying on the attached talking points.

       Yes                     No                     Let's Discuss
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                           Talking Points for Call to Geoffrey Bible

      Measuring the effect of comprehensive tobacco legislation on the price of cigarettes in the
       U.S. is an analytically difficult task that incorporates a large number of uncertainties. It
       is impossible to measure the effect of such legislation without making a number of
       assumptions and projections about an environment that is without historical parallel in the
       U.S.

      These types of scientific uncertainties lead to a number of the disagreements that your
       reviewers had with our analysis. On questions such as whether smokers are more or less
       responsive to small versus large price changes, there is no clear right answer. But in
       every such case we chose an assumption which was completely consistent with the extant
       scientific literature.

      In other important areas, we disagree quite strongly with your reviewers. Two such areas
       are the responsiveness of youth smoking to price, and the extent of smuggling that will
       arise from a comprehensive tobacco settlement such as the McCain bill.

      On the former, there is a clear scientific consensus that youths are very responsive to the
       price of cigarettes. This is confirmed by international evidence from Canada during the
       1980s, where the price of cigarettes rose by 90% and youth smoking fell in half. Indeed,
       it is confirmed by analysis contained in internal documents from Phillip Morris and the
       other tobacco companies.

      On the latter, we believe quite strongly that the creation of a sound regulatory system -
       one that will close the distribution chain for tobacco products - will ensure that the
       diversion and smuggling of tobacco can be effectively controlled and will not defeat the
       purposes of comprehensive tobacco legislation.

      Thus, while we recognize the uncertainty that underlies this exercise, we stand by our
       analysis, and we would apply the same basic methodology to analyzing future bills on this
       topic that emerge from the Congress.

      We hope that we can work with you in trying to pass comprehensive tobacco legislation
       this year.

Background - Specific Topics

Volume Adjustment: In the wake of an unfavorable score of the price per pack effects of the
McCain bill by JCT, the bill was augmented by adding a "volume adjustment" which would
lower the government receipts as cigarette volumes declined, to guarantee that the cost per pack
to the manufacturer would not rise by more than $1.10 ( 1998 dollars) in 2003. This volume
adjustment takes as its base 80% of 1997 volumes, which is criticized by Mr. Bible.

But the reason for this is quite simple: the payment stream included in the McCain bill already
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

had an "implicit" volume adjustment built in, which had the payments decline over time to
reflect the fact that we expected a fall in volume. The 80% adjustment was simply picked so
that, given our assumptions on volume decline, we would guarantee cost per pack increase of
$1.10 real. This is indeed the cost per pack increase "score" provided by JCT on the revised
bill.

The key point is that with this volume adjustment, the manufacturer per pack cost
increment due to the base payments in the bill is guaranteed to be no greater than $1.10
real. This seems to be misunderstood by both the reviewers and by Bible.

The Evolution of Price Responsiveness: Contrary to the statement by the first reviewer, our
model assumes that the price responsiveness of smokers rises as the price rises. But because the
model is slightly non-linear, it takes larger and larger absolute price increases to generate the
same quantity reduction. It is in this sense that the model is consistent with the intuition that as
the price rises, the market is composed of more and more committed smokers. Our model,
moreover, is consistent with several influential empirical studies. The criticism of it offered by
the first reviewer is without empirical or theoretical basis._

Smuggling: The regulatory regime we envision has three essential elements. First, all entities in
the distribution chain for tobacco products - manufacturers, wholesalers, exporters, importers,
distributors and retailers - should be required to hold a license or a permit. Licensing of
retailers could be done at the state level. Licenses would be issued based on certain clearly
specified criteria and could be revoked or suspended for certain specified violations. Those
conducting business without a license would be subject to penalties. Licensed entities should
only be authorized to sell tobacco products to other licensed entities. Second, legislation should
require the marking, branding and identification of packages of tobacco products intended for
domestic distribution and for export so that they may not be diverted or smuggled in
circumvention of the legitimate channels of distribution. Third, any regulatory proposal should
include penalty and administrative provisions that will allow for effective, efficient and uniform
enforcement of controls over distribution.

         With the necessary regulatory provisions in place to deal with potential smuggling, we
assume there will not be an increase in smuggling for several reasons. First, the Aciosed@
distribution scheme would limit drastically smugglers' ability to enter products into a legitimate
distribution channel. Potential black marketeers will not be able to move products through
legitimate wholesalers or distributors. Nor will they be able to sell products to retail consumers
at the local convenience stores or other licensed retail outlets. Instead, without a way to place
contraband products in the market legally, smugglers would have to sell cigarettes outside
channels of legitimate distribution. This would be a risky proposition and one we do not
believe will represent a significant problem. Second, U.S. cigarette manufacturers would have
great incentives not to become complicit in any smuggling operation, as they would encounter
enormous legal risks (such as the possibility of losing their license or, as the McCain bill
provides, losing their cap on liability risk) and public opprobrium. Indeed, it is hard to imagine
that large scale smuggling could occur without the manufacturers' knowledge. Third, the U.S.
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

    Customs Service has the expertise and the experience to deal with imported contraband products
    and has already made a substantial investment in the currently planned introduction of
    non-intrusive inspection systems and other equipment needed to detect smuggling of contraband.
     The organic nature of tobacco and the distinctive shape of cigarettes makes them readily
    detectable by equipment that Customs currently has in place.

    Pass-Through to Price: The second reviewer disputes our assumption that these payments will be
    passed-through to prices. But this assumption is supported by a large empirical literature, and is
    commonly employed in outside analyses of this legislation, including those by CBO and JCT.


