RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-JUL-1998 17:11:00.00

SUBJECT:   Radio Address

TO: Michelle Crisci (CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The ending with plug for FDA chief is TK, but please approve ASAP ASAP --
needs to go to road in next 45 minutes. Thanks.

Draft 7/1/98 5:00pm
Jordan Tamagni

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
RADIO ADDRESS ON FOOD SAFETY
JULY 4, 1998
        Good morning.   I have just returned from a very rewarding trip to China,
a remarkable nation where the seeds of freedom are beginning to take root
and grow.    I saw it in the faces of people free for the first time to
work in jobs of their own choosing, in the new private businesses that are
helping ChinaD, s economy to grow, and in the first free elect'ions of local
leaders in Chinese villages.   I was able to speak directly, not only to
the Chinese government, but to the Chinese people, about the importance of
freedom and what it means to us in America.   So it seems fitting that I
have returned home in time for Independence Day, the time of year we
celebrate the freedom our founders fought for and the values we have held
dear for more than 220 years.

        The Fourth of July is also a time for families and friends to come
together, at backyard barbeques and public parks all across America.
Today, I want to talk to you about what we are doing to make sure that the
food and drinks we serve to our families this Independence Day and every
day are 'safe, especially for our children.

        AmericaD,s food supply is the most bountiful -- and the safest
in the world.   For nearly six years, our administration has made food
safety a top priority.   I signed into law legislation to keep harmful
pesticides off our fruits and vegetables. We put in place strong
protections to ensure that seafood is safe, and we are modernizing our
meat and poultry safety system. Last year, we launched a nationwide early
warning system to catch outbreaks of food-borne illness sooner, and
prevent them from happening in the first place.

        But as much as we have done, we know we must do more to keep our
families safe and strong. That lesson was driven home tragically last
year, when apple juice contaminated with a deadly strain of E. coli
bacteria caused the death of a 16-month-old child in Washington State, and
led to the hospitalizati'on of more than a, dozen children.


         Today, we are taking two important steps to ensure that the food and
JU1ce we serve our families is as safe as we can make it.  First, I am
pleased to announce a new rule that requires warning labels on all
packaged juice that has not been pasteurized or processed to kill harmful
bacteria. This rule will help keep thousands of Americans from becoming
ill every year, and it will give parents precious peace of mind.

        Second, I am directing' [the Department of Health and Human Services) and
the Department of Agriculture to devise a plan within the next [90) days
to create a national institute for food safety. This institute will help
federal agencies to work together more efficiently with state and local .
health agencies, food producers, and consumer groups to find new ways to
improve food safety research. And it will leverage the resources of the
private sector for research projects that will help keep AmericaD,s food
supply the safest in the world.

        These are the steps we are taking today to give American families
the security they deserve.  But Congress must do its part as well.  My
food safety initiative makes an unprecedented $101 Million commitment to
provide the resources our agencies need to ensure that the food we eat is
safe. This is not a Republican or Democratic issue -- it is a matter of
our familiesD, health and safety.  And I call on the Congress to fully
fund this initiative.

        I have also proposed two key pieces of legislation to keep our
food supply safe and our families healthy.  The first would give the FDA
greater authority to stop unsafe food at our borders, by requiring it to
halt imports of fruits, vegetables, and other food products that are
produced under safety conditions that do not match ou'r own strict
standards. The second would give the USDA new authority to impose tough
fines on food producers who violate those standards     and to issue
mandatory recalls of unsafe meat and poultry before it reaches our tables.
