RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-JUL-1998 11:44:56.00

SUBJECT:   Free TV Time

TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rahm I. Emanuel ( CN=Rahm I. Emanuel/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
        The purpose of the memorandum is to get your guidance on a
possible voluntary agreement with the broadcasters on free TV time for
candidates.  Over the last couple of weeks, we have been in discussions
with Norm Ornstein of the American Enterprise Institute (AEI) regarding a
voluntary agreement with the broadcasters on free TV time.  It has become
clear, from our discussions, that what is now achievable is considerably
less than when the idea for the President's Commission on the
Responsibilities of Broadcasters in the Digital Age (Moonves-Ornstein
Commission) was first proposed. The broadcasters have become increasingly
entrenched. They no longer view action on free TV time by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) as a real possibility and they are
confident that their is a strong anti-free TV time faction in Congress
that will prevent any legislative solutions.  Finally, they do not feel
any public pressure for free TV time.

        Our leverage, at this point, lies within the Moonves-Ornstein
Commission itself.  Ornstein still has a majority of members that he can
call upon to support a final report.  Ornstein has told the broadcasters
that he is prepared to push through a majority report that would include a
scathing critique of the broadcasters unless they can reach a compromise.
He continues to work towards a consensus proposal, the core of which would
be the creation of a new, voluntary "Code of Conduct".   Included in the
"Code" would be a requirement that broadcasters provide 5 minutes of free
air time each night from every broadcaster over the last thirty days of an
election. The broadcasters would decide the format' and which candidates
have access to the air time. However, we, have convinced Ornstein that it
is important to insure that as many candidates have access to the time and
that the time be used for candidate-centered discourse.  The five minutes
do not have to be aired en bloc,  but would have to be broadcast between
5:00 pm and 11:30 pm.

        There are three ways to enforce this agreement.  First, get the
National Association of broadcasters to recgonize that stations must meet
the "Code" and reprimand those that don't.  Second, would be to require
disclosure from all broadcasters on how they are meeting their "Code"
obligations. Third, the FCC could consider how broadcasters are
    .'
·
         fulfilling their "Code" obligations when reviewing requests for license
         renewals.  This last piece would require a rulemaking by the FCC.

                 It has become evident that the other elements of Ornstein's
         consensus proposal. and our. ideas of free TV time, are not going
         anywhere.  For example, the broadcasters have shown no interest in our
         idea of providing a minute of free time for every two minutes purchased,
         even if it were exchanged, as Ornstein has suggested, for a repeal of the
         "lowest unit rate" requirement.   It is also unlikely that broadcasters
         would agree to implement this agreement before the 1998 election, because
         they fear Republican retribution.

                 Without much leverage and, in my view, with few prospects for an
         improved environment on the broadcasting front anytime soon, I would
         recommend that we work through Ornstein in trying to secure an agreement
         on the 30 days piece sometime after the election.  In. light of the failure
         of Congress to once again act on campaign finance reform, such an
         agreement will appear to be a more significant accomplishment than it is
         in reality.  However, their is an argument for holding off on an agreement
         until we, and the FCC are in a stronger political position.

         please advise.



                 In addition, Ornstein wants the Gore Commission to recommend to
         Congress that it repeal the "lowest unit rate" and put in its place a new
         law which would provide any candidate who buys 2 minutes of air time with
         an additional minute of air time.

                 Finally, there is a proposal to create an additional digital,
         PBS-like channel which would provide air time for public interest
         broadcasting including candidate info shows, etc.

                 There are three problems with this proposal.   First, the 5 minutes
         per night of air time will not have any significant impact on reducing the
         cost of campaign advertising. A candidate will be lucky to get one or two
         minutes in the final month of free air time.  Second,removing the lowest
         unit rate requirement requires congressional approval.   Finally, it is
         unlikely a large majority of Americans would watch campaign commercials on
         a PBS-like station.

                 We are working with Congressional and public interest groups to
         place pressure on the Gore Commission and to try to change the focus of
         the debate to one which talks about how television can help reduce the
         high cost of campaigning.  I will keep you posted .




                                               .,


