RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JUL-1998 16:58:45.00

SUBJECT:   Education Update

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
As we discussed, attached is a Shireman/Cohen memo to you and Gene,
providing you an update on where we stand on our education initiatives,
and steps we can take to promote our class size and school construction
agenda over the next few months.==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D22]MAIL49357698H.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504300060000010A020100000002050000000433000000020000F11A8D6E25DBAF657E4538

MEMORANDUM FOR GENE SPERLING AND BRUCE REED

FROM:           Bob Shireman and Mike Cohen

SUBJECT:        Outlook for Education Priorities


        As we recently reviewed education legislation in Congress, it became clear that we may
see several pieces of education legislation come to the President's desk this year, even while
Congress blocks action on our major proposals for Class Size Reduction and School
Construction, and our investments in current programs. We wanted to provide you with our
overview so that we can discuss strategy for the few weeks that remain in this legislative session.
 The key question that we need to consider is: Given the outlook for the rest of the year, how do
we get traction to force Congress to act on class size, school modernization, and education
appropriations?                                                                       .

I. Certainties

         There are only two education items that Congress is virtually certain to address in its final
month:

         1. Veto override on Education Savings Accounts (Coverdell), with its riders (such as
         reading). While the vote is sure to fail, it is the message that the Republicans want: they
         are for something popular for education, we are against it.

         2. Funding (appropriations or continuing resolution). In addition to the fight over
         funding levels, this may include riders on national tests, block grants and other issues.
         We are struggling with how to gain the upper hand on appropriations, given the media's
         insistence that our budget request is not realistic due to the demise of tobacco legislation.
         This is the crucial bill for the education groups; it will occupy the vast majority of their
         time, and they will support our efforts outside the appropriations bill to the extent that
         they see us supporting increased education investments in the appropriations bill.

II. Possibilities

      There are several bills with bipartisan support that could reach the President's desk before
Congress adjourns:

         1. Higher Education Act reauthorization. Assuming certain details are worked out,
         we would want to take credit for lower student loan interest rates, the government's first
         "performance-based organization," High Hopes, distance learning, and teacher training.
         The House has acted, and Senate action is expected soon.

                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
       "Skill Grant," consolidation of programs, and other program improvements. The bill is
       in conference.

       3. America Reads. The House passed a bill last year, and the Senate Committee has
       reported out its own version. One version or the other could be considered soon on the
       Senate floor, and either would be acceptable to us. The House version is better
       positioned to.pass the Senate, though the education community is strongly opposed to it
       because of what they see as a "voucher-like" provision and a governahce mechanism and
       funding stream that bypassed the state education agency.

       4. Charter Schools. The House passed a bill last year, and the Senate Committee will
       mark up its version within the next several weeks, most likely on July 22. Both versions
       provide incentives for states to expand charter schools programs, and to provide stronger
       accountability for results. The President supported the House version before it passed,
       and we should do the same for the Senate at the appropriate time. If this is enacted, we
       can highlight it as another step to help reach the President's goal of3,OOO charter schools.

       5. Ed-Flex. Sens. Frist and Wyden have introduced a bill to expand Ed-Flex to all 50
       states. The bill is likely to be marked up next week along with the Charter Schools bill.
       We are working with them to ensure that it incorporates both greater flexibility as well as
       accountability for results. At present, there is little enthusiasm for expanding Ed-Flex
       among Democrats or the education groups, and conservative Republicans (e.g., Coats)
       who favor block grants may oppose this on the grounds that it will weaken the case for
       block grants. Nonetheless, if added to the charter schools bill and if there is sufficient
       time to take this up, it is likely to pass the Senate and be accepted by the House in
       conference.

       6. Head Start Reauthorization. The Senate has marked up a bipartisan Head Start bill,
       and Riggs will take it up shortly in the House. There may be some controversial
       elements in the House (e.g., vouchers, English-only), though Riggs is eager to get a bill
       passed this year and presumably will not let it get hung up over those issues.

       7. Vocational Education Reauthorization. Bipartisan approaches have passed the
       House and Senate and are headed for conference. Work has already begun at the staff
       level, but the House has not yet named conferees and may want to kill the bill because of
       right-wing worries that the bill will promote school-to-work.                 .

III. Defensive Battles

        In addition to the battles that we face on the appropriations bill, Congress is moving
legislation on:

        1. Block Grants. The House committee has reported a block grant that combines 29
      . programs, including Goals 2000, School-to-Work, the Technology Literacy Challenge
                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
       floor within the next few weeks. There is a chance that Roemer may strike a deal with
       Republicans to add an accountability provision, which could add Democratic support to
       the bill and which would be quite problematic for us. There is no companion bill in the
       Senate at present, and we suspect it will be difficult to find floor time to take it up.

       2. Bilingual Education. The Riggs bilingual education bill has been reported out of
       committee and has also been attached to the appropriations bill. The prospects for floor
       action are uncertain, and there is little chance this will be taken up in the Senate.
       Nonetheless, this issue will continue to occupy a good deal of our time and could
       potentially be quite divisive for House Democrats.


IV. Getting Traction on Our Agenda

        While Congress may move forward on some of the items described above, Congress has
not held any hearings on legislation that the President has proposed for Reducing Class Size,
School Modernization, and Education Opportunity Zones.

In addition, the House Appropriations subcommittee has rejected $2 billion in increases proposed
in our FY 99 Budget (while providing increases for some programs we proposed to freeze, such
as special education). Further, we will again face a major battle over national testing on the
appropriations bill.

          Just as the President did on Monday, we should take, every opportunity to run down the
list of items on which Congress has failed to act, including:

              On July 15, when the House Appropriations Committee marks-up the
               Labor-HHS-Education bill.
              When the Coverdell bill is vetoed.
              In the July 18 radio address on Charter Schools.
              At the AFT speech on July 20 and the International Teachers' Organization
               speech on July 29.
              In the August 29 education radio address.
              In the August 31 interview.
              As opportunities arise.

In addition, we recommend working with the Democratic leaders in Congress on a Class
Size-School Modernization strategy that would include:

       July: Discharge Petition in the House of Representatives. Democrats, and perhaps
       the education groups, would announce an effort to bring the School Modernization bill
       and the Class Size Reduction bill to the floor in September by gathering signatures on a
       discharge petition. Progress could be noted periodically, so that supporters can use the
       information and apply pressure locally. (While the Senate does not have discharge

                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion




        petitions, perhaps signatures could be gathered on a letter.)

        August: School Visits and Surveys. For the August recess, we would provide
        Members of Congress with "kits" for holding media events on school modernization and
        class size reduction. The approaches would include local surveys of needs, town
        meetings, and forums. Cabinet members would be available to participate in some of the
        activities ..

        September 8: POTUS School Visit. POTUS would visit a school in Maryland or
        Virginia, and FLOTUS and VPOTUS would visit schools elsewhere in the country.
        Ideally, there would be examples of a school in need of repairs, a school experiencing
        burgeoning enrollment, a school with class sizes that are too large (or perhaps just right),
        and a modernized school. The visit(s) could be beamed by satellite for local events
        across the country, featuring local Members of Congress and/or supportive organizations.

               Press hook: We would release the Education Department's "Baby Boom Echo"
               report -- new data, state-by-state, on the record number of children in school. In
               the past two years, this report has gotten extensive tv and print coverage.

        September-October:        To be detennined.




                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


