RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 15-JUL-1998 14:40:26.00

SUBJECT:   vp   talking points

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
The VP's office asked me for some background and talking points on some
immigration issues for the VP's meeting with the Hispanic caucus on
Friday. Attached is the draft.   Thanks.

julie

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D78)MAIL40745859B.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504398070000010A02010000000205000000394A000000020000267A93B69FA207B4853DA6
99FCC38AE775E9D1ADDB8664701716D9BC236A3E96F84BFF5B850D2FED886B005366DOBDOC737A
6175C83DD6FD0754A256A2E44B9C2735138C17610E939B1BB94EA8C40FAFOE69FE01B902460966


1.     Naturalization Backlog

        Many Hispanic advocates have expressed serious concerns over the naturalization
backlog and INS's naturalization fee increases. The dramatic increase in naturalization
applications (from 540,000 in FY 1994 to almost 1.6 million in FY 1997), along with the
dedication of substantial resources over the past nine months to implement quality procedures,
has resulted in an increase in the number of pending applications to nearly 1.9 million as of the
end of May 1998. Currently, most applicants are experiencing a wait time of 12 to 15 months.

      The Administration is committed to the highest standards of integrity in the naturalization
       process as we work to improve waiting times and provide more efficient service to
       citizenship applicants.

      Reducing the naturalization backlog is a top priority of the INS. The INS has devised a
       backlog reduction strategy based on the following: the creation of a separate Office of
       Naturalization Operations within the INS to handle naturalizations and redesign the
       naturalization process; the provision of $200 million in new resources in FY 1998 to
       improve the naturalization process; and, the development of specific backlog reduction
       plans within individual field offices, starting with the biggest offices such as Los Angeles
       and Chicago. In addition, the INS is implementing technological improvements to more
       quickly process and track naturalization applications and the associated fingerprint cards.
      In the last year, the INS has (1) established more than 100 new offices specially designed
       to serve naturalization applicants; (2) implemented a nation-wide direct mail system for
       naturalization applications; (3) piloted a process to send fingerprints to the FBI
       electronically; and (4) engaged in an office-by-office analysis to identify choke points and
       inefficiencies and to promote standardization.

      The Domestic Policy Council and the Office of Management and Budget are working
       with the INS and DO] to evaluate the agency's current backlog reduction plan to
       determine what additional steps need to be taken to improve the process.




                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   HeX-Dump Conversion

         The Administration has developed a plan to make federal immigration activities more
effective by separating enforcement and service operations within INS -- from headquarters to the
field -- while preserving the necessary integrating functions for supporting and coordinating
both operations. Congressman Reyes has been working with Chainnan Rogers on an
alternative refonn bill. We, along with the House Democratic leadership (including Rep.
Becerras), have been trying to persuade Rep. Reyes to instead work with the Administration on a
proposal that meets all of our goals. We hope to present our refonn legislation to the Congress
very soon (likely next week).

      The focus ofthe Administration's refonn effort is to untangle the INS's overlapping and
       frequently confusing organizational structure and replace it with two clear organizational
       chains of command -- one to provide immigration-related services and the other to
       accomplish its enforcement mission. This separation will result in an INS organization
       with better accountability and improved efficiency that allows each operation to focus on
       the unique management, knowledge, skills, and abilities of its function. The most
       dramatic feature of our reform plan is the elimination of the district system and the
       creation of local offices that are focused either on services or enforcement.

      We believe that the Commission on Immigration Refonn (CIR) recommendation to
       disband the INS and reallocate its primary responsibilities to the Department of Justice
       (DOJ) and the Departments of State and Labor would only compound the current
       problems with the nation's immigration system. To be most effective, all immigration
       policy and management should remain within one agency at the Justice Department.

      The Administration did consider Congressman Reyes's proposal to pull enforcement
       operations out of INS into Main Justice. Consistent with Congressman Reyes's
       recommendation, our plan consolidates all enforcement operations to create a single point
       of responsibility and accountability. However, because of the variety of ways in which
       service officials depend on data collected by enforcement officers, and vice versa, to
       ensure the integrity and effectiveness of both functions -- as when, for example, a service
       officer discovers that a person has overstayed their visa and become an illegal alien -- we
       decided that both operations would work best when housed within a single entity.




                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

        The Immigration Control and Refonn Act (lRCA) of 1986 legalized the immigration
status of certain aliens who had been unlawfully present in the United States since January 1982.
 IRCA provided for a one-year application period for this benefit, ending in May 1988. The
INS's implementation of the legalization program was challenged on the ground that the INS
dissuaded some individuals from applying within the requisite time period. Despite a 1993
Supreme Court decision severely limiting the class of those potentially harmed by INS's action,
much litigation continued.

        Section 377 of the 1996 Immigration Act brought this litigation to an end by removing
federal court jurisdiction from cases where the claimant didn't actually file a legalization
application within the specified period, or couldn't show that they attempted to file during the
time period (by presenting a completed application and application fee) and were turned away.
This provision was supported by the Administration because DOJ believes that if an individual
either did not file during the window period or cannot demonstrate that they attempted to file but
were deterred, they are not entitled to relief under IRCA.

         Many immigration advocates are concerned that hundreds of.thousands of individuals
who have resided legally in this country for years will become deportable in the near future as a
result of this provision. Many ofthese individuals claim to have been in the United States since
at least January 1, 1982, and few would be able to secure any other fonn of relief from
deportation (the standard for "cancellation of removal" under the 1996 Immigration Act is much
stricter than the equivalent "suspension of deportation" standard that existed prior).

      I am told that the Administration supported the enactment of Section 377 in an effort to
       bring an end to lengthy litigation covering individuals without bona fide claims to
       legalization. However, I have asked my staff to look into this issue further.




                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex.-Dlltnp Convorslon

       The Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA), enacted
during the last session of Congress, authorized amnesty (automatic "green cards") for
Nicaraguans and Cubans, but provided a less certain form of relief from deportation for many
Guatemalans and Salvadorans. The Hispanic Caucus and many Central American advocates
have urged the Administration to implement NACARA in a way that would achieve "parity"
between all Central American groups affected by the legislation.

        The Hispanic Caucus and the advocacy groups wanted the Attorney General to issue a
regulation that would provide that those Guatemalans and Salvadorans covered under the
legislation would automatically meet the "extreme hardship" standard -- the key requirement for
suspension of deportation. This would almost ensure that Guatemalans and Salvadorans would
receive permanent status. In addition, the advocates strongly suggested that those covered by
NACARA should be processed through an administrative adjudication rather than through a
more adversarial process before the Immigration Judges at the Executive Office ofImmigration
Review (EOIR).

      We share your concern about the disparities in treatment in NACARA, as the President
       and I have made very clear in several public statements relating to the bill. As the
       President indicated in his signing stat"ment, we are seeking to minimize these disparities
       in the implementation process.

      In this regard, the Attorney General has authorized a new administrative procedure for
       adjudicating the cases of Salvadorans, Guatemalans, and Eastern Europeans covered by
       NACARA. This procedure will empower INS asylum officers to decide the suspension
       claims of these individuals (in addition to the review currently available by immigration
       judges). This modified procedure will be much less burdensome for these individuals
       because it is a less adversarial setting than immigration court and thus lessens the need
       for representation by an attorney.

      In order to maximize consistency in the application ofNACARA, the INS has
       temporarily suspended adjudication of asylum requests filed by potential NACARA
       beneficiaries (pending NACARA implementing regulations). Also, the INS will
       promulgate a regulation (due out soon) that codifies existing case law on adjudication of
       the "extreme hardship" standard to ensure that there is fair and consistent interpretation of
       the case law as it applies to this class of applicants.

      We expect that these changes will result in a generous approval rate. I know that you and
       others have pushed for a blanket finding of "extreme hardship" for these individuals.
       However, the Department of Justice has determined that this is not legally or
       administratively appropriate.



                                                ~utomated Records Management System
                                                 ex-Dump Conversion

        H-IB visas are temporary work visas that allow "highly skilled" foreign workers (with a
BA or equivalent) to work in this country for up to six years. Under current law, the number of
H-l B visas is capped at 65,000 per year. Last year, this cap was reached for the first time. This
year the cap was reached in early May. The information technology (IT) industry strongly
supports raising the annual cap to address what it maintains is a shortage of U.S. workers with IT
skills. Others, including the Department of Labor, challenge the industry's conclusions about a
shortage and are concerned that the current H-IB program does not target its use to employers
who are experiencing skills shortages.

        The Administration believes that the first response for addressing the need for skilled
workers must be ensuring that U. S. workers are recruited for these skilled jobs and protected
against being laid-off and replaced by H-IB worker, and increasing the skills of U.S. workers.
Thus, while it may be necessary in the short-term to increase the number of visas for temporary
foreign workers, this must only be done in conjunction with reforms to the H -1 B program that
protect U.S. workers by targeting H-l B usage to employers with genuine skill shortages and with
additional efforts to increase the skill level of U.S. workers.

         We are working with members ofthe House and Senate to develop legislative language
that is consistent with the Administration's objectives.

      We have heard a lot recently about the shortage of trained workers in the information
       technology (IT) industry. The Administration believes that the first response to
       increasing the availability of IT workers must be increasing the skills of American
       workers and helping the labor market work better to match employers with U.S. workers.
       While it may be necessary -- at least in the short-term -- to increase the number of visas
       for temporary foreign workers, this must only be done in conjunction with meaningful
       reform to the H-l B program and greater efforts to raise the skill level of U.S. workers.

      Since 1993, this Administration has sought reforms of the H-IB visa program, including
       requiring employers to "recruit and retain" U.S. workers before hiring temporary foreign
       workers and prohibiting employers from laying-off U.S. workers in order to replace them
       with H-lB workers. These reforms, if enacted, would help target H-l B usage to
       employers with genuine labor shortages.




                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


