RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-JUL-1998 19:50:51.00

SUBJECT:   PIR Advisory Board Information--Race Report

TO: Charles F. Ruff    ( CN=Charles F. Ruff/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Minyon Moore ( CN=Minyon Moore/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sylvia M. Mathews ( CN=Sylvia M. Mathews/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan    CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Sidney Blumenthal ( CN=Sidney Blumenthal/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Judith A. Winston ( CN=Judith A. Winston/OU=PIR/O=EOP @ EOP [ PIR 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

edley ( edley @ law.harvard.edu @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
To ensure that we are all engaged in the development of the policy and
budget ideas, if any, for the Race Report, I would like to schedule a
meeting for Tues 7/21 or Weds 7/22. What I thought we could do is to have
the PIR summarize the list of ideas that have come out of the Advisory
Board meetings and other work.  Below is that summary as an attachment.
We could, if all read the summary, use that as a starting point to discuss
ideas and ensure that the policy/budget process will be working on things
that can then fed into the report, if appropriate. We also should ask the
policy shops for ideas to add to the mix.  It would seem to me that we
need OPL, PIR, DPC, NEC, OMB and Counsel's office. Does anyone think we
need to include any other office at this time--which is really the
preliminary, brainstorming period?   After this initial meeting, the
policy/budget shops could probably continue the work, periodically coming
back together so we're all on the same team.
---------------------- Forwarded by Maria Echaveste/WHO/EOP on 07/16/98
06:37 PM ---------------------------




Robert Wexler
07/15/98 07:43:33 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Maria Echaveste/WHO/EOP, Minyon Moore/WHO/EOP
cc:      Judith A. Winston/PIR/EOP, Audrey M. Hutchinson/PIR/EOP
Subject:         PIR Advisory Board Information



Since Audrey is on vacation, Judy asked me to forward you the following
information:

1. ABRECS.WPD is a summary of Advisory Board policy recommendations to
date, provided to the POTUS via letters from the Advisory Board.



2.  POTUSLET.WPD is the planned schedule for completion of the outstanding
letters from the Advisory Board to the POTUS: administration of justice,
June meeting, health, and immigration.



3. OUTLINE.WPD is the working outline for the document that the Advisory
Board will submit to the POTUS in September. The schedule for completing
this document is as follows:

        July 31         Complete draft and send to Advisory Board
for comment.
        Aug 7           Deadline for receiving comments, other
information from                                       members of the
Advisory Board.
        Aug 19          Complete revisions and send to AB for final
comments.
        Aug 24          Deadline for receiving final AB comments.
        Wk of 8/24      Send document out to put in camera-ready format.
        Sept 1          Send out for publication.
        Sept 15(?)      Present document to POTUS.



If you have any questions or need to reach me for any other reason while
Audrey is out, my phone number is 395-1016.     Rob



==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D60)MAIL47567000H.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043FE060000010A020100000002050000004857000000020000732AB6FF2DF79B562B7344
833AC7C627DF35324D9107D56AD5072AF134C107CA60B24220AF6AD55450551AD507081A584BE1
                            One America in the 21st Century:
             Report of the Advisory Board to the President's Initiative on Race

Note: This is a very brief outline of subjects for the Advisory Board report which would
accompany individual Board members' contributions. We hope that this outline will help focus
Board members on the areas in which we believe the Advisory Board can make the greatest
contributions to the President's final report to the American People. It may also help organize
individual members' ideas for what they might structure their own reports.

Chapter 1.    Introduction: The Advisory Board to the President's Initiative on Race

      Why the President appointed an Advisory Board to his Initiative on Race - its mission
      Who are the individuals on the Advisory Board and their collective agenda
      What the Advisory Board set out to do during the Initiative year - challenges and
       opportunities, early decision to focus on education and economic opportunities, dialogue,
       promising practices, etc.
      Context that the Advisory Board is one element of a much larger Presidential Initiative
       which is lead personally by the President, involving the White House as well as the entire
       Administration

Chapter 2.    Advisory Board activities over the past year and lessons learned.

Collective
      Advisory Board meetings - WH Conference Center, Mayflower, College Park, Fairfax
       County, Phoenix, San Jose, Denver, Newark, and Boston
      Little Rock Central High School
      Santa Fe Congress of American Indians
      University of Mississippi
      Children's Defense Fund
      Carnegie Meeting

Individual

      Two to three compelling examples from each board member

Lessons Learned (interspersed with events above)

      Complexity of issues, their range and their interconnectedness
      Summary of some of the most compelling facts and analysis from meetings dealing with
       education, economic opportunities, and stereotype issues
      Personal stories of challenges overcome and opportunities expanded


                                  Automated Records Management System
                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

Promising Practices
      Brief description of some promising practices site visits in Phoenix, San Jose, Denver and
       LA
      Some common factors for why they work
      Programs may help shed light on larger policy prescriptions to improve race relations or
       reduce racial disparities
      Continuation or expansion of these program in the future to increase positive outcomes

Dialogue
      Brief description of most compelling public or private conversations that help advance
       state of race relations
      Elements that contribute to successful dialogues and strategies for replication
      Efforts to expand opportunities for productive dialogues that lead to concrete actions
      Reasons by dialogue leading to action is important

Chapter 4.    Policy Recommendations.

      Broadly, the 3-4 priority policy areas which most dramatically reduce disparities and
       promote equal opportunities (not specific or targeted program recommendations). This
       section will draw heavily from the existing letters from Dr. Franklin to the President
       following each of the Advisory Board meetings in the last 8 months. Additional ideas
       from the June meeting will also be incorporated in this section. Some examples may
       include:

             Continuing FY99 increases for anti-discrimination enforcement strategies which
              include periodic audits of how the country is doing in areas such as housing,
              employment and public accommodations; vigorous educational efforts to prevent
              discriminatory practices and to increase victims' awareness of the laws; and
              expansion of existing prosecution efforts;
             Closing the education gap through focus on some areas ofK-12 education such as
              teacher training, early childhood education, language acquisition or mentoring;
             Increasing opportunities for overall employment and economic growth through
              macroeconomic policies which sustain the current economic trends. In order to
              reduce racial disparities in economic opportunities, policy solutions must be
              broadly constructed to incorporate employment, housing, community
              development, transportation, training, child care and other related structural
              issues. Concentrated poverty issues must also be dealt with separately to help the
              most disadvantaged members of our society;
             Reducing health disparities which most fundamentally affect people's chances to
              learn and earn


                                        Automated Records Management System
                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

     Some options for next steps may include:
           Recruitment and engagement ofleaders, both existing and new, who can continue
            the work started by Advisory Board members in the past year and how we can
            sustain and nurture their work;
           Council for One America
           Continuation of promising practices identification
           Private foundation for One America
           One America community partnerships
           Advisory Board members' personal pledge to continue as advocates for the
            President's vision for One America
           Challenge and opportunity of government to government relationship on
            American Indian issues
           Other ideas for President on what he can ask of others when he reports to the
            American people at the end of the year

Chapter 6.   Conclusion.

     Unprecedented Presidential effort provided Board members incredible opportunities to
      travel country and touch people's hearts - Thank you to the President
     Have done a lot of work in this year - more than some expected, less than others
     But much more work remains which must involve President, Federal, state, and local
      governments, private sector, religious communities, schools, and individuals
     Towards a more perfect union - why the country will be better off in the next year and
      over the next 50 years because of what was started this year compared to not having this
      initiative




                                     Automated Records M
                                     H                  anagement System
                                      ex-Dump Conversion

Letter Topics        Meeting    First Draft    Review and       Signature       ToWHby
                     Dates      by             Comment by       by

Administration of    May 22     Completed      July 17          July 22         July 24
Justice and Race

General Advisory     June 18    Completed      July 24          July 29         August 3
Board Meeting

Race and Health      July 10    July 22        August 5         August 10       August 12
                                                                                         .
Race and             July 13    July 24        August 7         August 12       August 14
Immigrants




                                          Automated Records Management System
                                          HOlt-DumP Conversion

                                    Summary of Policy Recommendations from
                                       Advisory Board Letters to POTUS


          Following each meeting of the President's Advisory Board on Race, Dr. John Hope Franklin, Chainnan of
the Advisory Board, has sent a letter to the President on behalf of the full Board reporting on the meeting and
providing preliminary policy recommendations on the substantive issues discussed. To date, Dr. Franklin has sent
six letters to the President concerning the following substantive areas:

         I.       Civil Rights Enforcement (November 1997 meeting/College Park, Md)
         2.       Race and Education (December 1997 meeting/ Fairfax, Va)
         3.       Race and Employment (January 1998 meetinglPhoenix)
         4.       Race and Poverty (February 1998 meeting/San Jose)
         5.       Race and Stereotypes (March 1998 meetinglDenver)
         6.       Race and Housing (April 1998 meeting with HUD/Newark)


In addition, Dr. Franklin will likely send additional letters to the President in the following substantive areas:

                 Race and Criminal Justice (May 1998 meeting)
                 Follow-Up on Education, Economic Development, Leadership, and Vision (June 1998 meeting)
                 Race and Health (July 1998 meeting with HHS)
                 The Immigrant Experience

In September, the Advisory Board will forward to the President its final report, which will likely reiterate, expand,
and supplement the Board's initial, preliminary recommendations in the above critical areas.


       The major preliminary recommendations made in the seven leiters that have been sent to the President are
summarized below:

1.       Civil Rights Enforcement (November 1997 Meeting)

                 Strengthen Civil Rights Enforcement: "The data we have received and reviewed makes it clear
                  that actionable illegal discrimination on the basis of race and national origin is still active and the
                  source of hannful consequences .... [F]or the last two decades, civil rights enforcement agencies
                  have had their budgets and staffing reduced while many of their responsibilities have been
                  increased .... Strengthen[] civil rights enforcement throughout the United States: in the FY 1999
                  budgets, help create partnerships with States and localities that enforce comparable laws ... " The
                  Board has also recommended devoting additional resources to training staff and offering technical
                  assistance to recipients of Federal funds to help prevent discrimination.

                 Expand Data Collection on RaciaIlEthnic Discrimination: "Expand[] and strengthen[] the
                  Federal government's ability to collect, analyze, and disseminate reliable data on the nature and
                  extent of discrimination based upon race and national origin ... "

                Implement Initiatives from White House Hate Crimes Conference: "Implement[] fully the
                series of bold new initiatives announced at the White House Hate Crimes Conference aimed at
                better data collection, enforcement, and prevention."
2.       Race and Education (December 1997 Meeting)

                                                           1         Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


            Promote Teacher Equity and Preparation: "There seems to be substantial agreement that
             high-quality teachers are our most valuable educational resource. However, the data show that
             lesser-qualified teachers are overrepresented in high-poverty, high-minority communities. In
             addition, teachers are often ill-prepared to promote high expectations for students of all races, to
             create settings in which students of all races can learn effectively, and to teach in increasingly
             diverse environments. We recommend that you look at ways that the federal government can help
             bridge racial disparities in student access to quality teachers and support the professional
             development of teachers to serve minority students better."

            Develop Education Pipeline Programs: "It is our understanding that programs that expose
             students at an early age to future educational opportunities and that provide mentoring, tutoring,
             and other support for students who aspire to take advantage of those future opportunities have
             shown positive results in improving educational outcomes for minority youth. We understand that
             you are presently considering a proposal to expand existing pipeline programs, such as the TRIO
             programs, and to promote new programs, such as college-school partnerships, to increase
             expectations, improve achievement, and increase college access for minority students. We want
             to offer our support for such a proposal."

            Teach Racial Understanding Through Diversitv: "As we saw firsthand during our visit to
             Annandale High School, many of our schools are rapidly becoming more racially diverse. This
             diversity can be a great asset in teaching students how to get along with people different than
             themselves and about how our cultural diversity enriches America. We have had the opportunity
             to learn about many programs, several of which the Initiative has featured as promising practices,
             that are working in our schools to teach children the tolerance and understanding necessary for
             them to function as good citizens in our multicultural, democratic society.. " We must think of
             creative ways that the federal government can further support primary and secondary schools in
             their efforts to implement such programs and to promote understanding through diversity."

            Enhance Public School Choice: "While many of us have substantial concerns about using public
             school money to fund private schools, there seemed to be some consensus among Board members
             and panel participants on the efficacy of exploring public school choice as one strategy for
             increasing educational opportunity and overcoming racial disparities in education. I know that
             you are a strong proponent of public school choice. We wish only to offer our support for your
             continuing efforts in this regard."

            Other Recommendations: Other recommendations made more briefly included the need to
             promote school construction and the need to address Hispanic dropout rates, both of which are
             issues that the Advisory Board has focused on more urgently since the December meeting.


3.    Race and Employment (January 1998 meeting)

            Evaluate the Effectiveness of Job Training Programs: The Board recommended that the
                        Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Labor evaluate the
             relative effectiveness of various employment training programs for different minority and
             immigrant communities that will highlight the commonalities and, where they exist, the differences
             in their training needs.
            Support Multiple Forms of Testing to Create a Citizens' Progress Report on Race: The
             Board lent its support for a HUD-funded project to systematically measure racial discrimination

                                                    2
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

              through testing in the areas of employment, housing, credit and other areas of social life so that
              there is a periodic progress report on racial disadvantage and disparities.

             Improve Racial Data Collection: The Board advised that Federal statistical data gathering
                                                     agencies make every effort to create large enough
                                                     periodic samples of all minority groups so that
                                                     post-censal information on race is systematically
                                                     available for all groups. This could be achieved by
                                                     over-sampling Asian-Americans and American
                                                     Indians as part of such key annual data series as the
                                                     Current Population Surveys.

             Require the Bureau of Indian Affairs to Address Indian Economic Development Needs: Of
              particular concern to the Board was the difficulty that tribes interested in economic development
              and access to credit continue to face in gaining access to credit and investment resources due to
              confusion by investors about the jurisdictional rules or conditions for adjudicating mortgages and
              foreclosure procedures. The Bureau of Indian Affairs needs to make every effort to address this
              issue through the voluntary cooperation of major lenders and secondary market actors, including
              Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Memoranda of Understanding could be executed with major tribal
              associations, as well as individual tribes, which foster the necessary long-term process of building
              programs to inform and educate investors and lenders about the range ofrealistic, culturally
              sensitive lending and investment opportunities available in Indian Country.

             Other Recommendations: The Advisory Board also recommended that the Bureau of Indian
              Affairs fund a major, independent assessment of the fairness and effectiveness of all federal
              program resources intended to assist tribes and Alaska Native villages with their economic
              future.


4.    Race and Poverty (February 1998 meeting)

             Examine Income Inequality: The Board heard evidenc,e about long term patterns of income
              inequality and suggested that the President initiate discussions among senior policy makers and
              Congressional leaders, as well as the private sector, as to potentially available means to reduce the
              extremes of this persistent pattern of inequality that so notably limits this country's ability to
              reduce systemic poverty and concomitant racial disadvantage.

             Support Supplements for SBA Programs: The Board learned of the importance of strong
              encouragement for tax credits and supports for corporations to provide philanthropic support for
              micro-credit development programs. Such financing is critically important since many, if not aU,
              of the clients for such programs bring with them damaged or limited credit histories that prevent
              them from seeking funding from regular lending institutions or from the SmaU Business
              Administration.                                          

             Use the Current Economic Boom to Provide Necessary Job Training and Minimum Wage
              Increases: The Board found that it is important to take advantage of the current economic boom
              to reach out to, educate, train, and place as many people as possible for positions in the new
              economy as additional efforts aimed at welfare to work transition are put into place along with a
              commitment to ever higher minimum wages.


                                                       3          Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


             Evaluate Anti-poverty Program Effectiveness: The Board recommended the establishment of a
              White House task force involving those Federal agencies engaged in addressing various aspects of
              the anti-poverty problem to have them carefully and jointly assess and evaluate which of these
              current programs, or those programs which have recently lapsed, have proven utility in
              successfully reducing poverty on a sustained basis. They should use available data to assess
              whether programs are equally effective for all minority groups, and if they are not to seek answers
              to the question of why they are not succeeding. This cross-agency evaluation would assess how
              better to coordinate or integrate local level programs so that tools managed by different agencies
              could have a better, cumulative impact when targeted in tandem rather than in isolation.


5.    Race and Stereotypes (March 1998 meeting)

             Hold a Presidential Event On Stereotypes and What Can Be Done About Them: "The issue
              of racial stereotypes is a core element of the problems of racial division and the lack of inclusion.
              Stereotypes influence how people of different races and ethnicities view each other, and as a
              consequence, treat each other.... As the nation's leader and as a leading authority figure, you are
              in a unique position to underscore the link between racial discord in society and the stereotypes
              that lurk in the very private realm of our hearts and minds .... The event -- whether a speech,
              fireside chat, or other fonnat -- would need to include a call to action. This call to action would
              remind people that all of us -- especially local leaders -- are in a position to advocate for changes
              in the ways that stereotypes become unconsciously institutionalized into virtually every
              organization in society."

             Institutionalize the Administration's Promotion of Racial Dialogue: "In a variety of ways, the
              Initiative is promoting involvement in small group racial dialogue .... In addition to helping
              Americans learn more about racial issues, these efforts help reduce stereotypes by creating
              interdependencies and a common mission between people of different racial groups. We urge you
              to continue your commitment to racial dialogue so that it is institutionalized after the end of the
              Initiative. "

             Convene a High-Level Meeting on the Problem of Racial Stereotypes with Leaders from the
              Media: "The primary purpose of the meeting would not be to assign blame, but rather to focus
              Presidential and public attention on the role of the media in both helping and hindering societal
              progress about the issue of stereotypes.... During the meeting, you could encourage participants
              to pursue a number of strategies so that the media could playa more positive role with respect to
              stereotypes."

             Promote Inclusion of the American Indian Community: The Board also made several
              recommendations to promote inclusion of American Indians in the Initiative and beyond, including
              conducting a Presidential visit to an Indian reservation, convening a White House Conference
              on economic development in Indian country, and/or convening a report on American Indian
              issues.


6.    Race and Housing (April 1998 meeting with HUD)

             Continue to Use Testing to Develop Evidence of Continuing Discrimination: The Board noted
              the persistence of discrimination in housing and the important role which Federally funded testing


                                                      4
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

            programs have played in combating overt and subtle forms of disparate treatment. The Board
            supports HUD's decision to double housing complaints processing by the year 2000.

           Highlight Housing Integration Efforts: The Board learned of a small number of non-profit
            organizations dedicated to promoting integration through non-race based strategies of outreach,
            and the Board recommends that these efforts be highlighted in the final report.

           Support the Increase and Targeting of Federal Funds for Urban Revitalization: The Board
            supported the recommendations of the Eisenhower Foundation that stress the importance of linking
            federal and private sector funds to rebuild the core of inner city neighborhoods, many of which are
            home to minority and low-income families. The Board supported the type of targeting in HUD's
            HOME program and recommended an increase in overall levels of funding to meet the needs of
            such programs.

           Support Community Development Corporations: The Board is convinced that local
            neighborhood community development corporations offer key, sensible, cost-effective and locally
            legitimate programs that can improve conditions in minority communities in our inner cities.




                                                   5              Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


