RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-JUL-199B 19:27:51.00

SUBJECT:   POTUS Choice Letter

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is the latest draft for your review. Maria, once you have spoken
with John tomorrow and you and Elena have agreed on the final, Cynthia
will get it to Staff Secretary for circulation. They will send it to the
President over the weekend.

If anyone needs me, I can be reached at 203-461-9665.    ==================== ATTACHM
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D441MAIL4412B779G.126 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043CC040000010A02010000000205000000DC19000000020000E2090D9D6029EBBOD57604
50BFDE42AD66BBAA39EABF5B26A1AFA65BDCEADBA550DDF2CA57775E2BB72B5ABl19034E25E322
DDA760B2E170B2BA5ED7B7A9AFDC3F9269D1372BF0670EF060470A1B5379397A061BCC190FDB04
weeks to restrict safe reproductive choices for women. It is regrettable that some Members of
Congress have chosen to pursue a series of initiatives designed to create a political issue at the
risk of increasing unintended pregnancies and abortions and of compromising women's health
and safety.

        I have long said that I believe abortion should be safe, legal, and rare. All of the
proposals being offered would restrict safe medical choices. Some would actually restrict access
to family planning information and services and could have the perverse effect of increasing the
number of unintended pregnancies and abortions. I urge the Congress to put partisan politics
aside and instead put women's health and safety first.

        First, I am very disappointed that the House struck Congresswoman Lowey's proposal to
require health plans participating in the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program to cover all
FDA approved prescription contraceptives. The Lowey proposal would have improved basic
health care coverage for many women and helped reduce unwanted pregnancies and the need for
abortion.

        Second, I strongly object to the amendment to impose restrictions on international family
planning programs. By prohibiting foreign non-governmental organizations from receiving
United States funds if the organization uses any non-US government funds for abortion-related
services, the amendment jeopardizes funding to health care providers who are working to meet
the growing demand for family planning and other critical health services in developing
countries. Moreover, requiring recipients of US funds to refrain from advocating changes or
even calling attention to alleged defects in abortion law would interfere with lawful free speech
and the ability of organizations to participate in the democratic processes of their own countries.
Ultimately, the result of this amendment's provisions could also be an increase in unintended
pregnancies, abortions, and maternal and infant death.

        Third, I find it deeply disturbing that Congress would take the unprecedented step of
intervening in the Food and Drug Administration's drug approval process by banning funding for
the approval or testing of drugs such as RU-486. For years, the FDA has used vigorous testing
and the highest scientific standards to protect public health. This amendment substitutes
political ideology for sound science. It would restrict scientific research that can protect
women's lives and offer them safe medical choices.

        Fourth, I am disappointed that the House chose to reject the changes that I proposed to the
Child Custody Protection Act. As my Administration conveyed to Congress, I would support
properly crafted legislation that would make it illegal to transport minors across state lines for the
purpose of avoiding parental involvement requirements .. I have repeatedly stated that I would
sign a bill if it were amended to exclude close family members from criminal and civil liability
and to ensure that individuals who provide only information, counseling, referral, or medical
services to the minor cannot be subject to liability. As amended in this way, the legislation
would prevent the circumvention of state parental involvement laws, while ensuring healthy
family communications. Unfortunately, the Congress has ignored these proposed changes, as

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
the Department of Justice. In doing so, this Congress has demonstrated that it is not truly
interested in passing legislation, but only in creating another partisan political issue.

         Finally, Congress is again indicating that it will turn the difficult debate over so-called
partial birth abortions into an opportunity to score political points, rather than to pass legislation
restricting this procedure. I have long opposed late term abortions, and I believe that we
generally should prohibit the use of this procedure. I have insisted, however, on exempting
those few but tragic cases in which this procedure is necessary to save a woman's life or to
protect her against serious injury to her health. I again call upon Congress to add such a narrow,
tightly drawn exception to this bill, so that I can sign it and put an end to all other uses of this
procedure.

       I urge Congress to move beyond ideology and political maneuvering, to abandon
extremism, and to protect women's lives and health, while reducing the need for abortion.
Congress's current course would remove appropriate reproductive choices for women, seriously
jeopardize their health, and very possibly increase the frequency of abortions. I will strongly
oppose these efforts.




                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


