RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Melissa N. Benton ( CN=Melissa N. Benton/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUL-1998 11:29:06.00

SUBJECT:   REVISED HUD Conference Document on S462,HR 2 Public Housing Reform and Res

TO: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joanne Chow ( CN=Joanne Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Charles E. Kieffer ( CN=Charles E. Kieffer/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Tracey E. Thornton ( CN=Tracey E. Thornton/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Broderick Johnson ( CN=Broderick Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan D. Breul ( CN=Jonathan D. Breul/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Shelly A. McAllister ( CN=Shelly A. McAllister/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: David J. Haun ( CN=David J. Haun/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Maya A. Bernstein ( CN=Maya A. Bernstein/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Maureen H. Walsh ( CN=Maureen H. Walsh/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Matthew McKearn ( CN=Matthew McKearn/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Paul J. weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: James F. Jordan ( CN=James F. Jordan/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Hang T. Tran ( CN=Hang T. Tran/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Alan B. Rhinesmith ( CN=Alan B. Rhinesmith/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )


READ: UNKNOWN

TO: James C. Murr ( CN=James C. Murr/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christopher D. Carroll ( CN=Christopher D. Carroll/OU=CEA/O=EOP@EOP [ CEA 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lisa zweig ( CN=Lisa Zweig/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kate P. Donovan ( CN=Kate P. Donovan/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: William P. Marshall ( CN=William P. Marshall/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Norwood J. Jackson Jr ( CN=Norwood J. Jackson Jr/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Mathew C. Blum ( CN=Mathew C. Blum/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Winifred Y. Chang ( CN=Winifred Y. Chang/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kenneth L. Schwartz ( CN=Kenneth L. Schwartz/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joseph F. Lackey Jr.   ( CN=Joseph F. Lackey Jr./OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Larry R. Matlack ( CN=Larry R. Matlack/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jack A. Smalligan ( CN=Jack A. Smalligan/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sarah Rosen ( CN=Sarah Rosen/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD J
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Katherine L. Meredith ( CN=Katherine L. Meredith/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Susan M. Carr ( CN=Susan M. Carr/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Francis S. Redburn ( CN=Francis S. Redburn/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Deich ( CN=Michael Deich/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:


The document is attached following the LRM.
---------------------- Forwarded by Melissa N. Benton/OMB/EOP on 07/17/98
11:24 AM ---------------------------
Total Pages: ____


LRM ID: MNB203
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

Friday, July 17, 1998

LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

TO:                     Legi'slative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

FROM:           Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for Legislative
Reference
OMB CONTACT:    Melissa N. Benton
                                PHONE: (202)395-7887 FAX: (202)395-6148
SUBJECT:        REVISED HUD Conference Document on S462,HR 2 Public
Housing Reform and Responsibility Act of 1997

DEADLINE:               10 a.m.   Monday, July 20, 1998

In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
program of the President.  Please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

COMMENTS: To follow is the latest draft of HUD's letter to the Conferees
on public housing reform legislation.   This draft has been marked up to
show changes since the last draft.

please note the addition of the veto threat on p. 2.

DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:
52-HHS - Sondra S. Wallace - (202) 690-7760
61-JUSTICE - L. Anthony Sutin - (202) 514-2141
62-LABOR - Robert A. Shapiro - (202) 219-8201

EOP:
Michael Deich
Alan B. Rhinesmith
Francis S. Redburn
Hang T. Tran
Susan M. Carr
James F. Jordan
Katherine L. Meredith
Jose Cerda III
Leanne A. Shimabukuro
Diana Fortuna
Andrea Kane
Paul J. Weinstein Jr.
Sarah Rosen
Elena Kagan


Jack A. Smalligan
Matthew McKearn
Larry R. Matlack
Maureen H. Walsh
Joseph F. Lackey Jr.
Maya A. Bernstein
Kenneth L. Schwartz
David J. Haun
Winifred Y. Chang
Shelly A. McAllister
Mathew C. Blum
Jonathan D. Breul
Norwood J. Jackson Jr
Broderick Johnson
william P. Marshall
Tracy Thornton
Kate P. Donovan
Charles E. Kieffer
Lisa Zweig
Joanne Chow
Christopher D. Carroll
Janet R. Forsgren
James C. Murr
LRM ID: MNB203 SUBJECT:    REVISED HUD Conference Document on S462,HR 2
Public Housing Reform and Responsibility Act of 1997


RESPONSE TO
LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
MEMORANDUM

If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's.line) to leave a
message with a legislative assistant.

You may also respond by:
         (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
         (2) sending us a memo or letter
Please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


TO:             Melissa N. Benton phone:   395-7887   Fax:  395-6148
                Office of Management and Budget
                Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant): 395-7362

FROM:                                                    (Date)

                                                         (Name)

                                                         (Agency)

                                                         (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:


               Concur

               No Objection

               No Comment

               See proposed edits on pages

               Other:

               FAX RETURN of _____ pages, attached to this response sheet

==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D20)MAIL40f14510J.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750436E2AOOOOOlOA02010000000205000000F604010000020000CBB54CF183FDDAFA793CCD
FA2A3980126B1478B62758141FFE669A65251F6B80071E9279CC7EF3671B6E093116D063387CF6
28AA8E80A2559665EC900EOA7C72A8B296DC59046345C6A05DE7978EE452A3D176CCB4B428423E
BD7C7EFD025F85071EFB344FB2E22B1A2A82FA6A16090C8CD88F6ACCDD18FE7976FFB90ECF1FDB

                                  1998 Public Housing Reform Bills

                                        Letter to the Conferees

Dear Conferee:

       I am writing to make you aware of the Administration's views on the public housing
reform legislation you are now considering in the conference to reconcile S. 462 and H.R. 2.
These bills propose major changes in the public housing and tenant-based Section 8 programs.
Over several years now, both the Congress and the Administration have put a great deal of
thought and hard work into the pursuit of sound reform legislation. As you move ahead in the
conference, I look forward to our continued collaboration, so that important and long-overdue
refoims may finally be enacted and implemented.

INTRODUCTION

        The Administration strongly supports the goals of S. 462 and H.R. 2 -- to streamline and
reorganize the Nation's public housing system in a manner which will benefit public housing
residents, facilitate the efficient use of Federal resources, and increase accountability to the public.
 The Administration also appreciates the willingness of both the House and Senate to draw upon
management reform and other provisions in the Administration's bill -- the Public Housing
Management Reform Act of 1997.

        However, the Administration has a number of major concerns about S. 462 and H.R. 2
as-passed which, among other things, require the Conferees to take the following actions:

        Provide more targeting of scarce housing assistance to the neediest families;

        Delete the H.R. 2 provision allowing "fungibility" to meet income targeting requirements;

        Delete or address the serious flaws in H.R. 2's "Home Rule Flexible Grant Option";

        Delete the self-sufficiency agreements and the community work provisions in H.R. 2;

        Delete the Housing Evaluation and Accreditation Board created by H.R. 2;



                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
               do not improve sufficientlv within one Year, as well as related management
assessment                        provIsIons;


       Further streamline "PHA Plan" requirements; allow small PHAs to use operating and
       capital funds interchangeably; delete provisions constraining flexibility in the operating
       subsidy formula; and make the Drug Elimination Program a formula-based program;

       Delete the S. 462 provision authorizing PHAs to obtain medical information about
       applicants for housing assistance; and


       Delete the provisions of both bills allowing PHAs to set the payment standard in the
       tenant-based Section 8 program higher than the Fair Market Rent established by HUD.

SUMMARY OF THE BILLS

         The Senate and House bills make permanent a number of critical reforms that the
Administration and the Congress have been able to achieve only through year-to-year provisions
in appropriations legislation. Elements of the Senate and House bills would promote the
continuation and strengthening of the transformation of the public housing and Section 8
programs already underway, including: (1) replacing the worst public housing with scattered-site
and townhouse developments and with portable tenant-based assistance through the HOPE VI
program, permanently repealing the one-far-one replacement requirement, and facilitating
demolition of obsolete developments and conversion to tenant-based assistance or appropriate site
revitalization; (2) turning around troubled PHAs through the use of various tools, including
mandatory receiverships for chronically troubled PHAs and enhanced powers afforded to HUD
and court-appointed receivers upon takeover; (3) promoting public housing communities with a
greater income diversity and allowing PHAs to implement rent policies that encourage and
reward work, and are coordinated with welfare reform; (4) demanding greater household
responsibility as a condition of housing assistance through more vigorous screening, eviction or
subsidy termination, and lease enforcement provisions; and (5) implementation of several of the
Administration's key management reforms. Important provisions for management reform
include program consolidation and streamlining, deregulation of well-managed PHAs and small
PHAs, increased reliance on physical conditions in assessing PHA performance and more certain
treatment of the most troubled PHAs.

DESCRIPTION OF ADMINISTRATION CONCERNS



                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         HeX-Dump Conversion
recent months, however, the Administration has a number of major concerns about particular
provisions of both bills. Despite its support for the general goals of both bills, the
Administration believes that certain provisions go farther than is necessary to make the reforms
that are needed. Instead of making only reforms, some provisions -- particularly on income
targeting -- would move the program too far away from fundamental, prudent national standards
and appropriate federal oversight. Income targeting is a fundamental issue because it sets the rules
fOr access to assisted housing. A resolution of this issue that provides insuOicient protection fOr those
who most need assistance would lead me to recommend a veto of this legislation.         Nevertheless,
the Administration is hopeful that our concerns can and will be addressed in the Conference,
clearing the way to enactment of sound public housing and Section 8 reform legislation.

       The Administration's most important concerns about the bills are described below.

L      MAJOR CONCERNS

        A.     INADEQUATE TARGETING OF HOUSING ASSISTANCE TO THOSE
               FAMILIES MOST IN NEED

               1.       Income Targeting in Public Housing

        The Administration believes that the income targeting provisions of both bills must be

 tightened to direct more housing assistance to families with the most pressing housing needs. In
particular, the Administration strongly opposes the House "fungibility" provision, which could mean
that PHAs in some cities would not have to offer any public housing units to extremely low-income
families. The Administration supports the Senate requirement that 40% of available public housing
 units go to extremely low-income families; however, the Administration also advocates increasing --
from 70% (as in the Senate bill) to 90% -- the ratio of newly available units that must be offered to
families with income levels no higher than 60% of median (which is approximately $22,600
nationally). The Administration also seeks a requirement that at least 40% of the units in each
public housing development be occupied by families with incomes below 30% of area median income.
   This will ensure that the poorest families have housing opportunities at all developments, induding
those that may be most marketable to relatively higher income families.

        The Administration believes that the income targeting provisions of both bills -- especially
the House's "fungibility" provision -- go much farther than is necessary to serve working families
and achieve a more diverse income mix in public housing. It is essential to the social and
financial health of public housing communities that more working families are admitted to public



                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex'-Ownp Conversion
21 of median income nationally. By contrast, both bills would open up too many public
housing units to families at the upper end of the eligibility range -- families with incomes of up
to 80 of the area median income, or approximately $40,000 in the ten largest metropolitan
areas.

         The Administration does not oppose admitting a small number of families at that income
level. However, the Administration believes that mixed-income communities that serve working
families can be attained without going as far as the House and Senate bills. This can be done
by ensuring that at least 40 of admissions are reserved for families with incomes up to 30 of
median (approximately $11,300) and that 90 of admissions are families with incomes at or
below 60 of the area median (approximately $22,600). In comparison, 60 of median
income is the absolute upper cap for the HOME and low-income housing tax credit programs.
In addition, the Administration urges the Conferees to adopt language that would require PHAs
[renerally to maintain an occupancy distribution such that at at least a forty percent certain
percentage of units in each public housing development are occupied by very poor extremely
low income families.

        Not only are the income targeting percentages inadequate, but the House bill's fungibility
provision could undermine even that level of targeting which the bill proposes. This provision
would allow a PHA to admit even fewer very poor families to public housing if the PHA gave
more of its Section 8 certifkates tenant-based assistance to such families than the minimal number
which the bill requires. +Because manv communities' current levels of admissions of very poor
families to the certifIcate and voucher prmrrams substantiallv exceed the House percentage
requiremellt, the result almost certainly would be that some PHAs would not have to offer any
public housing units to families -- including many working families -- whose incomes are below
30 of the area median income. The Administration finds such a possibility to be unacceptable.

          The Administration proposed its income targeting for public housing with the
understanding that the achievement of a more diverse income mix necessarily would result in
reduced access for those with the lowest incomes. Partly in recognition of this problem, the
Administration each year has proposed that Congress provide substantial additional vouchers.
Congress should recognize that these proposals are linked and that the loosening of public
housing income targeting needs to be done in conjunction with the provision of additional
vouchers. Anv compromise between the Administration's income targeting and the Senate's
i[1(0111(' taff!etinfJ, for both public housillg- alld Section 8, should occur onlv to the extent
udditional vouchers are provided that compensate fix the loss of access for those who most need
housirl!;{ assistance. This would require an annual appropriation of 62,500 additional vouchers
if the Senate's income targeting levels are adopted.




                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
law. The Administration proposal is a moderate proposal to ensure continuing access to all
developments by all eligible income groups.

                 2.    Income Targeting in the Tenant-Based Section 8 Rental Assistance Program

         The Administration is opposed to the provisions of both bills on income targeting for the
tenant-based Section 8 program. Instead, the Administration believes that 75% of tenant-based
assistance which becomes available each year should be targeted to the very poor -- families with
incomes at or below 30% of median income (approximately $11,300) -- and that the remainder of
such assistance generally should go to families with incomes no greater than 50% of median, as under
current law.

         Both bills unnecessarily reduce the portion of Section 8 tenant-based assistance that would
go to families with severe housing needs. Current law generally limits eligibility for
tenant-based assistance to very low-income families with incomes below 50 of the area median
income. Moreover, federal preferences, which applied to 90 of new Section 8 recipients prior
to FY 1996 as opposed to only 50 of new public housing residents, have served to further target
assistance to extremely low income families. The median income of Section 8 certificate holders
is now approximately $7,550.

        In contrast, H.R. 2 would require only that 40 of all Section 8 tenant-based assistance
go to extremely low-income families -- the income range which the program has primarily served
in the past. Relatively higher income families, with incomes up to 80 of median income,
would become eligible to receive such assistance. S. 462 is not as extreme as the House bill~
but would still require only that 65 of all tenant-based assistance go to families with the most
severe housing needs and that 90 go to families with incomes under 60 of median.

        The Administration contends that scarce federal rental subsidies for use in the private
market must be targeted to families with the lowest incomes, for the following reasons: 1) 5.3
million very low-income renters now have "worst-case housing needs", defined as paying more
than 50 of their income toward rent or living in substandard housing units, and these families
are concentrated at the lowest income levels (below 30 of the area median income); 2) relatively
few of the families with incomes in the upper ranges allowed under both bills who would
become eligible for admission to the Section 8 program (including 17.5 million unassisted
renters) have serious un'met housing needs; 3) federal preferences are being repealed; 4) both the
Senate and House bills propose opening up public housing admissions to families with relatively
higher incomes to promote mixed-income communities, which means fewer units will be
available for extremely poor families; and 5) tenant-based rental assistance integrates families with


                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex·Dump Conversion
severe income concentration problems of project-based programs.

        The Administration also sees no reason to expand tenant- based program eligibility limits
so that these scarce housing resources can be provided to households with incomes at 80 of the
median -- approximately $40,000 for families in the ten largest metropolitan areas -- who are
better able to afford private market housing without any subsidy. This income ~evel, which is
equivalent to 250 of the poverty line, exceeds the income limits for virtually all other federal
means-tested programs.

        B.      HOME RULE FLEXIBLE GRANT OPTION

        The Administration strongly opposes the Home Rule Flexible Grant Option in H.R. 2, which
could transfer public housing funds from a PHA to a dty government regardless of the dty's ability or
experience in administering housing programs or the housing authoritis management record.
Instead, the Administration believes that implementation of the current M91'iRg te Moving-to- Work
demonstration will provide suffident opportunity to explore innovative local approaches in the public
housing and Section 8 programs.

        The Administration has taken bold action to deal with chronically troubled PHAs and to
demolish and replace the worst public housing. However, that is not what the House provision
is about. The House provision would allow a city government, regardless of its motives or its
track record in administering housing programs, to take over or replace even a high-performing
housing authority. Some of the most intractable management problems in recent years have
occurred in several chronically troubled PHAs that have been operated as part of city
government.

         The provision also inexplicably provides cities that would administer public housing more
regulatory flexibility than PHAs (e.g., to charge rents exceeding Brooke amendment
requirements). There is no reason to link additional regulatory flexibility with the choice of the
entity to administer public housing.

         If the goal of this provision is to address serious management problems in public
housing, one would expect it to be crafted as an alternative intervention strategy with respect to
troHbledfailin!:! PHAs. As a compromise, +!he provision could be applied where HUD a~Yrees
that this is an acceptable alternative to court-ordered receivership (with the locality subject to the
usual public housing" and Section 8 re!:!ulatinns.)      Rather, -::fthe Ctlrrellt provision instead
would be applicable to all PHAS~ irrespective of the demonstrated quality of their management.




                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
Administration instead supports continued implementation of the Moving to Work demonstration
authorized by the FY 1996 appropriations act. That demonstration program allows up to thirty
PHAs to design and test innovative ways to provide housing assistance and to link families to
work, through merging funding streams and testing new rent structures while retaining
reasonable income targeting. HUD has selected PHAs with diverse and potentially far-reaching
proposals. The demonstration is large enough to allow substantial experimentation, yet small
enough to permit a rigorous evaluation of program success and replicability.

        C.      COMMUNITY WORK AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS

         The Administration opposes the self-sufficiency agreements and the community work
provisions in the House bill. Instead, the Administration beJieves that provisions emphasizing
collaboration between PHAs and local welfare agencies are a better and more productive approach to
addressing welfare reform and self-sufficiency issues. For example, the Administration supports the
provisions in both bills which require PHAs to describe in their annual plans the ways in which they
propose coordination with other local and state welfare and service agencies, and assure that
households who violate welfare program self-sufficiency rules are not rewarded with subsidized
housing rent decreases. The Administration also supports provisions in both bills permitting PHAs
to set public housing rents "up to" 30% of a family's adjusted income, which allows for rent structures
that do not penalize increases in earned income. Further, the Administration supports authorization
of additional Section 8 certificates for use with local collaboratives in welfare-to-work initiatives.

        The Administration believes that public housing and Section 8 residents must assume
certain responsibilities in return for the benefits of their housing assistance. To this end, the
Administration supports many reforms in both the House and Senate bills which place a
premium on resident self-sufficiency and on linking the PHA with existing providers of services.
Additionally, the Administration supports provisions in both bills to toughen screening, lease
enforcement and eviction, and subsidy termination requirements.

        However, the Administration opposes the House bill's mandatory self-sufficiency
contracts. This sweeping new requirement would fundamentally change the public housing and
Section 8 programs and would impose inordinate and costly burdens on 3,400 local PHAs
whose budgets and administrative capacities already have been stretched. A far more efficient
and effective approach is to encourage partnerships between PHAs and State and local welfare
agencies that promote self-sufficiency through initiatives such as the authorization of "Welfare to
Work" certificates, as proposed in the Administration's bill.




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
included in the House bill. The Administration's bill includes a community service provision
because the Administration believes it is reasonable to ask each recipient of public housing or
tenant-based assistance to be engaged in some activity which benefits the community as a whole,
which includes working, attending school, or otherwise preparing for work. However, the
Administration's bill provides for much more reasonable exemptions than the House bill and
would not authorize eviction as an enforcement tool.

        D.     MANAGEMENT REFORM

               1.      Federal Oversight

        The Administration supports several of the bills' revisions to the PHMAP system, including
those that emphasize the importance of decent Jiving conditions, and would support the establishment
of an advisorv performance evaluation board or other task force to review various performance
evaluation systems and determine the need, if any, for an outside accreditation entity. The
Administration also supports the House and Senate bill provisions which give HUD or a receiver
enhanced powers for dealing with troubled PHAs; require .J.ll=I.Asj the takeover of se~'efe!y troubled
PHAs that fail to improve prompdy; and require the obligation and expenditure of capital funds
within certain time frames (which the Administration believes should be extended to the HOPE VI
program). The Administration does not support the Accreditation Board created by the House bill.

        The Administration believes that it is critical to have an assessment tool which accurately
measures PHA performance and is consistent with the Administration's management reform plan
for HUD. In the short FHn, this FeqHiFes making modifications to This requires overhauling
looking the current performance measurement system -- the Public Housing Management
Assessment Program (PHMAP). In particular, the Administration supports the bills' provision
adding an PHMAP indicator assessing the extent to which a PHA is providing acceptable basic
housing conditions and the House provision making acceptable basic housing conditions a
precondition for a PHA to get a passing grade in the assessment system. This will support
HUD's efforts to make PHMAP the periormance evaluation svstem more objectively verifiable
and reflective of the conditions under which public housing residents are living.

         The Administration, however, strongly opposes the House bill's "Accreditation Board", a
. new federal agency which would create an accreditation program for all public housing agencies
 and other providers of federally assisted housing. This proposal, written prior to the
 Administration's management reform efforts, runs directly counter to the Administration's plan for
 improving and streamlining Federal oversight of the public housing program. It would not
 reduce, but instead would redistribute and probably increase, the Federal bureaucracy.



                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
which would be given to the Accreditation Board, from HUD's ongoing obligation to provide
Federal funds to PHAs. This would make it more difficult for HUD to hold PHAs
accountable.

        Instead of the House bill's Accreditation Board, an advisory entity such as the
Administration's proposed Performance Evaluation Board should be given the opportunity to
review and make recommendations on implementation of !-IUD's management refonn in this
area as well as various approaches to Federal oversight and assessment of PHAs, including
accreditation. Finally, the Justice Department advises that the proposed means of appointing the
Accreditation Board would unduly restrict the President and thus violate the Appointments Clause
of the Constitution.

                 The Administration already has taken the most aggressive actions in HUD's
history against chronically troubled PHAs, including direct takeovers and support for judicial
receiverships. In this regard, the Administration supports the Senate bill's provisions giving
HUD enhanced powers to deal with troubled PHA<; (which are the same pro¥isions as in the
Administration's bill) PHAs. Those provisions require HUD to take certain actions against
any PHA that is still troubled after one year (including mandatory receivership for any large
PHA). After further consideration, the Administration believes that this provision should be
modified to give a troubled PHA one additional year before HUD will take action if that PHA
has made progress in the first year that is equal to at least half the difference between its PHMAP
assessment score and the score necessary to be a "standard" performer.

         In addition, the Administration supports the Senate bill provision requiring PHAs to
obligate capital funds within 24 months. It is critical in these times of fiscal restraint to ensure
that appropriated funds are used promptly for their intended purposes. Further, the
Administration urges the Conferees to adopt two additional provisions from the Administration's
bill: (1) requiring PHAs to spend capital funds within 48 months (in addition to obligating such
funds within 24 months); and (2) applying specific time frames to the HOPE VI program, such
that a PHA would have to sign a primary construction contract within 18 months of executing
the grant agreement, and would have to complete construction within 4 years from the grant
agreement.

               2.      Consolidation and Streamlining

        The Administration urges the Conferees to further streamline PHA plan requirements as in the
Administration's bili. In addition, the Administration supports the House provision allowing small
PHAs to use operating and capital funds interchangeably. The Administration also advocates the
deletion of House provisions constraining flexibility in the operating subsidyJormula. Further, the


                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
program, and to merge the TOP and EDSS programs.

       The Administration supports and recognizes the benefits of consolidating PHA planning
and reporting requirements into a single annual plan, as provided in both the Senate and House
bills. However, the Administration is concerned that the scope of the annual plans be consistent
with HUD efforts to streamline PHA and HUD administration of the public housing and
Section 8 programs. The Administration strongly urges the Conferees to consider limiting the
number and scope of plan elements as described in the Administration's bill. Conferees also
should adopt the Senate provision permitting HUD by regulation to provide that elements of the
PHA plan other than the capital plan and civil rights shall be reviewed only if challenged.

       The Administration also supports the House provision allowing small PHAs (less than
250 units) to use operating and capital funds fungibly, as provided in the House bill, because the
formula allocation of capital funds to such PHAs would be small and the additional flexibility
would simplify PHA operations and HUD administration. However, the Administration
opposes the provision of the House bill giving governors new responsibility to allocate half of
such funds.

         In addition, the Administration supports the language in both bills authorizing HUD to
renegotiate the formula for allocating public housing operating subsidies to PHAs. The current
system has not been changed in many years. A renegotiation could result in a revised formula
that is simpler and more equitable, and that provides better incentives for sound, cost-effective
public housing management. However, HUD opposes the House provisions defining
treatment of vacant units, utility rates, and rental income. These provisions may hamstring and
substantially complicate the future formula and should be left to rulemaking (which will be
negotiated rulemaking under the House and Senate bills). The extent to which PHAs may
retain increases in rental income, in particular, should be left to rulemaking because: (1) rental
income has is increasedffig substantially throughout the program, for reasons that may be
unrelated to PHA administration of the program; and (2) such retention creates a strong financial
incentive for PHAs not to serve the poorest households. The House §204(d) interim allocation
provisions also are unnecessary.

        Further, the Administration urges the Conferees to convert the Public Housing Drug
Elimination Program from a competitive to a formula-based program, to provide predictable
funding for PHAs and reduce the administrative burden on both HUD and PHAs of annual
competitions. The Administration also advocates permanent authorization of the supportive
service (EDSS) program and a merger of EDSS and the Tenant Opportunities Program (TOP),
as provided in the Administration's bill.



                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

          The AdmiRisEFetieR epp96e5 the Hall5e bill's pw\rfsieR eR eCCupGRcy 5tflREUll'fis Bec6u5e it
lI'ellid reduce pwtectieR5 CI1£FeRdy efferded te /~i1ie5 with childr~ under the FGk Hall5mg Act.
        The House pro~'isioR OR occupaRcy staRdards would iRvite state adoptioR of absolute
occupaRCY staRdards regafEiless of the facts of a particular situatioR, or the existeRce of aRY health
or safety justificatioRs. ERaCtfReRt of this pFOvisioR could result, fOf eltample, iR a State allo't'"iRg
a housiRg pFO~'ider to refuse to reRt a 2 bedFOom uRit to a family with three childreR, eveR if: 1)
the bedFOoms were uRusually large; 2) ORe of the childreR was aR iRfaRt; Of 3) a deR could
reasoRably be used as a bedFOom. This could cORtFibute to the shortage of affordable housiRg
large eRough for families. HUD's curreRt occupaRcy staRdard, 'Nhich cORforms to CORgress's
directioR iR the PY 1996 HUD AppFOpriatioR Act, appFOpriately requires HUD to deteffRiRe, OR
a case by case basis, 'Nhether a staRdard is legal uRder the Pair HousiRg Act, based 'dPOR a
variety of circumstaRces.

       EP.      RESIDENT EMPOWERMENT

         The Administration strongly supports provisions in both bills, and retention of certain elements
of current law, which empower residents, ensure that residents are given the opportunity to participate
in decisions affecting their lives, and protect residents from unwarranted intrusions.

        In the Administration's view, the final bill must include, at least, the following:

                The Senate bill's authorization of the supportive services funding originally
                authorized in the FY 1996 appropriation (the EDSS program), which should
                                   include elements of the Tenant Opportunity Program as
                proposed in the Administration's bill

                Resident membership requirements on the public housing boards Q[
                commissioners, as provided in both bills, and the House bill's required plan
                review period for affected residents;

                The Senate bill's provisions protecting residents' rights to adequate notice and
                consultation and ensuring adequate relocation assistance in the demolition and
                disposition process; and

                Retention of current law provisions on: (1) lease and grievance procedures (as
                opposed to the House repeal); and (2) notice of lease termination (as opposed to
                the House bill's preemption of any minimum notice requirements provided under
                State law).


                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-DUmP Conversion

      The Administration strongly opposes the provision in the Senate bill that would authorize
PHAs to obtain medical information about applicants for housing assistance.

         This provision could increase the potential that important antidiscrimination protections of
Federal fair housing laws could be violated and could discourage persons with drug problems
from seeking treatment. The Administration shares the Senate's desire to ensure safety and
security in public housing, and has proposed and implemented tough new policies, such as "One
Strike and You're Out", to achieve that goal. However, the Administration believes that the
Senate's medical records provision goes too far, weakening other important legal protections and
compromising efforts to encourage people with drug abuse problems to enter appropriate and
effective treatment programs. The Administration is concerned that this provision could have
negative consequences for individuals who have received treatment and are attempting to rebuild
their lives.

       GH.     PAYMENT STANDARD

       The Administration opposes the provisions of both bills aJJowing PHAs to set the payment
standard in the tenant-based Section 8 program at levels higher than the Fair Market Rent established
by HUD.

        The Administration believes that the Payment Standard should be set at no higher than
the Fair Market Rent (FMR) or a HUD-approved exception rent up to 120 of FMR. H.R. 2
would permit PHAs to establish payment standards of 80 to 120 of FMR. The Senate bill
would allow PHAs to establish payment standards of 90 to no of FMR, though PHAs may
establish higher or lower payment standards with HUD approval.

        The higher the payment standard, the greater the subsidy to each assisted household.
Consequently, fewer eligible families would receive housing assistance. The pressures on PHAs
to help the currently assisted at the expense of the unassisted are very high, and work against
national goals of helping more families in need. In addition, a higher payment standard would
encourage a greater number of relatively higher-income and less needy families to apply for
housing assistance, further reducing the amount of housing assistance available to the poorest
families with the most severe housing needs.




                                                     Automated Records Management System.
                                                     Hex.OWDP Conversion

          A. REPEAL OF THE U.S. HOUSING ACT OF 1937

          The Administration urges Congress to find another means of signaling dramatic program
reform.

        The Administration sees no compelling operational reason to repeal the 1937 Act. The
new law can be crafted so that it clearly calls for sweeping reform of the public housing and
tenant-based assistance programs, without including the complications of repealing the 1937 Act.

         There are also practical concerns regarding repeal. At the request of the House Banking
Committee in the previous legislative session, the Administration conducted an extensive review
of the implications of the proposed repeal of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937. HUD determined
that there are, at a minimum, over 500 references to the 1937 Act in other statutes, located both
within and outside of the jurisdiction of the Congressional Banking Committees. Additionally,
the Administration identified a series of issues which the Conferees should address if the repeal is
accepted in the Conference. Moreover, coupling the 1937 Act repeal with a ban on new
regulations prior to the effective date of the law, as provided in the House bill, would inhibit the
ability of the Administration to ensure that the new law is carried out uniformly and with
adequate guidance.

          B.   RENT LEVELS

                 1.   Flat Rents

        The Adm,inistration does not see the need for the House bill provision giving public housing
residents the choice of paying an income-based rent or a flat rent based on the market value of their
units.

        This provision would be administratively burdensome to the 3,400 PHAs who will have
to determine the market value of well over one million public housing units, including units in
elderly housing developments. In addition, if the goal is to encourage residents to increase their
incomes or to encourage relatively higher-income families to move into or remain in public
housing, then the same thing can be accomplished by implementing a program of rent
incentives, including earned income disregards and ceiling rents. Both bills allow PHAs to
adopt innovative rent policies by permitting rents "up to" 30 of adjusted income (as opposed to
current law, which requires rents to be set "at" 30 of adjusted income).



                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

        The Administration opposes the minimum rent provisions in the bills, particularly the
authority in the House bill to set a minimum up to fifty dollars. Instead, the Administration supports a
minimum rent requirement of $25 per month, with an exemption for hardship categories to be
determined by the Secretary or the PHA.

        The Administration generally agrees with the concept that every family receiving housing
assistance should make at least some rental payment. However, the Administration believes
such a minimum rent should not exceed $25 per month, an amount which is sufficient to make
the symbolic point that all residents should contribute something to maintenance of their
development without imposing an undue burden on the very poorest families. Thus, the
Administration opposes the House provision allowing PHAs to charge a minimum rent of up to
$50 per month. Further, the Administration believes that the Secretary of HUD must have the
authority to establish hardship exemptions for certain types of cases -- for example, for those
families awaiting public benefit eligibility determinations.

        C   HOME AND CDBG INCOME TARGETING

      The Administration opposes the House bill's unnecessarily loosened income targeting in both
the CDBG and HOME programs.

        The Administration strongly objects to the changes which would preclude the Secretary
from capping median incomes at the national median income. Currently, the CDBG and
HOME hlllds are targetted to assure that low-income t(101ilies are well served. This proposal
would immediately raise the income limit in thirty-seven relatively higher income metropolitan
areas. For example, in one community, the income limit for a four person family would exceed
$71,000 (Stamford, Connecticut). By allowing families with incomes even above moderate
income ranges to benefit from these programs, these changes would eviscerate the requirement
that those programs substantially benefit low and moderate income households.

       D. DISCRETION TO SETTLE LA WSUITS

        The Administration opposes the House bill's provision which requires the Secretary of HUD
to consult all adjacent local governments, when settling any lawsuit involving HUD, a PHA, and a
local government.




                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
its affairs. Moreover, the Justice Department represents HUD in settling lawsuits. It would be
unwise to require the Secretary of HUD to engage in particular consultations that may conflict
with or duplicate the efforts of the Justice Department. At a minimum, this provision could be
extremely costly for the Federal government, since it will hinder the ability to settle lawsuits in a
timely and cost-effective manner. Finally, the provision is overly broad, since it would require
such consultation for all matters, whether trivial or substantial.

        E.   CDBG SANCTION

        The Administration opposes the House bill's CDBG sanction against local govemments
contributing to the troubled status of a PHA.

        H.R. 2 provides that the Secretary may withhold or redirect the CDBG funds of any local
government whose actions or inactions have substantially contributed to the troubled status of a
PHA. Current law, coupled with new sanctions included in both bills gives HUD a number of
other sanctions to deal with troubled PHAs, including receivership. The proposed CDBG
sanction could lead to substantial charges, countercharges, and litigation, without resulting in the
improvement of troubled PHAs.

        F. AVAILABILITY OF CRIMINAL CONVICTION RECORDS

         The Administration opposes the apparent requirement in the House bill that private owners of
federally assisted housing be provided with information regarding criminal conviction records of adult
applicants or tenants of that housing.

        The Administration opposes allowing any private citizens or entities, including the private
owners of federally assisted housing, to obtain criminal record information about other
individuals. The provision of such sensitive information to private individuals and entities raises
significant privacy concerns. The Administration will work with Congress to identify other
means of bolstering security efforts in privately owned, federally assisted housing.

        G. DESIGNATED HOUSING

         The Administration opposes the changes H.R. 2 makes to current law requirements for
designation of housing for elderly persons or persons with disabilities. These changes would weaken
current law provisions requiring PHAs to consider the housing needs of persons with disabilities, and
would not allow an adequate time period for proper review of designated housing plans.



                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
First, the plan must be "necessary to meet the jurisdiction's Comprehensive Housing Affordability
Strategy, "and" the plan must be "necessary to meet the low-income housing needs of the
jurisdiction." Under H.R. 2, a PHA would need to meet only one of these two prongs,
showing that a designation plan is necessary to meet either the CHAS "or" the low income
housing needs of the jurisdiction.

       These changes are not necessary and are likely to have a detrimental impact on access to
housing for persons with disabilities. The current statutory framework is working effectively.
HUD has been successful in helping PHAs designate thousands of units for elderly persons,
while preserving housing access for persons with disabilities in those communities.

         Allowing a PHA to rely solely on a CHAS, as H.R. 2 proposes, may lead to designations
which are inconsistent with the housing needs of persons served by the PHA. The CHAS is
written based upon Consolidated Plan regulations that are tailored to community planning and
development programs and that do not require communities to assess the housing needs of
persons with disabilities in general. Rather, they refer specifically only to persons with
disabilities who require service-connected or accessible housing. The vast majority of persons
with disabilities who apply to live in public housing are merely low-income individuals who also
have disabilities. They are neither looking for, nor need supportive housing.

        In addition, the submission and review of designated housing plans should not be
incorporated into the PHA's !!local housing management plan!!, as under the House bill. The
Administration believes that, since they involve significant decisions that could permanently limit
access to important housing resources for some low-income people, designated housing plans
should be considered separately from the many other administrative and management issues that
are addressed in the local housing management plan.

       H.    TOTAL DEVELOPMENT COSTS

       The Administration urges the Conferees to indude language reflecting the Administration's
proposal on total development costs.

         The Conference staffs ha'/e been pFo¥iaea with are being provided HUD's proposal on
total development costs. The proposal would assure that capital costs allowed for HOPE VI
and other public housing development will produce sound and durable, but modest, housing that
fits into the community. It would also assure that the costs of community development and
supportive service activities are not confused with the costs of housing construction. HUD
urges the Conferees to include statutory language that reflects this proposal.



                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex.Dwnp Conversion

              HUD opposes the House provision barring a national occupancy standard, solely
because the provision may cause confusion regarding HUD's autholity.

           HUD has 110 intention to establish, directly or indirectly, a national occupancy standard.
 The Department continues to follow Congress's direction in the FY 1996 HUD Appropriations
Act, which requires that HUD, in connection with a complaint under the Fair Housing Act,
determine theat          legality of a State or local standard, on a case-by-case basis, considelill~ a
v.Hiet\' of                           (~ircumstances.


       II.      VOLUNTEER SERVICES

        The Administration urges the Conferees to take this opportunity to revise the volunteer
exception to the Davis-Bacon Act to conform to the language of the Community Improvement
Volunteer Act of1994.

       There is no policy reason to continue the differences in the definitions of volunteer
exemptions. The Administration included the necessary language in its public housing bill
(H.R. 1447, Section 121). Any volunteer provisions regarding resident management
corporations also need to be consistent with this definition.




       KJ.     SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS

       A rule barling "sexuallv violent predators" (rom public housing probably would be difficult or
 impossible to enforce. In addition, housing agencies already have access to the information
contained in the National Sex Offender Registry,

        Section MIlc) of H.R. 2 and S 301 CO of S.462 would require public housin:; agencies
to exclude "sexuallv violent predators" as defined in the Wetter/in:; Act (42 USc. 14071).
The Wetterlin:; Act contains standards for States sex otTellder re:;istnltion programs. ]n the past,
those standards required states to determine convjctcd sex offenders are "sexuallv violent
predators" (using a partially legal and quash-psychiatric definition set out in the Act), for purpose
of imposing registration requirements. However, under recent amendment to the Act, States no
longer are required to make such determinations. I nste<ld, the\' can adopt other measures to
protect the public from particularlv damrerous sex offenders. Because it is predictable that many




                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
predators" from public housint; will probably be difficult or impossible to enforce.

        Section 644(a) of H.R. 2 and § 304{b) of S.462 require the FBf and state and local
afiencies 10 provide public housing agencies with information collected under the National Sex
Offender Registrv (NSOR) or a State registry. An an initial matter, these provisions refer to
lan(!uage ("designated State law enforcement agency: and "local law enforcement agencv
authorized by the State agency") that is no IOI1l~er in the WetterLingAct. In addition, an NSOR
check alone will not to reveal whether a sex oHender is a "sexuallv violent predator." As it
currently exists, NSOR is a system for notillf~ on an offender's criminal history record in the
FBI's records system if he or she is a convicted sex offender required to register in some State.
t\ person accessim: the record can contact the State for more detailed infonnation. If n State
uses the "sexually violent predator" classification, the State registry may reveal whether a sex
offender has been determined to be a sexuallv violent predator.

         Finnllv, there already. are procedures for housinfi agencies to obtain criminal history
record information on housing applications from the FBI. The agencies can use the existing
procedures to detennine whether an applicant is a convicted sex offender, and then contact the
state tor additional information.

        I look forward to contributing to the constructive resolution of these issues.     As always,
please call upon me and the HUD staff for any assistance we can provide.


                                        Sincerely,




                                        Andrew Cuomo




                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                      He,,·Ownp Conversion


