     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUL-1998 13:51:01.00

     SUBJECT:   Complete Weekly Report 7/17/98

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D51)MAIL49408420W.226 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF5750431A100000010A02010000000205000000135B00000002000091AD62C3BCB4468BAEB49B
     B38F4F1A954FCAB7A6E1B1AD2BD6596FA7366EAEODD5866ED97C3FCC9ED07E670187A6C9F86FOO
     AF58158E508C9DA60628B1F268C2E326C394E45D6EC2FCE65070DD147D2CBC68E60532B0661BE8
     238678550B885FFDA2B11DEFCE9EAA974352465EOE863EE52027967F3ADDC774278FCDAAF08562


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:         Bruce Reed
              Elena Kagan

RE:           DPC Weekly Report


       Tobacco -- State Attorneys General: The State AGs met in Colorado this week and
decided to expand their negotiating team and continue working toward a deal with the tobacco
industry to settle the state suits. They are seeking about $200 million over 25 years.

         Tobacco -- Counteradvertising: This week, we met with ONDCP to explore whether
we could incorporate tobacco counteradvertising in their national youth anti-drug media
campaign. While ONDCP's $195 million budget must go toward anti-drug ads, their guidelines
stipulate that any air time they purchase must be matched on a dollar for dollar basis by the
network, and these matching funds may be used for anti-tobacco messages. In addition,
ONDCP seeks pro bono media activity in exchange for purchasing air time (i.e., a network may
agree to incorporate anti-drug or anti-tobacco messages into their prime time television
programming). We plan to use this opportunity for launching anti-tobacco counteradvertising
efforts, and will work with HHS and public health groups such as the Campaign for Tobacco
Free Kids to propose programming ideas and specific advertisements to be aired.

        Health Care -- Patients' Bill of Rights Update: The two patients' bill of rights
events you held this week were extremely well received, particularly by the Hill Democrats.
  Notwithstanding your bipartisan tenor at these events, the media continues to question the
Democrats' commitment to passing and enacting legislation, rather than making this an
election year issue. We would recommend that we continue to display a non-partisan
profile and a strong commitment to getting a bill this year. Next week, the House and the
Senate will bring up their bills for floor action. In the House, the Republican Leadership
is attempting to pass a rule for an up or down vote on the Republican Task Force bill and a
separate vote for the Dingell/Ganske legislation. Currently, it appears that the House
Republicans may succeed in passing their bill, but they will likely get no or few Democrats
and will not get the votes of at least some of the seven Republican co-sponsors of the
Dingell-Ganske bill. Should this vote occur, it will be viewed as an attempt by the
Republicans to get a vote on the record and not as a serious attempt to pass legislation.
The Dingelliegislation will likely receive 200 or so votes, but will not pass the House.

       In the Senate, Senator Lott is expected to bring up this issue for consideration as
early as Wednesday. Unlike the House, however, there will be votes on amendments to the

                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
when Senators Chafee and Graham will introduce their bilI. This proposal does appear to
have every single patient protection and an enforcement mechanism that is stronger than
the limited civil monetary penalties in the House but not as strong as the state-court
enforcement option in the Dingell-Ganske bilI. Because of the partisan divide on this
issue, it appears that this bill currently has little support on ether side of the aisle, with the
exception of perhaps conservative Democrats. Regardless, the strongest bill will likely
emerge out of the Senate. Under any circumstances, it is highly unlikely that a
House-Senate conference agreement will occur before the August agreement.

        Health Care -- Nursin"g Home Enforcement: Senators Grassley and Breaux are
about to release the scathing GAO report on shortcomings in the quality of nursing homes
that have led to vastly inadequate care and even deaths. This report will cite HCFA as
part of the problem, charging that there has been insufficient oversight in surveying and
certifying nursing homes and a lack of monitoring for quality. They plan on releasing this
report on or around July 27th during a hearing on nursing home quality. We have been
working with the Department to develop a new strong nursing home quality initiative that
includes increasing civil monetary penalties, eliminating survey and enforcement
contractors for nursing homes with vastly insufficient quality, and exploring developing a
national abuse registry. We believe we have developed a strong package and are
recommending that we preempt the upcoming release of this report and hearing by holding
an event to highlight your commitment to weeding out these abusive nursing home
practices. We believe this event should be held early next week to ensure that you are out
in front of a possible leak of the GAO report.

       Health Care -- O.P.M. Long Term Care Update: Congressman Mica (R-FL), the
Chairman of the Government Oversight Committee with jurisdiction over the Federal
Employees Health Benefits Program (FEHBP) is planning on marking up a bill as early as
next week that would allow Federal employees to purchase private long-term care. As you
know, we are contemplating a similar measure and are planning to present it to you in
short order. In order to highlight your leadership in this area, we believe that it is
advisable for Janice LaChance to write the subcommittee to communicate your
longstanding interest on this issue as well as to raise our concerns about the flawed Mica
policy. His proposal does not have any good limits on what type of quality package will be
offered and does not limit the number of policies to assure we can get a good price.
Advocates of FEHBP and long term care would strongly support such a letter. This would
be in conjunction with the overall long term care options that we will be presenting in the
next few weeks.

       Abortion -- Hill Update: A series of abortion-related votes occurred this week in the
House, and we expect more next week. First, the Lowey provision in the House Treasury-Postal
appropriations bill, requiring health plans participating in the FEHBP to provide coverage of
contraceptives, was approved in the House by a vote of224-198" Second, the House passed by a


                                                2         Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
order to avoid a state's parental consent law. Third, an Istook amendment to the House Labor
HHS Appropriations bill requiring parental consent for Title X family planning services passed
in Committee.

        Next week, we can expect the House to vote on whether to override your veto of the
Partial Birth Abortion bill and to consider international family planning restrictions in the
Foreign Operations Appropriations bill. As you know, the Agriculture Appropriations bill,
passed by the House, denies FDA funding for the testing or approval of RU-486. We have
drafted for your signature a letter to Congress which expresses your concern over these politically
motivated initiatives which will limit women's reproductive choices, harm women's health, and
only lead to more abortions and unintended pregnancies by limiting women's access to family
planning. The letter also calls on Congress, once again, to send you a bill banning so-called
partial birth abortions, while including exceptions to protect women's lives and health.

        Education -- Ed-Flex: The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee will be
marking up a FristJWyden Ed-Flex bill on July 22. The 12 states participating in the
current demonstration program have the authority to waive most requirements in the
major elementary and secondary education programs. The bill would extend the existing
Ed-Flex Demonstration program, and potentially make all states eligible. We have been
working with Frist and Wyden's staff, and NGA, to ensure that as eligibility is expanded,
the new states must meet strong accountability requirements, by having in place standards,
assessments, school report cards and procedures for intervening in failing schools. You
announced your support for such an approach at the NGA Winter meeting this year.
Democrats and most of the education community are at best luke warm to this bill; even if
they support it in committee they are likely to use it as a vehicle for moving higher priority
items, such as class size reduction. Republicans may also use it as a vehicle for voucher
and block grant amendments, so its ultimate fate is quite uncertain.

       Education -- Charter Schools: The Senate Labor and Human Resources
Committee will also mark-up a charter schools expansion bill. This bill will contain many
provisions we have recommended, and is likely to gain bipartisan support. We will work
to convince Democrats to use other bills, such as the Ed-Flex bill, as a vehicle for forcing
votes on other education priorities, so that we have a chance of moving this bill through the
Senate and to conference.

        Community Empowerment -- Community Reinvestment Act (CRA): According to
the National Community Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC), the private sector has pledged more
than $1 trillion going forward in loans to distressed communities and more than 95 percent of
these financial commitments have been made since 1992. The NCRC also reported that there
have been 23 times more financial commitments to distressed communities from banks in the
past 5Yz years than in the previous 15 years combined. In addition, lending commitments under
the CRA have increased 69-fold from the pre-I 993 era -- from an average of$2.6 billion per year


                                                3
                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
of your Administration's reform of CRA, some in Congress are working to attach riders to the
Credit Union Membership Access Act which would gut the program. Over the next weeks, the
NEC, DPC, and Treasury will closely monitor this situation. (PLEASE LEAVE LINE IN).

         Crime -- Values-Based Anti-Crime Initiative: Next Wednesday, you are scheduled to
unveil a new values-based violence prevention initiative at an event on the South Lawn. The
initiative will support and enhance the efforts of community-based organizations, including faith
organizations, to reach out to at-risk youth and improve public safety, in partnership with law
enforcement, schools, courts and service providers. Some of the activities undertaken by the
partnerships include gang intervention, gun abatement, truancy prevention, mentoring, drug and
alcohol abuse, conflict resolution, and job training. The initiative will provide grants between
$75,000 and $150,000 to each site. The 16 cities selected for the demonstration are: Salinas,
CA; Los Angeles, CA; Washington, DC; Miami, FL; Chicago, IL; Indianapolis, IN; Baltimore,
MD; Detroit, MI; Kansas City, MO; Hempstead, NY; Portland, OR; Philadelphia, PA;
Charleston, SC; San Antonio, TX; Richmond, VA; and Seattle, WA.

        Crime -- Appropriations Highlights: The Senate has now joined the House in fully
funding your Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative, which will allow us to add 6 ATF agents
to our 27 cities -- and perhaps expand to others. In addition, the House defeated a Schumer
amendment to the Treasury-Postal bill which would have redirected funds provided to reimburse
a limited number of firearms importers for modified assaults subject to the Presidential directive,
and used the funds to pay for additional ATF agents.

        Welfare Reform-- Wellstone Amendment to Count College Attendance toward
Welfare Work Requirements Passes Senate: As part of its passage of the higher education
reauthorization, the Senate passed an amendment offered by Senator Wellstone on college
attendance and welfare by a vote of 55-43. It would allow states to count up to two years of
college toward the welfare work requirements, and increase from 12 to 24 months the amount of
time that vocational education counts as work. (Both of these would be subject to the 30% cap
on the percentage of the caseload that can count vocational education as work.) Ten
Republicans voted in favor (Hatch, Snowe, Allard, Jeffords, D'Amato, Stevens, Thomas, Specter,
Chafee, Collins). Supporters argue it will help welfare recipients increase their earning potential
and permanently leave welfare. Senator Roth argued against weakening the work requirements,
and we understand that House Republicans will fight it in conference.

        We have opposed any weakening of the work requirements on principle. We have also
worked to educate states, college officials, and others that the welfare law affords states
tremendous flexibility in allowing students to continue college, and have encouraged them to use
work-study as a means to this end. In addition, states are free to exempt college students from
the work requirements altogether, since the percentage of the caseload required to work never
exceeds 50%. We do continue to hear anecdotal evidence that college enrollment of welfare
recipients is dropping, although we know neither the magnitude nor the cause. Some states may


                                                 4              Automated Records Management System
                                                                HOlt-Dump Conversion



    be requiring students to choose between college and welfare. Students may be dropping out
    because they can't manage both school and work, because they fear the time limits, or because
    they see better opportunities for their families through work because ofthe strong economy.

            Our preference would be to remain silent on this amendment on the assumption that the
    House will ultimately drop it in conference. Another option is to offer a compromise that
    college can count for up to half a person's work requirement (i.e., 10-15 hours) for up to two
    years. In that way, college students would be required to perform some work, but we would
    recognize the difficulty of juggling work, classes, and parenting responsibilities.

            Welfare Reform -- Illegal Immigrants: Next week, HHS will issue guidance as to
    which of its programs are federal public benefits. Under the welfare law, illegal immigrants are
    not eligible for federal public benefits. The list includes adoption assistance and foster care,
    child care, low-income heating assistance, Medicare, Medicaid, the Social Services Block Grant,
    the new Child Health Insurance Program, and T ANF, as well as 20 smaller programs. Although
    the statutory definition of federal public benefit is quite broad, HHS's legal interpretation is that
    programs like community health centers and maternal and child health programs should continue
    to be available to all comers. Immigrants advocates argued strongly that shutting off such
    programs to illegals would be dangerous to the public health and to citizen children. It is
    possible that House Republicans like Lamar Smith will attack the HHS definition as
    unreasonably narrow, but we believe it is based on sound legal reasoning.

            In addition, DO] will issue a proposed rule telling providers of federal public benefits
    how to verify alien and citizenship status, as required by welfare reform and the BBA, to make
    sure that they are properly screening out illegal immigrants. It requires providers to look at
    documents for everyone, including citizens, unless they get a temporary waiver from the
    requirements. Providers will see this as a major administrative burden, but the law is rather
    clear on this point. Under the law, charitable organizations are exempt from this requirement.

           Food Safety -- Vote in the Senate: On Thursday afternoon, Senator Harkin offered
    an amendment to restore $68 million for funding of your food safety initiative. The
    amendment received strong bi-partisan support and passed 66-33. We worked closely
    with the Senate and consumer groups in promoting the amendment, and the Los Angeles
    Times published a strong editorial in support of your program. Rahm Emanuel worked
    with the press office to put out a statement emphasizing this as a victory for good
    government over partisanship, and we will continue to work with the news media to stress
    the importance of this issue in conference. Senator Harkin's amendment required
    USDA's tobacco program administrative costs to be fully-funded by the tobacco industry,
    and used the savings to offset the cost of expanded food safety programs for both USDA
    and FDA.




                                                      5                Automated Records Management System
                                                                       tIet,.Dump Conversion


