RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-JUL-1998 15:41:44.00

SUBJECT:   INS naturalization

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
I just met with Michael Deich and the OMB team to discuss where we are
with evaluating the INS naturalization workplan, etc. As you know, Steve
Mertens, David Haun and I have had several meetings with INS and Justice
over the past couple of weeks to determine their current situation (how
they are spending current dollars) and their plan for improving service
and reducing the backlog.   In short, the INS has not developed a backlog
reduction plan that OMB or I have confidence in. For example, INS is
projecting a 69% increase in productivity between May 1998 and September
1998, but .cannot describe what steps are being taken to achieve that
 (beyond general statements about management improvements and the lessing
of "adjudicator fear" -- e.g., a feeling that they need to be overly
cautious in the wake of last year's indictment by Congress that they were
naturalization criminals). Also, the plan that they have put together
does not take into account the estimated 46% reduction in receipts in the
forseeable future.

Yesterday, immigration advocates called Maria and sent a letter to Jack
Lew asking for a meeting to discuss Administration support for additional
money for INS to address the backlog problem. The groups are most upset
that INS intends to raise the fee on naturalization applications (from $95
to $225) though the service they are providing remains poor. Michael has
recommended that OMB lead a meeting (with our participation) on Tuesday to
generally discuss with the advocates our reasons for not supporting an
additional appropriation for naturalization at this time.  He has also
suggested that we (OMB and us) put together a memo for ME that discusses
the current problem, options for fixing the problem (with price tags), and
realistic timelines for implementation. This memo will also discuss the
appropriations strategy associated with each option.  Steve Mertens and I
are working on this draft.

After we have all agreed on the options and a plan for moving forward,
Micheal suggests that we bring in INS and DOJ (Holder; Meissner) and
inform them of how we are going to lead them through this process. He
then recommends that Maria meet with the advocates (perhaps the following
week), to present our plan o.f action.

I will get you a draft of the memo to ME early next week.  please let me
know if you have any questions/concerns about this plan.  Thanks.

Julie


