RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUL-1998 18:23:35.00

SUBJECT:   re-send of Q&A

TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
please use this version. Thanks!
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D41]ARMS10046730J.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504308050000010A02010000000205000000402B0000000200004E8E99DA16CA31E4D18666
F7D2646CB1F8937659B25A5935CE9C45F7AA406FF36936ECE7528B7A03507CC3C91F6850F8399C
D6305E5056BIIAC3D93E05F373762F4939958962443E680D1304FOFB49B248FAOD6B3144253D70
                                   Questions and Answers
                                       July 20, 1998


School Discipline

Q.     Do you know how many schools have school uniform policies in place?

A.     While we do not have comprehensive data on the number of schools that have adopted
       uniform policies, we know that there has been a recent push by schools and school
       districts nationwide to adopt school uniform policies to improve student discipline,
       attendance, and school climate. Since President Clinton called on the Education
       Department to send out a guide on school uniform policies to every school district in the
       country in 1996, a growing number of schools and school districts have adopted uniform
       policies:

       ·      The Department of Education's National Center for Education Statistics estimates
              that of the 3% of all public schools have mandatory uniform policies, 34%
              initiated their policy in the 1996-97 school year.

       ·      The 1998 National Association of Elementary School Principals (NAESP) survey
              of principals in 10 states shows that 11 % of elementary schools require uniforms,
              and 15% are considering a policy. Almost two-thirds of schools with policies
              adopted them in the last two years.

      Moreover, some of the nation's largest school districts have adopted school uniform
      policies, including: New York City, Dade County, San Antonio, Houston, Chicago and
      Boston. In New York City alone, this will mean 560,000 elementary school students in
      the nation's largest school system will have school uniforms by fall of 1999.


Q.     How do you know if school uniforms are having an impact on school crime?

A.    School uniforms have been identified as promising strategy to help make students safer
      while promoting discipline and respect in schools. Because of this, the Clinton
      Administration has encouraged schools to consider adopting school uniform policies.

      Since the trend is recent, there have not been any large-scale documented research results
      into the effectiveness of school uniforms. Perhaps the best and most publicized study
      comes from the Long Beach, CA School District's four-year school uniform policy -- the
      first large school district to require uniform system-wide in elementary and middle
      schools. Total crime -- including assault, fighting, robbery, and vandalism -- fell 76%
      between 1993 and 1997. More specifically, weapons offenses dropped 83% and
      vandalism was cut in half. In addition, in the 1995-96 school year, attendance hit an

                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
       solely to their school uniform policy, they believe that it has contributed to safer, better
       schools.


Q.    Is there any evidence to show youth curfews are having an impact on crime?

A.    Last December, the U.S. Conference of Mayors released a 347-city survey of youth
      curfews. In the survey, 93% of cities reported that enforcing a curfew is a useful tool for
      police; more specifically, cities reported that curfews were a proactive way to combat
      youth violence as well as prevent juveniles from becoming crime victims. 88% of cities
      reported that curfews help to curb gang violence. All of the 72 cities that had a daytime
      curfew reported that it cut down on truancy.

      In May 1996, the Justice Department released a report by the Office of Juvenile Justice
      and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) on 7 jurisdictions with youth curfews in place. The
      report showed that when curfews backed by a community of support, and are part of a
      larger plan to help fight juvenile crime, they can play an important role in keeping our
      children safe. For instance, in New Orleans, a community-supported curfew --
      combined with summer jobs and recreational programs for youth -- helped cut juvenile
      crime during curfew hours the year after it was implemented.


Q.    Wasn't a study released earlier this year showing that they don't reduce crime?

A.    In June, the Justice Policy Institute released a study which looked at curfews in
      California. The study, which argues that curfew enforcement has not reduced youth crime
      in the state, has largely been criticized by California law enforcement officials, including
      the State Attorney General's office. Law enforcement officials across the State have
      stated that they have seen a very positive correlation between curfews, truancy laws and
      lower crime rates.

      President Clinton believes that useful tools such as curfews, school uniforms, and
      anti-truancy policies, can help schools and communities enhance youth discipline and
      reduce crime as part of a comprehensive plan to combat juvenile violence and crime.


White House Conference on School Safety

Q.    What can you tell us about the White House conference on school safety?

A.    In his speech today, the President will announce a White House Conference on School
      Safety, and proclaim October 15, 1998, National School Safety Day. The White House
      Conference will be linked by satellite to schools across the country and will specifically
      include the communities impacted by the recent wave of school shootings. We are still

                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

Recent School Shootings

Q.    What are you doing about all of these school shootings?

A.    This spring, the President sat down with youth violence experts ~- from principals to
      parents to prosecutors -- to discuss what we can do at all levels to keep these tragedies
      from occurring in the first place. There was broad agreement that we should be focused
      on tackling the larger problem of youth violence. This is why the President continues
      to challenge the Congress to pass his strategy on youth violence to take on youth access to
      guns, tough punishment for violent youths and gangs, and provide additional adult
      supervision in the after school hours when violent juvenile crime is most likely to occur.

      Today's announcement of a White House Conference on School Safety will be an
      important step to focus on making schools safer for our kids. The President has already
      taken a number of actions to address the troubling series of school shootings, including:

      Early warning guide. Last month, the President directed the Secretary of Education and
      the Attorney General to develop a guide to help teachers and principals identify and
      respond to the early warning signs of troubled youth that can lead to school violence.
      The guide will be made available to schools nationwide when classes begin in the fall.

      First Annual Report on School Safety. In December, the President called for the
      development of an Annual Report on School Safety, which will be released on School
      Safety Day, October 15. The report will include: an analysis of all existing national
      school crime data and an overview of state and local crime reporting; examples of schools
      and strategies that are successfully reducing school violence, drug use, and class
      disruption; actions that parents can take locally to combat school crime, including a local
      safety checklist; and resources available to schools and communities to help create safe,
      disciplined, and drug-free schools.

      More Police in Schools. In March, the President announced funding for a new
      community policing program through the Justice Department's COPS Office focused on
      reducing violence on or near school grounds. The President later called on the Attorney
      General and Education Secretary to report back by the start of the school year on ways to
      provide even more police for our schools.

      Promoting Gun Safety and Responsibility. Earlier this month, President Clinton.called
      on states to promote gun safety and responsibility by passing Child Access Prevention
      (CAP) laws that hold adults responsible if they allow children easy access to loaded
      firearms. Fifteen states have already enacted such CAP laws. A recent study published
      by the Journal of the American Medical Association found that CAP laws reduced fatal
      unintentional shootings by an average of 23%.

                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


