RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-JUL-1998 17:22:09.00

SUBJECT:   Rural agenda version II

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here's the latest version for Thursday.  The headings don't work, and we
should look to see what specific items should be included in the agenda.============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D64]MAIL45095570U.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504355120000010A020100000002050000005D55000000020000261DDCC6CA75A365D845CA
47C37C47D78D22EA2EDIBF9173B77380FI06A60A1708EOFE81A88070647FFA6CD986DEA26EFOBC

Five and A Half Years of Progress. For five and a half years, President Clinton and Vice
President Gore have worked to expand opportunity for rural Americans and farm families. The
Administration has worked to strengthen crop insurance, provided critical disaster assistance to
ranchers who have lost livestock, doubled our use of export credits from last year, improved our
school lunch programs by buying surplus commodities, and worked to diversify the sources of
enterprise and income in rural America. [EXPAND TO INCLUDE RURAL, NOT JUST AG)

But rural America still faces challenges -- with the economic crisis in Asia weakening some of our
best customers for farm products, with strong world crop production bringing prices down, and with
farmers facing floods and fires and drought and crop disease.

                 A FOUR-POINT ACTION PLAN FOR RURAL AMERICA

EXPANDING THE RURAL ECONOMY


      Implementing the Wheat Purchase Initiative. On Saturday, President Clinton acted within
       his took immediate steps to help our family farmers and to reduce crop surpluses at home.
       He directed the Secretary of Agriculture to purchase more than 80 million bushels of wheat,
       which could lift prices as much as 13 cents a bushel. With this wheat, the President will
       launch a new food aid initiative to press the world struggle against hunger. Secretary
       Glickman, working with our Agency for International Development, will oversee substantial
       donations of U.S. wheat to countries where the need is greatest -- places such as Sudan and
       Indonesia. Donations will also be made to private humanitarian groups. It's good for
       American farmers and good for our economy.

      Exempting Food Exports/rom U.S. Sanctions Policy. President Clinton signed into law
       an exemption for US food exports from economic sanctions required by the nuclear
       non-proliferation law. This law will allow American farmers to sell wheat to Pakistan, the
       market for 7 percent of US wheat. But, Congress should do more to give us the braodest
       possible flexibility.

      Fighting for Full Funding o/the IMF to Shore Up America's Customers Around the
       World. We must keep the market for our products growing by paying our dues to the
       International Monetary Fund so that we can stabilize and help to reform Asian economies
       that are such important customers for America's farmers, and for our other exporters who are
       responsible for 30 percent of the remarkable growth we've enjoyed since 1993.

      Promoting an Aggressive Regional Approach to Free Trade. The Clinton Administration
       has put in place a comprehensive approach to opening agricultural markets in each of our
       key export markets. NAFTA opened Mexico and Canada to U.S. exports; now, exports are
       up _ percent [CK]. We have established an agricultural negotiating group in the FTAA
       talks and important discussions on specific agricultural products in APEC. And for the first

                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
     facilitate cooperation with Europe on a range of issues, including approval of genetically
     modified organisms.

    Enforcing Our Trade Agreements. This administration has brought and won a number of
     important agricultural disputes, including the European Union's restrictions on hormone
     grown beef, bananas and pork in the Phillippines. We have been aggressive in using every
     tool at our disposal to ensure that agreements made are agreements kept.

    Carrying Over EEP Balances. Congress has consistently refused to fully fund our efforts
     to enhance the ability of American business to export their farm products around the world.
     Weare now looking at ways to ensure that the Export Enhancement Program has ("EEP") is
     flexible enough to move balances lefty at the end of the year into other programs to fund
     additional sales of US crops. The Administration's FY 1999 Budget already proposes that
     unused balances be carried over into subsequent years to expand U.S. exports.

    Announcing New USDA Initiative on Rural Development. Today, President Clinton is
     announcing that USDA is (1) awarding more than $10 million in loans and grants for rural
     housing; (2) targeting $237 million in existing funding into the Northern Great Plains
     Initiative; and (3) providing $1 million in rural business enterprise grants. [WHAT ARE
     DETAILS ON THESE?] [Texas may be a disaster area]

    Increasing Access to Capital in Rural America. The Clinton Administration, working
     with Congress, has invested more than $175 million in the nation's three rural empowerment
     zones and 33 rural enterprise communities (EZ/ECs) since 1995, creating or saving over
     7,000 jobs. And more than 700,000 rural citizens now receive additional services in the
     EZ/EC's as a result of USDA loans, grants, and programs. [ADD info from USDA, SBA
     and CDFI)

IMPROVING EDUCATION AND PROTECTING UNIVERSAL SERVICE IN RURAL AMERICA

    Protecting Universal Service.   President Clinton strongly supports universal service, a
     long-standing goal of ensuring that all Americans have access to affordable telephone service.
       Without universal service, telephone rates would be prohibitively expensive for many
     Americans living in rural areas. The President also supports the e-rate, which would
     expand universal service to include schools, libraries, and rural health care providers.
     Unfortunately, some members of Congress have introduced legislation which would repeal
     the e-rate and undermine universal service. The President urges the Congress to join him
     in supporting universal service.

    Pushing for Rural School Modernization. Almost one-half of the nation's 80,000 public
     elementary and secondary schools are located in rural or small town areas. According to the
     U.S. General Accounting Office, 30 percent of those rural and small town schools (educating
     4.5 million children) have at least one building in need of extensive repair or replacement.
     We must move forward this year with a comprehensive effort to address the needs of rural


                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

     Building a Digital Library for Rural America. The goal of this initiative is to dramatically
     increase the quantity, quality and accessibility of networked information related to agriculture
     and rural development by leveraging USDA's existing investment in research and education
     at our nation's land-grant colleges.

    Developing Distance Learning. President Clinton has proposed legislation that would make
     it easier for Americans to gain access to new skills using distance learning. In its proposal
     for reauthorization of the Higher Education Act (HEA), the Clinton Administration is
     seeking to broaden opportunities for distance learners by: including computers in the "cost of
     attendance" for purposes of financial aid; allowing institutions that offer more than 50
     percent of their courses using distance learning to be eligible for student aid; and providing
     grants to "virtual universities" and other experiments with distance learning with a program
     called "Learning Anytime, Anywhere Partnerships."

PROMOTING HEALTH AND WELFARE FOR RURAL AMERICA

    Advancing Telemedicine. The President has set a goal of connecting all rural clinics and
     hospitals to the "information superhighway." In 1996, he signed the
     Telecommunications Act, which expanded the definition of universal service to include
     rural health care providers (hospitals, clinics, community health care centers, local
     health departments, and medical schools). The program (administered by an
     independent corporation established by the FCC) is designed to ensure that rural
     health care providers pay no more than their urban counterparts for
     telecommunication services. This will help improve the quality of care in rural America
     by allowing patients to receive advice from the best specialists in the country.

    Improving Food Safety. The President's Food Safety Intitiative is a comprehensive plan for
     improving food safety, including education, new technology, standards and more inspectors
     to make sure all food, including food that is imported, is safe. Congress should fund this
     $101 million initiative when it is raised in Agricultural Appropriations conference.

    $3 Billion to Help Move More People/rom Welfare to Work.           Because of the President's
     leadership, the 1997 Balanced Budget Act included the total funding requested by the
     President for the creation of his $3 billion welfare-to-work fund. The Department of Labor
     is committed to ensuring that roughly 30 percent of these grants are provided to rural areas.
     This program will help states and local communities move long-term welfare recipients, and
     certain non-custodial parents, into lasting, unsubsidized jobs. These funds can be used for
     jqb creation, job placement and job retention efforts, including wage subsidies to private
     employers and other critical post-employment support services.

A STRONG AGRICULTURAL POLICY FOR AMERICA'S FARMS

    Improving Education in Risk Management/or Farmers. Farmers' ability to manage risk
                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                             H~ Conversion
         remains low. Relatively few producers forward contract their crops, though futures markets
         originated as a way for farmers to avoid risk. USDA needs to improve its education and
         outreach in risk management, perhaps linked with the long-distance learning initiative.
         More funding could be made available for pilot options programs, including a new initiative
         for dairy producers.

        Establishing a Fundfor Rural America. [If we're calling for funding for the. Fund for Rural
         America, we should also call for letting the funding go forward for the $120 m. in annual ag
         research provided in the Ag Research bill the President signed a couple weeks ago. This
         would echo the President's comments at the signing, and reinforce the message that we think
         research has a vital role in moving ag forward into the 21st century.] [???/Challenge
         Congress to move forward]

        Crop Insurance/Adjustment Assistance. The economic risk being faced in some rural
         regions, such as North Dakota, reveals shortcomings of the current Federal crop insurance
         regime. The problem is less crop price than crop yield, and an actuarially-sound insurance
         program must raise premiums and lower coverage in response to multi-year disease or
         weather problems. Without abandoning Administration policy by reinstating permanent
         crop disaster authority (a controversial, unnecessary step), the Administration could propose:
         (1) a program of short-term (5 years) retirement of formerly-productive farmland now beset
         with physical problems such as excess moisture; (2) indemnity payments for losses due to
         disease, perhaps through crop insurance subsidies in an auxiliary program. These payments
         might be designed as adjustment assistance, to enable producers in marginal agricultural
         regions to re-educate or retool. [????/Challenge House to move forward]

        Whole Farm Insurance. USDA is exploring the feasibility of a Whole Farm Coverage
         Insurance Program, based on the farmer's income tax information. The appeal of such a
         product is that producers could insure their whole farm, not just individual crops as under
         the current program. Whole farm insurance could also potentially address the problem of
         insuring minor crops and livestock. However, there are a number of rating issues that need
         to be addressed and USDA lacks legal authority to insure livestock under permanent
         programs. USDA hopes to pilot a program in 1999.




                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
