RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-JUL-1998 12:40:05.00

SUBJECT:   H2A background

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,
Here.is the background on the H2A program and where we are.

julie

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D52]MAIL45022580U.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043170A0000010A02010000000205000000692C00000002000073E48BDDA68387AE3458F9
9029CA271AAE4FD7A6B1AF533A5AE576934B6A5F3EA9BF1A7B278D457E6DA0834B6AD4A5E016A7

1.      H-2A -     in general

        Agricultural "guestworkers" are admitted on H-2A visas for temporary jobs. In order to
be allowed H-2A workers, an employer must prove to the DOL that (a) there are not sufficient
U.S. workers able, willing, qualified and available to perform the services; and (b) there will be
no adverse effect on the wages and working conditions of similarly-employed U.S. workers.
Employers also are required to provide free housing to workers outside the commuting area;
reimburse workers' inbound transportation if they complete half the contract, outbound also if
they complete the contract; guarantee 3/4 of the hours of the contract (the 3/4 guarantee); and
hire any qualified U.S. worker who applies during the first half of the work contract (the 50%
rule). There is no cap on the number ofH-2A visas granted. In in FY 1996, H-2A admissions
totaled 9,635.

2.      Recent legislative efforts

        In June 1995, in response to efforts in Congress to pass legislation that would create a
new guestworker program (without the worker protections present in the existing program) and
agreeing with the recommendation of the Commission on Immigration Reform, the President
stated his opposition to a "new guestworker program." However, he also stated that if the
crackdown on illegal immigration contributes to labor shortages, he would direct the
Departments of Labor and Agriculture to work cooperatively to improve and enhance the existing
H-2A program.

         On March 12th of this year, the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration approved
legislation, sponsored by Rep. Robert Smith (R-Ore), that provides for a new pilot guestworker
program. This legislation establishes a 24-month pilot program to test new procedures for
companies to secure approval to employ temporary foreign agricultural workers. The bill
proposes the elimination of many of the worker protections in the existing H-2A program,
including the housing requirement (only requires the provision of housing if that is the
"prevailing practice in the occupation and area"), transportation allotment, and the use of the
adverse effect wage rate. I The bill further eliminates the requirement that the Department of
Labor determine that there are not sufficient legal U.S. workers available at the time and place of
need. Rather, the bill would require only that the grower file a "labor condition attestation" with
the office of the state job service. The attestation would be deemed accepted within 7 days,
unless the agency finds that it is "incomplete or obviously inaccurate." In a March 12, 1998
letter to Chairman Lamar Smith, Secretary Herman stated that if this legislation were presented
to the President, she would recommend a veto.

        In recent weeks, Senators Wyden and Graham have asked the Department of Labor to

         I The Department of Labor detennines the minimum rate to be paid by employers ofH-2A workers, based
on wage surveys conducted by USDA. This so-called "adverse effect wage rate" is designed to mitigate any
negative effect employment of these workers may have on domestic workers similarly employed.


                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
Smith proposal.

3.     A new guestworker program?

        Grower advocates argue that they continue to experience difficulties in finding domestic
farmworkers and that the H-2A program is slow, cumbersome, and expensive. However, a
recent (December 1997) GAO study concluded that agribusiness does not now and will not soon
face an agricultural labor shortage. The GAO's finding of a labor surplus echoes the
conclusions of the U.S. Commission on Agricultural Workers (l992), and the U.S. Commission
on Immigration Reform reports (1995 and 1997). While the GAO report suggested that there
could develop localized labor shortages, it noted the widespread belief that employers should
respond to the market place by increasing wages, improving recruitment and modernizing their
labor practices. Further, the GAO report cited a study which concluded that substantial wage
increases would have little effect on consumer produce prices or international competitiveness.

       Many growers blame the INS's recent crackdown on undocumented farmworkers for the
shortages of domestic farmworkers and their need to rely on a dysfunctional H-2A program.

4.     The Administration's recent efforts

        Our goal is to reform the H-2A program so that it works more effectively to provide
temporary foreign workers when shortages exist. However, we also want the program's current
regulations to be enforced and to explore reforms that would ensure that the program isn't being
used to displace U.S. workers.

        Earlier this month, the Administration put forth a proposal to streamline the H-2A
program (OIRA is close to completing its review ofthe proposed rule). These reforms are
targeted at improving how H-2A applications are processed and reducing paperwork and delay.
However, there remain several substantive aspects of the program that are need of reform: wage
requirements, housing, and the requirement of positive domestic recruitment by growers.

5.     The Labor Department's position and the current legislative picture

         Though the Labor Department understands and supports our position in opposition to
legislation that would create a new guestworker program, they have asked us on a couple of
occasions whether they could send a letter to Wyden and Graham that generally supports their
efforts to enact new guestworker legislation. They have said that because Wyden and Graham
are Democrats, we should respond in a generally positive way to what they are doing. We
(DPCINEC) have strongly opposed the Administration giving any indication of support for the
Wyden/Graham legislation. Also, because there is little to no chance of the Wyden/Graham
legislation going anywhere this year, we see no need to weigh in at this time .




                                                             . Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

         Despite not wanting to in any way indicate support for any of the current legislative
efforts to reform t~e H-2A program, we continue to want to engage in a process with the DOL,
USDA and other agencies to find solutions to some of the difficult issues presented by this
program, such as how to better guarantee fair wages for farmworkers; the issue ofthe lack of safe
and decent housing for migrant farmworkers; and whether we need to develop better ways of
ensuring that growers are making good faith efforts to access the domestic labor market.

        We are recommending a meeting with DOL and USDA in order to make sure that we are
all on the same page. Though the USDA agrees with our position, their career staff (who deal
regularly with the program) has been pressing hard for ways to make the program cheaper and
more efficient for growers. It is likely that USDA staff has been working with some Senators
(like Wyden and Graham or Smith) in the development of alternative legislative proposals.
Though the Labor Department would like to see increased worker protections, improved
conditions, and wage reform, they are somewhat afraid of the bloody battle that would be pitched
by the growers if any movement is made in that direction. They also seem eager to please
Senator Coverdell (who has a hold on two of their nominations and wants lots of pro-grower
reform to the H-2A program) and Senators Wyden and Graham (they say, because they are
Democrats).

        Thus, it is important that we reiterate to DOL and USDA that we do not and will not
support any of the current legislative efforts, but that we are committed to cautiously proceeding
with a process that looks at the most difficult issues, including wages, housing and enforcement
of current regulations that protect U.S. workers, with the hope of proposing a new set of
substantive reforms in the next couple of months.




                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion


