RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Stephen G. Elmore ( CN=Stephen G. Elmore/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-JUL-1998 13:45:53.00

SUBJECT:   Senate Report on S2176--Vacancies Act Reform Bill

TO: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert N. Weiner ( CN=Robert N. Weiner/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Tracey E. Thornton ( CN=Tracey E. Thornton/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: William P. Marshall ( CN=william P. Marshall/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Dorian V. Weaver ( CN=Dorian V. Weaver/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan D. Breul ( CN=Jonathan D. Breul/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert G. Damus ( CN=Robert G. Damus/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: David J. Haun ( CN=David J. Haun/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lisa B. Fairhall   CN=Lisa B. Fairhall/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda I I I ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: G. Timothy Saunders ( CN=G. Timothy Saunders/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Roger S. Ballentine ( CN=Roger S. Ballentine/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Jennifer A. DeMarco ( CN=Jennifer A. DeMarco/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kate P. Donovan ( CN=Kate P. Donovan/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Steven D. Aitken ( CN=Steven D. Aitken/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: James Boden ( CN=James Boden/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Raymond P. Kogut ( CN=Raymond P. Kogut/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )


READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce D. Long ( CN=Bruce D. Long/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Ingrid M. Schroeder ( CN=Ingrid M. Schroeder/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: James J. Jukes ( CN=James J. Jukes/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: James C. Murr ( CN=James C. Murr/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached below is a copy of the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee's
report on S2176, Sen. Thompson's "Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998"
(S. Rept. 105-250). The Committee had ordered the bill reported on June
17th.

I understand that the Administration (Bowles) letter on 52176 is under
final review and that it may be transmitted to the Senate as early as
close of business today.   (We circulated the draft letter for your
comments under LRM ID:   SGE150. White House LA and OMB LA are
coordinating final review and clearance.)

Copy of report in PDF format:
(You also may access it directly through the Library of Congress' Thomas
Web page: http://thomas.loc.gov/cp105/cp105query.html

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.DO]MAIL46456580X.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

255044462D312E310DOA25E2E3CFD30DOA312030206F626AODOA5B2F43616C5247420DOA3C3COD
OA2F5768697465506F996E74205B302E39353035203120312E3038395DODOA2F47616D6D61205B




                                            Calendar No. 469
105TH CONGRFSS
  2d Session
                                SENATE                    {   REPORT
                                                              105-250




   FEDERAL VACANCIES REFORM ACT OF 1998




                          REPORT
                                 OF THE


   COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
          UNITED STATES SENATE
                            together with

          ADDITIONAL AND MINORITY VIEWS
                             TO ACCOMPANY


                               S. 2176
 TO AMEND SECTIONS 3345 THROUGH 3349 OF TITLE 5, UNITED
   STATES CODE (COMMONLY REFERRED TO AS THE ''VACANCIES
  ACT") TO CLARIFY STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO
  VACANCIES IN CERTAIN FEDERAL OFFICES, AND FOR OTHER
   PURPOSES




                 JULY   15, 1998.-0rdered to be printed


                  U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 59-010                     WASHINGTON: 1998




                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                      FRED THOMPSON, Tennessee, Chairman
WILLIAM V. ROTH, JR., Delaware           JOHN GLENN, Ohio
TED STEVENS, Alaska                      CARL LEVIN, Michigan
SUSAN M. COLLINS, Maine                  JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN, Connecticut
SAM BROWNBACK, Kans..                    DANIEL K AKAKA, Hawaii
PETE V. DOMENICI, New Mexico             RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois
THAD COCHRAN, Mississippi                ROBERT G. TORRICELLI, New Jersey
DON NICKLES, Oklahoma                    MAX CLELAND, Georgia
ARLEN SPECTER, Pennsylvania
                   HANNAH S. SISTARE, Staff Director and Counsel
                        FREDERICK S. ANSELL, Chief Counsel
                       LEONARD WEISS, Minority Staff Director
                            LYNN L. BAKER, Chief Clerk




                                      (II)




                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                                                Pag'
    I.   Purpose .......................................................................................................... .     1
   II.   Summary ....................................................................................................... .        1
 III.    Need for Legislation .................................................................................... ..             3
  IV.    Legislative History ofS. 2176 ...................................................................... .                   9
   V.    Committee Action ......................................................................................... .            10
 Vl.     Section-by-Section Analysis ......................................................................... .                 11
 VlI.    Regulatory Impact Statement ...................... ,.............................................. ..                   22
VlII.    Cost Estimate ................................................................................................ .        23
  IX.    Changes in Existing Law ............................................................................. .                 23




                                                                (III)




                                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                                         Hex·DtImp Conversion
                                                                REPORT
105TH CONGRESS}
   2d Session                      SENATE                   {   105-250




         FEDERAL VACANCIES REFORM ACT OF 1998



                   JULY   15, 1998.-Ordered to be printed



   Mr. THOMPSON, from the Committee on Governmental Affairs,
                    submitted the following

                                REPORT
                                together with

                ADDITIONAL AND MINORITY VIEWS
                             [To accompany S. 2176[

  The Committee on Governmental Affairs, to which was referred
the bill (S. 2176) to provide a mechanism for the temporary filling
of positions that are legally appointed by the President, by and
with the advice and consent of the Senate, and having considered
the same, reports favorably on the bill as amended and rec-
ommends that the bill as amended do pass.
                                 I. PURPOSE
  The purpose of S. 2176, the Federal Vacancies Reform Act, is to
create a clear and exclusive process to govern the performance of
duties of offices in the Executive Branch that are filled through
presidential appointment by and with the consent of the Senate
when a Senate confirmed official has died, resigned, or is otherwise
unable to perform the functions and duties of the office.
                       II.   SUMMARY OF S.      2176
  S. 2176 provides that upon the death, resignation, or inability to
serve of an officer of an executive agency (including the Executive
Office of the President), the first assistant to the officer becomes
the acting officer, subject to the bills time limits. If the President
so directs, a person who has already received Senate confirmation
can be made the acting officer in lieu of the first assistant. The bill




                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
also requires that a first assistant who has not received Senate
confirmation, but who is nominated to fill the office permanently,
can be made the acting officer only if he has been the first assist-
ant for at least 180 days in the year preceding the vacancy. The
acting officer may serve for 150 days beginning on the date the va-
cancy occurs. In the event a first or second nominee is withdrawn,
rejected or returned, the person may serve as the acting official
until 150 days after the withdrawal, rejection, or return.
   The bill applies to all vacancies in Senate-confirmed positions in
executive agencies with a few express exceptions. First, those laws
that expressly provide that they supersede the Vacancies Act will
do so. Second, current laws (there are approximately 41) that pro-
vide for the President or the head of an executive department to
designate an officer to perform the functions and duties of a speci-
fied office in an acting capacity are maintained, as are those stat-
utes that themselves stipulate who shall serve in a specific office
in an acting capacity. Statutes that generally permit agency heads
to delegate or reassign duties within their agencies are specified
not to constitute statutes that provide for the temporary filling of
particular offices.
   The bill's enforcement mechanism is to make an office vacant if,
150 days after the vacancy arises, no presidential nominee has
been submitted to the Senate for the office. For offices other than
the heads of agencies, the functions and duties specifically to be
performed by the vacant officer are to be performed only by the
head of the agency. Such duties include duties established by regu-
lation for the officer during any part of the 180 days before the va-
cancy occurred, notwithstanding subsequent regulations that pur-
ported to limit those duties. The sanction can be ended if the Presi-
dent submits a nominee after the 150-day period, whereupon the
acting officer can resume service. Actions taken in violation of the
vacant officer provisions are of no effect and are not permitted to
be ratified by anyone else. The shifting of duties to the agency head
does not apply to vacancies in the positions of general counsel to
the National Labor Relations Board and Federal Labor Relations
Authority or to Senate-confirmed inspectors general, given the spe-
cific goal Congress established for those positions of independence
from the agency heads.
   The bill also requires heads of agencies to report to the General
Accounting Office on the existence of vacancies, persons serving in
an acting capacity, the names of any nominees, and dates of dis-
position of such nominees. The Comptroller General then reports to
the Congress, the President, and the Office of Personnel Manage-
ment of the existence of any violations of the Vacancies Act.
   The 150-day period for submitting nominations is extended for
an additional 90 days for vacancies that exist when the President
changes or that arise in the 60 days thereafter. And the bill main-
tains holdover provisions in current law that apply to single-mem-
ber independent agencies, and exempts members of multi-member
independent agencies altogether, as does the present Vacancies
Act.
   The bill applies to any office that becomes vacant after the date
of enactment, as well as to offices that are vacant on the date of



                                             Automated Records Manllgl:ment System
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
enactment, except that the bill shall apply to those offices as
though they first became vacant on the date of enactment.
                     III. NEED FOR LEGISLATION
   The need for legislation to govern the performance of the func-
tions and duties of vacant offices ultimately derives from Article II,
Section 2 of the Constitution, which, inter alia, vests the President
with the authority to appoint all officers of the United States, sub-
ject to the advice and consent of the Senate, but that Congress, by
law, may vest the appointment of inferior officers in the President
alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of departments. Con-
gress has passed legislation since the Washington Administration
to provide for temporary officials to perform the functions and du-
ties of vacant positions requiring the advice and consent of the Sen-
ate. Over the years, the time of temporary service has been length-
ened, but Congress has always placed time limits on such acting
officials.
   In recent decades, the Department of Justice has argued that its
advise and consent positions are not covered by the Vacancies Act.
It construes its enabling legislation, and now the enabling legisla-
tion of other departments, as exempting its compliance with the
Vacancies Act. Specifically, the Department of Justice maintains
that where a department's organic act vests the powers and func-
tions of the department in its head and authorizes that officer to
delegate such powers and functions to subordinate officials or em-
ployees as she sees fit, such authority supersedes the Vacancies
Act's restrictions on temporarily filling vacant advice and consent
positions, allowing for designation of acting officials for an indefi-
nite period, even without submitting a nomination to the Senate to
fill the position on a permanent basis. This interpretation of the
law is wholly lacking in logic, history, or language, as evidenced by
repeated opinions of the Comptroller General. Opinion B-150136,
Feb. 19, 1976; 65 Op. Compo Gen. 626, 631-33 (1986); Opinion B-
220522.2, Oct. 17, 1986. By May, 1997, seven statutory offices in
the Justice Department requiring presidential nomination and Sen-
ate confirmation were vacant. One vacancy had existed for twenty-
one months, three were vacant for more than 120 days, and three
positions were unfilled for less than 120 days. In at least four in-
stances, positions were filled by an order of the Attorney General
designating a person to act in the vacant position. For example, the
Solicitor General's position was occupied by an acting officer for
more than one year without a nomination ever being submitted to
the Senate.
   Despite attempts to do so through 1988 amendments to the Va-
cancies Act, described below, Congress was not successful in gain-
ing the Justice Department's agreement that its advice and consent
positions are subject to the Vacancies Act. Given the growing num-
ber of federal departments and agencies that now claim exemption
from the Vacancies Act, Congress must explicitly reject the position
that general organic statutes for various agencies and departments,
such as 28 U.S.C. §§ 509 and 510, trump the specific provisions of
the Vacancies Act. Otherwise, the Vacancies Act will be of no prac-
tical effect, thwarting the constitutional mandate that persons



                                                Automated Records Management Sy~tem
                                                llmt-DW1IP Convmion
serving in advice and consent positions do so through the Senate's
approval of such service.
                       THE 1988 AMENDMENTS
   The Justice Department's aggressive claims of exemption from
the Vacancies Act led Congress in 1988 to make the first signifi-
cant changes in the Vacancies Act since 1868. The 1988 amend-
ments changed the law's coverage to apply to all executive depart-
ments and agencies, overruling a 1973 court decision that had lim-
ited the applicability of the Act to executive and military depart-
ments. The length of time that an acting official was permitted to
serve was extended to 120 days, rather than the previous 30, and
the acting officer could serve more than 120 days if the President
submitted a nominee. An additional 120 days of acting service was
provided if the Senate rejected the nomination or if it was with-
drawn. Through this mechanism, Congress created an incentive for
the President to submit nominations in a timely manner, and al-
lowed temporary officials to serve until the Senate completed its
advice and consent function. This Committee's report accompany-
ing the Senate bill stated, "The Committee also believes that the
present language, however old, makes clear that the Vacancies Act
is the exclusive authority for the temporary appointment, designa-
tion, or assignment of one officer to perform the duties of another
whose appointment requires Senate confirmation. The exclusive au-
thority of the Vacancies Act would only be overcome by specific
statutory language providing some other means for filling vacan-
cies." S. Rep. No. 100--317, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. 14 (1988). In
1989, the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel recognized
the Senate's view, but continued to interpret the Vacancies Act as
not precluding the Attorney General's authority to appoint tem-
porary officials under the Department's organic statute, character-
izing the Senate report as an improper and ineffective effort to
"alter the proper construction of a statute through subsequent leg-
islative history." 13 O.L.C. 173,175 (1989). If the Vacancies Act is
to function as it is designed-to uphold the Senate's prerogative to
advise and consent to nominations through placing a limit on presi-
dential power to appoint temporary officials-the Justice Depart-
ment's interpretation of the existing statute must be ended. Legis-
lation is needed to ensure this result, a primary reason for the
Committee's reporting of S. 2176.
           THE CONSTITUTIONAL NEED FOR LEGISLATION
   The selection of officers is not a presidential power. The Presi-
dent may choose whom he wishes to nominate, but the Senate has
the power to advise and consent before those nominees may as-
sume office. The Appointments Clause "is more than a matter of
'etiquette or protocol;' it is among the significant structural safe-
guards of the constitutional scheme." Edmond v. United States, 117
S. Ct. 1573, 1579 (1997). The Appointments Clause was adopted
against a historical background: "The 'manipulation of official ap-
pointments' had long been one of the American revolutionary gen-
eration's greatest grievances against executive power because 'the
power of appointment to offices'" was deemed "the most insidious
and powerful weapon of eighteenth century despotism." Freytag v.



                                              Automated Records Management System
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 501 U.S. 868, 883 (1991) (cita-
tions omitted).
   Nonetheless, vacancies occur in such positions, and since the
President lacks any inherent appointment authority for govern-
ment officers, legislation authorizing some non-Senate confirmed
persons to perform the functions and duties of vacant offices is nec-
essary if the government's operations are to be performed. The
president's duty is to submit nominees for offices to the Senate, not
to fill those offices himself. The President's power to take care that
the laws shall be enforced is a duty, and not a source of power,
since the President takes care that the laws be executed, and has
no right to enforce ~he laws himself where Congress vests such re-
sponsibility in an inferior officer. See, e.g., Kendall ex rel. Stokes v.
United States, 12 Pet. (37 U.S.) 522, 612-613 (1838); George v.
Ishimaru, 849 F. Supp. 68 (D.D.C. 1994). In the absence of affirma-
tive statutory authority to fill a vacancy, the office must remain va-
cant. The Vacancies Act limits presidential authority to make act-
ing appointments, while preserving the Senate's power to advise
and consent. Therefore, its scope must be government-wide unless
Congress chooses clearly and specifically to exempt specifically
identified officers from its reach when countervailing consider-
ations apply.
   Because the Justice Department maintains that it is exempt for
the Vacancies Act, it has permitted positions to be held by acting
officers for years without the submission to the Senate of a nomi-
nee. Its contentions are broadly applicable to virtually all other de-
partments given the broad language of vesting and delegation con-
tained in those departments' organic statutes. By early in 1998, 64
of 320 advise and consent positions in the executive branch were
held by acting officials, 43 of whom had served more than 120 days
without a nominee. Acting officials served in each of the 14 Cabinet
departments. If the Constitution's separation of powers is to be
maintained, and officers of the government subjected to the scru-
tiny of the Senate for the benefit of the liberty of the people, legis-
lation to address the deficiencies in the operation of the current Va-
cancies Act is necessary. The 1988 legislation unfortunately has not
succeeded in encouraging presidents to submit nominees in a time-
ly fashion, and it has not resulted in the Justice Department's
agreement that is covered by the Act. Indeed, given the number of
acting officials and the growing number of departments that claim
not to be covered by the Vacancies Act, the Senate's confirmation
power is being undermined as never before.
                       THE "DOOLIN" DECISION
   Most recently, the need for new legislation was underscored by
the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia Circuit in Doolin Security Savings Bank, F.S.B. v. Of-
fice of Thrift Supervision, 139 F.3d 203 (D.C. Cir. 1998). In that
case, the validity of an Office of Thrift Supervision administrative
enforcement action was challenged by a bank subject to the order
on the ground that the absence of a lawfully appointed director of
the agency rendered the enforcement action void. The Senate-con-
firmed director of OTS resigned in December, 1992, and purported
to delegate all his authority to OTS's Deputy Director for Washing-



                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
ton Operations. That individual, who was neither the first assist-
ant nor a Senate-confirmed individual, served as the acting director
until October, 1996. Two days later, the President invoked the Va-
cancies Act to designate a Senate-confirmed official from the De-
partment of Housing and Urban Development to serve as acting di-
rector. Within 120 days of the second acting director's appointment,
the President submitted a permanent nominee to the Senate. The
new acting director issued the final order against the bank in
March,1997.
   The bank maintained that the 120-day limitation on acting serv-
ice contained in the Vacancies Act lapsed long before the second
acting director was ever named. The court agreed that the Vacan-
cies Act may be used only when there is a vacancy caused by the
departure of an officer appointed in compliance with Article II, and
that the departure of an appointed acting official does not trigger
the Vacancies Act. The court found that merely because a person
temporarily performs the functions of an office does not make that
individual an "officer" for purposes of the Vacancies Act. "Other-
wise, § 3348's time limitation could be easily avoided by a series of
temporary resignations, with each resignation triggering a new
120-day period." 139 F.3d at 208. Thus, the departure of the Sen-
ate-confirmed Director triggered the president's authority under
§ 3347 to designate an acting official, not the departure of the act-
ing official. The Committee accepts this reaffirmation of the long-
standing operation of the Vacancies Act.
   Notwithstanding its recognition that the President's designation
of the second acting official took place approximately four years
after the vacancy in the position arose, however, the court upheld
the second acting director's 1997 final order. The court agreed with
the Justice Department that the 120-day time limit contained in
§ 3348 does not begin to run until someone actually takes office
pursuant to the Vacancies Act, either by detail or by presidential
directive. Under that interpretation of the statute, the second act-
ing director served lawfully at the time the order was issued
against the bank. The court rejected the bank's position that the
120-day period begins immediately upon the death or resignation
of a constitutionally appointed officer.
   According to the court, "Nothing in the Act expressly deals with
the amount of time that may transpire before the President exer-
cises his § 3347 authority to designate a temporary replacement."
139 F.3d at 209. In its view, the Vacancies Act governs how long
a position may be temporarily filled, but does not specify when the
President must undertake the filling of the position. "The time
limit is placed not on Presidential action, but on the tenure of the
President's designee." [d. The 120-day period will commence with
the vacancy when the first assistant assumes the office or the
President under § 3347 immediately designates an acting official.
But if there is no first assistant and the President does not imme-
diately act, the vacancy has not been "filled" and the 120-day pe-
riod does not run. [d.
   The Committee believes that this portion of the court's opinion
necessitates legislative action. Whether or not the court properly
interpreted the existing law, the Committee believes that the 120-
day time limit must run from the date of the vacancy caused by



                                             Automated Records Management System
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
the death or resignation of the Senate-confirmed official, and not
from the date that the President designates an acting official. A
limit must be placed on the President's time to act to fill a position.
If the purpose of the Vacancies Act is to limit the President's power
to designate temporary officers, a position requiring Senate con-
firmation may not be held by a temporary appointment for as long
as the President unilaterally decides. Such a scheme obliterates the
constitutional requirement that the officer serve only after the Sen-
ate confirms the nominee. If there is no first assistant, the Presi-
dent must designate another Senate-confirmed official. By contrast,
the Doolin court would allow the President to accept a resignation
on the second day of his term, allow an acting person to assume
the functions and duties of the office (in this case, an acting officer
not appointed by the President), and then, so long as there is no
first assistant, by unilaterally not invoking the Vacancies Act,
allow that·position to be filled by an "acting" official who has never
received Senate confirmation for so long as the president holds of-
fice. The Committee finds this state of affairs to be unacceptable
and constitutionally suspect. Nor does it believe that the vacancy
has not been "filled" when an acting person has been performing
the functions and duties of the office for four years.
   Notwithstanding the 1988 Vacancies Act amendments that pro-
vide for a tolling of the 120-day period when the President submits
a nomination to the Senate to fill the vacant position, the court
stated, "The Vacancies Act was never meant to give the President
an "incentive" to fill vacant positions with appointees confirmed by
the Senate. The function of the Act is to allow some breathing room
in the constitutional system for appointing officers to vacant posi-
tions, to validate the actions of those temporarily occupying the po-
sitions." [d. at 211. The Committee believes that the reason why
in 1988, for the first time, the period of acting service was extended
beyond 120 days if the President submitted a nominee is that, in
light of the frequent noncompliance with the Vacancies Act by
presidents who allowed acting officials to serve more than 120
days, Congress wanted to encourage the President to submit a
nominee within the Vacancies Act period. If an acting person
served beyond 120 days, the Senate at that point would bear the
responsibility for the fact that a Senate-confirmed person for that
office was not in place.
   The court recognized that under its interpretation of the statute,
if no one is detailed or directed to fill the position, or the 120 days
expires without a nomination, the position will be vacant or occu-
pied by someone not constitutionally entitled to perform the duties
of the office. But in its view, that situation will create an incentive
for the President to submit a nomination, for fear that the actions
of part of his administration will be declared void. The Committee
believes that this part of the court's opinion also shows the need
for Congressional corrective action. Under the Justice Department's
interpretation of the many vesting and delegation provisions in the
organic statutes of various departments, few positions would re-
main vacant. This fact, combined with the lack of an effective en-
forcement process, would give the President no reason to comply
with the Vacancies Act. The court seems not to understand the fun-
damental purpose of the Vacancies Act, which is not to ensure the




                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
legality of the actions of acting officials, but rather to limit the
power of the President to name acting officials, as well as the
length of service of those officials.
   If the Constitution or Congress requires that an office be held
only by a person appointed by the President by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate, then unless legislation provides to the
contrary, only a person the President has nominated for that posi-
tion and who has received Senate confirmation may fill the posi-
tion. The President has the duty to take care that the law be faith-
fully executed, and that duty includes adherence to Article II. He
does not have the power to execute the law himself when Congress
has given statutory duties to lower-level officials in the executive
branch. Nor can he name temporary officers of his unfettered
choice. That is why the Vacancies Act or other statutes providing
for the temporary filling of a specific position are the exclusive au-
thority setting forth the procedures by which acting officials can
serve, with the exception only of the President's power to make ap-
pointments during the recess of the Senate. The court's opinion
overlooks this central concept. The Vacancies Act does recognize
that when vacancies arise in those positions, it may be necessary,
due to time constraints on the nomination and confirmation proc-
esses, for someone who has not received Senate confirmation for
that particular post to serve temporarily to keep the government
functioning. But the Vacancies Act requires that those acting offi-
cers be either (1) first assistants or (2) persons who have already
received Senate confirmation for some other post and are selected
by the President to be the acting officer.
   The court did not reach the question whether the OTS Director's
designation of the first acting director satisfied the Vacancies Act.
For the court, any error was harmless in light of the legality of the
second acting director's appointment under the Vacancies Act, and
the ratification by the second acting officer of any actions taken by
the first acting director. The Committee also finds that this portion
of the court's position demands legislative response. First, it is con-
stitutionally unacceptable for any acting official to serve for four
years, especially an officer "appointed" not by the President, nor by
a department head, but a mere agency head. The Appointments
Clause limits appointing powers to hold individuals accountable for
their selections. Second, if any subsequent acting official or anyone
else can ratify the actions of a person who served beyond the
length of time provided by the Vacancies Act, then no consequence
will derive from an illegal acting designation. This result also un-
dermines the constitutional requirement of advice and consent.
   In short, in light of various administrations' noncompliance with
the Vacancies Act and a recent court decision undermining its oper-
ation, it is imperative that Congress enact legislation to restore
constitutionally mandated procedures that must be satisfied before
acting officials may serve in positions that require Senate con-
firmation. The issue is not simply the prerogative of the Senate.
Like other structural constitutional provisions, the Appointments
Clause was designed to protect the liberty of the people. Although
the President has the sole power to nominate, as a single officer
may feel a greater sense of duty in selecting an individual for con-
sideration to a particular post, the "the necessity of [the Senate's]



                                                 Automated Records M
                                                 H D                   anagement System
                                                  ex- Ll.tnp Conversion
concurrence would have a powerful, though in general a silent op-
eration. It would be an excellent check upon a spirit of favoritism
in the President, and would tend greatly to preventing the appoint-
ment of unfit characters from State prejudice, from family connec-
tion, from personal attachment, or from a view to popularity. And,
in addition to this, it would be an efficacious source of stability in
the administration." Federalist LXXVI (Hamilton). Legislation is
needed to restore these goals of the Founders.
                 IV. LEGISLATIVE HISTORY OF S. 2176
   The Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998 was introduced as S.
2176 in the Senate on June 16, 1998 by Senators Fred Thompson,
Robert C. Byrd, Strom Thurmond, Trent Lott,. and William Roth.
Introduction of S. 2176 followed the March 16, 1998 introductions
of S. 1761, the Federal Vacancies Compliance Act, by Senator Byrd
and S. 1764, the Vacancies Clarification Act, by Senators Thur-
mond and Lott. The latter two bills sought to enforce the Vacancies
Act through withholding the pay of any acting officer who exceeded
the time period provided by the Vacancies Act, and S. 1764 specifi-
cally provided that the time period for acting service ran from the
date of the vacancy. In addition, both bills made the Vacancies Act
supersede other laws governing the temporary service of non-con-
firmed officials, ending the argument that statutes vesting in de-
partment heads the general authority to delegate powers to other
officials provided an alternative method of empowering acting offi-
cials apart from the Vacancies Act. Both bills also created a report-
ing mechanism to the President, the General Accounting Office,
and the Congress on the length of time that each acting official had
served.
   A hearing was held at the Governmental Affairs Committee on
oversight of compliance with the Vacancies Act on March 18, 1998.
Senator Thompson chaired the hearing, which addressed the gen-
eral issues of noncompliance with the law, as well as the legislative
proposals that had by then been introduced. The following wit-
nesses provided testimony: Senator Robert C. Byrd, State of West
Virginia; Joseph N. Onek, Principal Deputy Associate Attorney
General, Department of Justice, accompanied by Daniel Koffsky,
Special Counsel, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice;
Joan M. Hollenback, Associate General Counsel, General Account-
ing Office; Senator Strom Thurmond, State of South Carolina; Mi-
chael J. Gerhardt, Professor of Law, Case Western Reserve Univer-
sity; Morton Rosenberg, Specialist in American Public Law, Con-
gressional Research Service; and Paul C. Light, Director, Public
Policy Program, The Pew Charitable Trusts.
   All of the witnesses but Messrs. Onek and Koffsky supported leg-
islation that would overturn the Justice Department's arguments of
exemption from the Vacancies Act and that would create an en-
forcement mechanism. Senator Byrd also pointed out the Senate's
responsibility to demand strict compliance with the Vacancies Act
from the Administration. He expressed his hope that the Senate
would make the Vacancies Act "so tight, so air-tight, that no de-
partment can find a crack or crevice anywhere through which to
creep." He expressed his view that the Committee could draft legis-
lation to address the problem other than S. 1761. Ms. Hollenbeck



                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
  provided reasons why the Justice Department's interpretation of
  the Vacancies Act is contrary to the language and legislative his-
  tory of both the Vacancies Act and the Justice Department's or-
, ganic statute, and pointed out that Congress' passage of statutes
  governing temporary officers in particular governmental positions
  shows that Congress knew how to create specific exceptions to the
  application of the Vacancies Act. She offered GAO's recommenda-
  tion that legislation be passed to explicitly provide that the Vacan-
  cies Act can be superseded only by a statute providing an alter-
  native means for filling a particular vacancy. GAO also rec-
  ommended reporting provisions and the withholding of pay of act-
  ing officials who served in violation of the Vacancies Act. Mr.
  Koffsky noted that there are no statutory duties that are to be per-
  formed by assistant 'attorneys general.
     Senator Thurmond testified to the need to rewrite, not simply
  amend, the Vacancies Act. He demonstrated that the 1988 amend-
  ments had not solved the problem of excessive service by acting of-
  ficials. He also stressed the need to prevent the Justice Depart-
  ment from arguing that it is exempt from the Vacancies Act, which
  he would accomplish by requiring statutes exempting particular po-
  sitions from the Vac,ancies Act to specifically cite the Vacancies Act.
  Prof. Gerhardt testified to the need to change some of the terms
  of art used in the Vacancies Act, !lnd suggested lengthening the
  120-day time period. Mr. Rosenberg testified to the errors in the
  Justice Department's exemption argument in light of the language
  of the Vacancies Act, the Department's organic statute, and its leg-
  islative history. He also spoke of the problem of transferring assist-
  ant secretaries from one position to another without their under-
  going Senate reconfirmation. He recommended adding an enforce-
  ment mechanism to freeze the duties of the office as they existed
  on the date of the vacancy after the 120-day period has expired.
  Mr. Light testified that one of the problems with noncompliance
  with the Vacancies Act is the unnecessary proliferation of political
  appointees in the government at a time when total federal employ-
  ment was declining.
     Following the hearing, Senator Thompson considered whether to
  introduce his own legislative proposal. After careful consideration,
  he determined to address only the Vacancies Act issues involved in
  the Senate's advise and consent powers. The Committee believes
  that authorizing committees may wish to consider whether statu-
  tory duties should be given to assistant secretaries and assistant
  attorneys general in those departments in which the only current
  statutory duty of such officials is to assist the secretary or the at-
  torney general. Staff from both parties tried to resolve as many
  issues as possible. Staff also attempted to respond to the sugges-
  tions of the Justice Department and the White House. S. 2176 re-
  flects these discussions. The Committee was told informally that
  the Justice Department recognizes that the legislation offered effec-
  tively prevents it from arguing that departments with vesting and
  delegation statutes are exempt from the Vacancies Act.
                        V. COMMI'ITEE ACTION
 On June 17, 1998, the Committee held a business meeting at
which S. 2176, the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, was con-



                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     HeX-Dump Conversion
sidered. Senator Lieberman offered an amendment to retain exist-
ing statutes that by their own terms provide a process for the fill-
ing of specific advice and consent positions, as well as the statues
referenced in S. 2176 as introduced, which preserved existing stat-
utes that allow the heads of departments to designate an acting of-
ficial. That amendment was agreed to by voice vote.
   Senator Glenn offered two amendments. The first amendment
would have reduced the length of time that a first assistant need
serve to be both the acting officer and eligible to be nominated per-
manently to the position from 180 of the 365 days preceding the
vacancy to 30 days prior to the vacancy. The amendment failed on
a roll call vote of 6 Yeas (Glenn, Levin, Lieberman, Akaka by
proxy, Durbin, and Cleland) and 8 Nays (Roth by proxy, Stevens,
Collins, Brownback by proxy, Domenici, Cochran, Nickles by proxy,
and Thompson).
   Senator Glenn's second amendment would permit the acting offi-
cer to serve even after the 150-day period following the rejection,
withdrawal, or return of the first nomination, once a second nomi-
nation was made. The amendment was agreed to by voice vote.
   Senator Levin offered an amendment to begin the time limit on
the service of acting officers in vacant positions arising on or in the
60 days after a transitional inauguration day 120 days after the
transitional inauguration or the arising of the vacancy, whichever
is later. Mter Senator Levin agreed to shorten the additional pe-
riod to 90 days, the amendment was agreed to by voice vote.
   With no other amendments being offered, Chairman Thompson
moved adoption of S. 2176 as amended. The bill was ordered favor-
ably reported by a vote of 9 Yeas (Stevens, Collins, Domenici, Coch-
ran, Glenn, Levin, Lieberman, Cleland, Thompson) and 1 Nay
(Durbin). Senators Roth, Brownback, and Nickles voted Aye by
proxy.
                 VI.   SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS
   Section 1 states the short title of the legislation-the "Federal
Vacancies Reform Act of 1998."
   Section 2 strikes sections 3345 through 3349 of Title 5 and re-
places the existing law with a reformed version of the Vacancies
Act. The Committee believes that amending existing legislation,
given the ineffectiveness of the 1988 amendments, may again fail
to ensure the exclusivity of the applicability of the Vacancies Act.
To ensure an effective enforcement mechanism and to overturn the
recent decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Dis-
trict of Columbia Circuit in Doolin Security Savings Bank v. Office
of Thrift Supervision, 139 F.3d 203 (D.C. Cir. 1998), the Committee
believes that replacement of the existing Vacancies Act is nec-
essary.
   Under current law, section 3345 covers heads of executive agen-
cies, and section 3346 affects "an officer of a bureau of an Execu-
tive department or military department, whose appointment is not
vested in the head of the department * * *" Section 2 creates a
new section 3345, applicable to all officers of executive agencies
whose appointment to office is required to be made by the Presi-
dent by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. References
to the term of art "bureau" have been eliminated. The purpose of


                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
this change is to clearly make the Vacancies Act applicable to all
officers of executive agencies whose appointments require Senate
confirmation. The Vacancies Act would now apply to such officers
in all departments, regardless of the department or agency's or-
ganic statute.
   "Executive agency" is defined at 5 U.S.C. § 105. Because the De-
partment of Defense is a department within the meaning of 5
U.S.C. § 101, the military departments, which are located in the
Department of Defense, are also covered by this Act, notwithstand-
ing the omission of the term "military department" from current
sections 3345 and 3346.
   The section applies when an officer in an executive agency whose
appointment is made by the President by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate dies, resigns, or is otherwise unable to per-
form the functions and duties of the office. The law applies when
any of those factual situations arises, regardless of how the situa-
tion is characterized. For instance, the Vacancies Act would apply
in situations such as Doolin, when the first acting director of the
Office of Thrift Supervision was purportedly designated by virtue
of the departing confirmed director's invocation of a statute provid-
ing for his duties to be temporarily delegated in the director's "ab-
sence." Under this legislation, when an acting officer is to be des-
ignated, as opposed to automatically gaining acting status as a first
assistant, only the President may designate an acting officer in a
position that requires Senate confirmation.
   When a vacancy arises, the bill provides an exclusive set of pro-
cedures that may be followed. If the vacant officer has a first as-
sistant, the first assistant performs the functions and duties of the
office temporarily in an acting capacity, subject to the time limita-
tions of section 3346. The Committee does not establish a definition
of "first assistant." That term has a long history of use in the Va-
cancies Act. As under current law, the term "first assistant" is used
to refer to the first assistant to the "officer." However, the practice
under current law, which would be continued by this bill, is that
the first assistant is actually the first assistant to the vacant office.
Certain officers have first assistants designated by statute. See,
e.g., 28 U.S.C. § 508(a) ("for the purpose of section 3345 of title 5
the Deputy Attorney General is the first assistant to the Attorney
General.") Other departments and agencies have established first
assistants by regulation. The Vacancies Act provides for the auto-
matic performance of the functions and duties of the vacant office
by the first assistant because such person is often a career official
with knowledge of the office or a Senate-confirmed individual, and
the Committee believes that the routine functions of the office
should be allowed to continue for a limited period of time by that
one person. The provision therefore emphasizes the limit on presi-
dential power to select an acting officer without that individual
having received Senate confirmation, while permitting flexibility in
the performance of governmental operations since, if a first assist-
ant exists, the President need not take any action for an acting offi-
cial to serve.
   If there is no first assistant, or if the President following the as-
sumption of acting status by the first assistant, but within the time
limits prescribed by section 3346 so chooses, the President (and




                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
only the President) may direct a person who has already received
Senate confirmation for another position to perform the functions
and duties of the office temporarily in an acting capacity, subject
to the time limits of section 3346. This provision allows the Presi-
dent limited flexibility in appointing temporary officers, restricting
the pool to persons who have already received Senate confirmation
for their current position. If there is no first assistant, no one is
permitted by law to become an acting officer until the President
designates a Senate-confirmed individual to be the acting officer.
   In either case, the acting officer's service is limited to the time
period specified in section 3346. This marks a repeal of the current
statutory provision in both sections 3345 and 3346 that the acting
officer "shall perform the duties of the office until a successor is ap-
pointed or the absence or sickness stops," language that has been
a part of each Vacancies Act since 1792.
   Notwithstanding a first assistant on the day of the vacancy's
automatic functioning as the acting officer, such first assistant who
has not served as first assistant for 180 days of the 365 days prior
to the vacancy may not serve as the acting officer if the President
nominates that person for appointment to that position. If the
President nominates the former first assistant, who served for less
than 180 of the 365 days preceding the vacancy, to the permanent
position, the first assistant must cease performing the functions
and duties of the office. In that instance, for an acting person to
continue to perform those duties, the President would be required
to designate as the acting officer a person who has received Senate
confirmation to another post, who can serve as the acting officer for
the remainder of the time period established under section 3346
that was not consumed by the first assistant.
   A first assistant who is a career person will ordinarily have
served more than 180 days as first assistant at the time the va-
cancy arises. Such a person will be able to serve both as the acting
officer and as the permanent nominee. The 180-day requirement is
not confined to the 180 days immediately preceding the vacancy,
as, for instance, the first assistant may have been ill for part of
that period. The President's power to nominate is not disturbed in
any way; however, if he chooses to nominate a brief-serving first
assistant, that person may no longer serve as the acting officer.
The President would retain his existing power to designate first as-
sistants to those officers where he currently enjoys such power. The
Committee believes that the length of service of the first assistant
eligible to be both the nominee and the acting officer should be suf-
ficiently long to prevent manipUlation of first assistants to include
persons highly unlikely to be career officials.
   With respect to a vacancy in the office of Attorney General, 28
U.S.C. § 508 will remain applicable. That section ensures that Sen-
ate confirmed Justice Department officials will be the only persons
eligible to serve as Acting Attorney General.
   The new section 3346 limits the length of the acting officer's
service to 150 days, beginning on the date the vacancy occurs. The
Committee believes that while the background check process takes
no longer today than in 1988, when the Vacancies Act limitation
was set at 120 days, the vagaries of the vetting and nomination
process now make 150 days a more realistic time limit. Even if



                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
there is no first assistant, and the President declines to designate
a Senate-confirmed person to be the acting person, the 150-day pe-
riod begins to run. Thus, the designated person would serve for 150
days less the time that elapsed between the vacancy and the des-
ignation. If the vacancy arises while the Senate is in adjournment
sine die, and thus the acting officer begins to serve during such pe-
riod, the 150-day period is to begin on the date that the Senate
first reconvenes. The only time this provision is relevant is when
the Senate-confirmed person dies, resigns, or becomes ineligible to
serve when the Senate is in adjournment sine die.
   The 150 days is a maximum period, but an acting officer need
not serve the full 150 days. Besides the obvious ending of service
within 150 days if a nominee is confirmed in that time, the Vacan-
cies Act also applies to the beginning of an inability of the applica-
ble officer to serve. When that officer is again eligible to resume
service, he or she may return to the office, thus ending the service
of the acting officer.
   The 150 days runs from the vacancy, "vacancy" referring to the
death, resignation, or beginning of inability to serve of the Senate-
confirmed officer. This meaning of "vacancy" applies each time it
is used in the legislation. When the acting person's 150 days ex-
pires, the position again becomes vacant, but there is no ''vacancy''
that permits another person to serve as acting for another 150
days. Otherwise, a string of acting officials could serve for 150
days. That has never been the understanding of the functioning of
the Vacancies Act, and the Committee reaffirms that there is only
one vacancy that triggers the 150 days.
   An acting officer may die or resign. In that event, the first assist-
ant, if there is one, or a new presidential designee of a Senate-con-
firmed officer may become the acting officer, limited in service as
acting officer to 150 days less the time of service of the first acting
officer. No one else may serve as acting officer. Once again, that
means that if there is no first assistant, and no presidential des-
ignation, no one may serve as acting officer. The prohibition on an
acting officer who was first assistant for less than 180 days of the
365 days prior to the vacancy becoming the nominee for the posi-
tion would still be applicable, since the original vacancy, not the
subsequent departure of the acting officer, is the measuring event.
   Under new section 3346(a)(2), and subject to section 3346(b), an
acting officer may serve more than 150 days if a first or second
nomination is submitted to the Senate, and may serve while that
nomination is pending from the date the nomination is submitted.
The acting officer may serve even if the nomination is submitted
after the 150 days has passed although, as discussed below, the
acting officer may not serve between the 151st day and the day the
nomination is submitted. The Committee extends the time period
for acting service so as to create an incentive for the President to
submit a nomination. The submission of nominations also will lead
to a reduction in the number of acting officials, a goal the Commit-
tee finds highly desirable.
   The statutory language refers to "[tlhe person serving as an act-
ing officer as described under section 3345." The Committee chose
this wording deliberately. That is the only person eligible to be the
acting officer, whether during the 150 days or upon submission of



                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
a nomination. The same considerations apply to the bill's ref-
erences to "the person" in subsections (b) and (c).
   If the first nomination for the office is rejected by the Senate,
withdrawn, or returned to the President by the Senate, the person
may continue to serve as the acting officer for no more than 150
days after the date of such rejection, withdrawal, or return. "Re-
turn" refers to Senate Rule XXXI, which provides that, "[I]f the
Senate shall adjourn or take a recess for more than thirty days, all
nominations pending and not finally acted upon at the time of tak-
ing such adjournment or recess shall be returned by the Secretary
to the President, and shall not again be considered unless they
shall again be made to the Senate by the President." This provision
allows the office to be temporarily filled by "the person" who was
originally eligible to be the acting officer at the time the vacancy
arose while the President is provided 150 days to submit a second
nomination.
   Notwithstanding the 150-day limit on service of an acting officer
following the rejection, withdrawal, or return of a first nomination,
"the person serving as the acting officer" may serve longer than
150 days if, in the cases of rejection or withdrawal of the first
nominee, a second nomination of a different individual for the office
is submitted to the Senate. If the second nomination is submitted
after more than 150 days -after the rejection, withdrawal or return
of the first nomination, the provisions of revised section 3348 will
apply until the second nomination is submitted. If the second nomi-
nee is confirmed within 150 days of the nomination, the term of the
acting officer ceases. In the case of a return, the second nomination
could be of the same individual first nominated. The "person serv-
ing as the acting officer" may serve for 150 days following the rejec-
tion, withdrawal, or rejection of the second nomination. However,
after that 150-day period has elapsed, if no permanent nominee
has been confirmed, the provisions of revised section 3348 apply.
   The revised section 3347 provides that the Vacancies Reform Act
applies to any office of an executive agency (including the Execu-
tive Office of the President) for which appointment is required to
be made by the President by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate. The section does allow temporary appointments to be
made other than through the Vacancies Reform Act in three nar-
rowly delineated exceptions. First, where Congress provides that a
statutory provision expressly provides that it supersedes the Va-
cancies Reform Act, the other statute will/overn. But statutes en-
acted in the future purporting to or argue to be construed to gov-
ern the temporary filling of offices covered by this statute are not
to be effective unless they expressly provide that they are super-
seding the Vacancies Reform Act.
   Second, the bill retains existing statutes that are in effect on the
date of enactment of the Vacancies Act of 1998 that expressly au-
thorize the President, or the head of an executive department to
designate an officer to perform the functions and duties of a speci-
fied office temporarily in an acting capacity, as well as statutes
that expressly provide for the temporary performance of the func-
tions and duties of an office by a particular officer or employee.
(This includes statutes that provide for an automatic designation,
unless the President designates another official). The Committee is



                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
aware of the existence of statutes specifically governing a vacancy
in 41 specific offices, 40 of which would be retained by this bill:
       1. Administrator, Drug Enforcement Administration (5
    U.S.C. Reorg. Plan No.2 of 1973) (two alternatives);
       2. Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency (5 U.S.C.
    Appendix 1);
       3. Administrator, Federal Aviation Administration (49 U.S.C.
    § 106(1));
       4. Administrator, General Services Administration (40 U.S.C.
    § 751(c»;
       5. Administrator, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin-
    istration (5 U.S.C. Appendix 1);
       6. Administrator, Small Business Administration (15 U.S.C.
    § 633(b)(1));
       7. Archivist, National Archives and Records Administration
    (44 U.S.C. § 2103(c»;
       8. Attorney General (28 U.S.C. § 508(a»;
       9. Attorney General (28 U.S.C. § 508(b»;
       10. Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff (10 U.S.C. § 154(d»;
       11. Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff (10 U.S.C. § 154(e»;
       12. Chief Judge, Court of Veterans Appeals (38 U.S.C.
    § 7254(d»;
       13. Chief of Naval Operations (10 U.S.C. § 5035(d)(2»;
       14. Chief of Staff of the Air Force (10 U.S.C. § 8034(d)(2»;
       15. Chief of Staff of the Army (10 U.S.C. § 3034(d)(2»;
       16. Commandant of the Marine Corps (10 U.S.C.
    § 5044(d)(2»;
       17. Commissioner, Social Security Administration (42 U.S.C.
    § 902(b)(4»;
       18. Comptroller General (31 U.S.C. § 703(c»;
       19. Director, Office of Management and Budget (31 U.S.C.
    § 502(f));
       20. Director, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
    (22 U.S.C. § 2563);
       21. Director, U.S. Information Agency (5 U.S.C. Appendix 1);
       22. Director, U.S. International Development Cooperation
    Agency (5 U.S.C. Appendix 1);
       23. General Counsel, Department of the Treasury (31 U.S.C.
    §301(f)(1));                                          .
       24. General Counsel, National Labor Relations Board (29
    U.S.C. § 153(d»;
       25. President, Export-Import Bank (12 U.S.C. § 635a(b»;
       28. Public Printer, Government Printing Office (44 U.S.C.
    § 304);
       29. Secretary of Defense (10 U.S.C. § 132(b»;
       30. Secretary of Education (20 U.S.C. § 3412(a)(1) (two alter-
    natives);
       31. Secretary of Energy (42 U.S.C. § 7132(a» (two alter-
    natives);
       32. Secretary of Health and Human Services (5 U.S.C. Ap-
    pendix 1) (two alternatives);
       33. Secretary of Labor (29 U.S.C. § 552);
       34. Secretary of Transportation (49 U.S.C. § 102(c)(2»;
       35. Secretary of Transportation (49 U.S.C. § 102(e»;



                                                   Automated Reco~ MIP\~~~~1 §~~tem
                                                   Hex-Dump ConvmlOl)
        36. Secretary of the Treasury (31 U.S.C. § 301(c)(2))j
        37. Secretary of Veterans Affairs (38 U.S.C. § 304)j
        38. Special Counsel, Immigration-Related Unfair Employ-
      ment Practices (8 U.S.C. § 1324b(c)(l))j
        39. United States Attorney (28 U.S.C. § 546(a}-(d))j and
        40. United States Marshal (28 U.S.C. § 562(a}-(b)).
   A statute, 42 U.S.C. § 206(a), provides that the Surgeon General
shall assign one commissioned officer from the Regular Corps to act
as Surgeon General in the event of disability or vacancy in that of-
fice. The language of this bill does not retain this statutory means
for filling a vacancy in a specific position.
   Most of these retained statutes do not place time restrictions on
the length of an acting officer. The various authorizing committees
may choose' in the future to reexamine whether these positions
should continue to be filled through the existing procedure, or
whether it would be advisable to repeal those statutes in favor of
the procedures contained in the Vacancies Reform Act. The Com-
mittee believes that some of these statutes may have been passed
without knowledge of the Vacancies Act. In any event, even with
respect to the specific positions in which temporary officers may
serve under the specific statutes this bill retains, the Vacancies Act
would continue to provide an alternative procedure for temporarily
occupying the office.
   The third exception to the applicability of the Vacancies Reform
Act to all executive agency offices that are appointed by the Presi-
dent by and with the advice and consent of the Senate is the Presi-
dent's constitutional power under Article II, sec. 2, cl. 3 to make
appointments during the recess of the Senate.
   The bill provides that any statutory provision providing general
authority to the head of an executive agency to delegate or reassign
duties within that executive agency is not a statutory provision
that qualifies within the exception contained in section 3347(a)(2)
for existing statutes that provide for the filling of a vacancy in a
specific office. This provision forecloses the argument raised by the
Justice Department that sections 28 U.S.C. §§ 509 and 510, rather
than the Vacancies Act, apply to vacancies in that department.
This provision also forecloses the argument that similar language
of vesting and delegation contained in the organic statutes of other
departments, rather than the Vacancies Act, applies to those de-
partments.
   New section 3348 provides an enforcement mechanism for the
legislation. If the President does not submit a nominee for a vacant
executive agency position requiring the advice and consent of the
Senate within 150 days of the vacancy caused by the departure of
the last Senate-confirmed officer, the functions and duties of the of-
fice can be performed only by the head of that agency until a nomi-
nation is forwarded to the Senate.
   The bill defines "function or duty" of the office as those functions
or duties that (1) are established by statute and are required to be
performed only by the applicable officerj (2) are established by reg-
ulation and are required to be performed only by the applicable of-
ficerj (3) were established by regulation and were required to be
performed only by the applicable officer at any time in the 180
days preceding the vacancy, notwithstanding any regulation issued



                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-DumP Conversion
more recently than 180 days before the vacancy occurred that lim-
its or eliminates any function or duty required to be performed only
by the applicable officer. The functions or duties of the office that
can be performed only by the head of the executive agency are
therefore defined as the non-delegable functions or duties of the of-
ficer as they existed at any point during the 180 days prior to the
death, resignation, or inability to serve of the last Senate-confirmed
person to hold the applicable office, less any such duties subse-
quently limited by statute, but including duties subsequently lim-
ited or repealed by regulation, and including any such duties sub-
sequently imposed by statute or regulation. Since so many execu-
tive agency positions filled with the advice and consent of the Sen-
ate lack any meaningful statutory duties, and because internal de-
partmental regulations such as those providing duties for specific
officers can be changed at will without undergoing the notice and
comment process, 5 U.S.C. § 553(b)(3)(A), the Committee defined
the functions and duties of a particular office to be those that ex-
isted at any point in the 180 days prior to the vacancy and those
subsequently added, but not subtracted. Otherwise, agencies and
departments could avoid the enforcement mechanism of making the
office vacant by simply issuing regulations providing that the office
has no non-delegable duties. The Committee believes that the du-
ties as established 180 days before the vacancy is the appropriate
period for freezing the duties because in many instances, the ad-
ministration will know of an upcoming vacancy. The bill does not
include as duties or functions of the office those duties that are lim-
ited or eliminated by statute after the date 180 days preceding the
vacancy. When Congress shifts statutory duties from one agency to
another, or changes the statutory underpinnings of a regulation af-
fecting the duties of an officer, this bill does not extend the life of
those affected regulations. Functions and duties of the office added
by statute or regulation on or after 180 days preceding the vacancy
are defined as functions and duties of the office, and thus, cannot
be performed except by the head of the department or agency if the
vacant office provisions apply.
   Subject to section 3347 and a special rule discussed below when
the 150th day is one on which the Senate is not in session, if 150
days elapses from a vacancy to which this legislation applies with-
out the President having submitted a nomination for the vacant of-
fice to the Senate, the office shall remain vacant until the Presi-
dent submits a nomination to the Senate. After the 151st day until
the date the nomination was made, neither the acting officer nor
anyone else could fill the vacant office. In addition, except in the
case of the head of an executive agency, only the head of that agen-
cy himself or herself could perform any function or duty of the of-
fice as defined in the legislation. Delegable functions of the office
could still be performed by other officers or employees, but the
functions and duties to be performed only by the officer whose ap-
pointment is by the President by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate could be performed solely by the head of the execu-
tive agency. For any such office located within a department, that
would mean that only the head of the department could perform
those functions. All the normal functions of government thus could
still be performed. The legislation only limits the person who may



                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
perfonn them. The goal is not to punish or to obstruct, nor to in-
convenience for the purpose of inconveniencing, but, rather, to en-
courage that a nomination be forwarded to the Senate after more
than sufficient time for doing so has elapsed. Any inconvenience to'
the executive branch can be eliminated instantly by the President's
unilateral decision to make a nomination, for once such a nomina-
tion is made, the acting officer can resume service, including per-
fonning the non-delegable duties of the office.
   If the head of the agency position is vacant for more than 150
days without a nomination being sent to the Senate, the office is
to remain vacant.
   If the President does not submit a second nomination to the Sen-
ate within 150 days after the rejection, withdrawal, or return of the
first nomination, the office will remain vacant, and the non-dele-
gable functions and duties of the office can be performed only by
the head of the executive agency as described above. If an office is
vacant after 150 days after the rejection, withdrawal, or return of
the second nomination, then the office shall remain vacant until a
person is appointed by the President by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, and only the head of the executive agency
may perform any function or duty of such office until the Senate
has confirmed a nominee for the office, as described above. This
provision tracks other provisions in the bill that allow the acting
officer to serve once a first or second nomination is made, even if
more than 150 days have elapsed, but do not permit an additional
opportunity for the acting officer to serve in the event of exceeding
the bill's time limits after disposition of the second nomination.
   If the 150th day following the vacancy, following disposition of a
first nomination other than by confirmation, or following disposi-
tion of a second nomination other than by confinnation falls on a
date the Senate is not in session, then the first day the Senate is
next in session and receiving nominations shall be deemed to be
the last day of such period.
   To enforce section 3348's vacant office and performance of duties
and functions of the office only by the agency head provisions be
enforced, any function or duty of the office taken by a person who
fills that vacancy despite the vacant office provision or who, not
being the agency head, perfonns such a function duty without fill-
ing the office, shall be of no force or effect. Such actions cannot be
made to have force or effect through ratification. For example, the
successor in the office by virtue of his appointment by the Presi-
dent by and with the advice and the consent of the Senate may not
ratify the actions of a person who filled the office in violation of the
legislation's provisions or who, not being the agency head, per-
fonned nondelegable duties of the office. A lawfully serving acting
officer cannot ratify the actions of a temporary officer whose service
does not comply with the Vacancies Reform Act. The agency head
may not ratify an action that is of no force or effect under this leg-
islation that was performed by another official. Nor under well-es-
tablished principles of constitutional law may the President ratify
actions taken by officials that the law has provided shall be per-
formed solely by lower-level executive branch officials. The Com-
mittee expects that litigants with standing to challenge purported
agency actions taken in violation of these provisions will raise non-



                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
compliance with this legislation in a judicial proceeding challenging
the lawfulness of the agency action. It is concerned that the ratifi-
cation approach taken by the court in Doolin would render eMorce-
ment of the Vacancies Reform Act a nullity in many instances.
   Section 3348 does not apply to the General Counsel of the Na-
tional Labor Relations Board, the General Counsel of the Federal
Labor Relations Authority or any inspector general appointed by
the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Although the Committee believes that it has retained the specific
statute that governs vacancies in the office of general counsel of
the National Labor Relations Board, the Committee desires to
make certain that the vacant office provisions do not apply to that
position or its equivalent at the Federal Labor Relations Authority.
These are two unusual positions that require appointment by the
President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. The
positions are within multimember commissions but are not mem-
bers of those commissions. Congress provided for Senate confirma-
tion for these positions because it demands that these officials be
independent of the commissioners. Specifically, it wanted to sepa-
rate the official who would investigate and charge potential viola-
tions of the underlying regulatory statute from the officials who
would determine whether that statute had actually been violated.
If the non-delegable duties of these general counsel were somehow
to be performed by the commissioners, that policy would be obliter-
ated. Thus, section 3345 applies to all advice and consent positions,
but section 3347 retains the existing statutory procedure for filling
a vacancy in the general counsel of the NLRB. Section 3348 states
clearly its inapplicability to the general counsel of the NLRB.
   Under current law, the general counsel of the FLRA is not cov-
ered by the Vacancies Act because of the peculiarity that the posi-
tion requires the advice and consent of the Senate but is not the
head of an agency. Whereas the Justice Department has argued
that its non-coverage under the Vacancies Act means that other
provisions govern acting appointments for its offices, the Depart-
ment has concluded that no statute permits an acting general coun-
sel at the FLRA. Accordingly, in recent years, when that position
has become vacant, no one has performed its duties until a perma-
nent successor has been confirmed by the Senate. Since one of the
duties of that position is to institute proceedings, this has resulted
essentially in the cessation of the agency's functions. S. 2176 covers
the general counsel of the FLRA under sections 3345 and 3346,
permitting an acting officer to serve in case of a vacancy, but ex-
cludes the position from the enforcement mechanisms of section
3348 to preserve the independence of the position.
   Similarly, agency inspectors general are to be independent of the
agencies to which they are assigned. Inspectors general are to in-
vestigate mismanagement in their agency, and often may be criti-
cal of the agency head. If an inspector general whose appointment
was made by the President by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate were to have his functions performed by the agency
head, the agency head might be delighted not to perform them vigi-
lantly. Thus, section 3348 will not apply to this class of inspectors
general.



                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Het.nump Conversion
   Revised section 3349 of the bill requires the head of each execu-
tive agency to submit to the Comptroller General and to each house
of Congress notification of vacancies in positions in their agencies
requiring Senate confirmation, the name of any person serving in
an acting capacity and the date such sllrvice began as soon as such
service began, the name of any person nominated to the Senate to
fill the vacancy as soon as such nomination is submitted, and the
date of a rejection, withdrawal, or return of any nomination as soon
as such rejection, withdrawal, or return occurs. If the Comptroller
General makes a determination that an officer is serving longer
than the 150-day period, including the applicable exceptions to
such period in the legislation, the Comptroller General is to report
such determination to the relevant committees listed in the legisla-
tion, the President, and the Office of Personnel Management. This
function is informational only and does not provide the Comptroller
General with any function properly to be performed only by an ex-
ecutive branch official. The Committee designated the recipients of
the report so that appropriate action can be taken by the individ-
uals who are informed of possible violations of the law.
   New section 3349a extends the 150-day period in sections 3346
and 3348 for vacancies that exist on or that arise within 60 days
after a presidential inaugural transition. In effect, the 150-day pe-
riod becomes 240 days in this circumstance, running from the later
of the date the vacancy arose or the transitional inauguration day.
The bill defines a presidential inaugural transition as a date on
which any person swears or affirms the oath of office as President,
if such person was not the President on the date preceding the date
of the swearing or affirming such oath of office. The time limit is
extended in this circumstance because a new president will have
essentially all positions in the executive branch requiring Senate
confirmation to fill when he assumes office and may require addi-
tional time to nominate individuals to fill them. By the time the
240 days has run, the President would have confirmed sufficient of
his own Senate-confirmed officials to designate as acting officers if
he chose to exercise his power under section 3346, and that could
continue to serve as the acting officer if a permanent nominee were
submitted to the Senate. The provision covers vacancies in posi-
tions requiring Senate confirmation that arise in the 60 days fol-
lowing the presidential inauguration transition because each de-
partment keeps a Senate-confirmed person into a new administra-
tion for a short time in case vacancies in that department are not
able to be filled as quickly as anticipated. The filling of those hold-
over offices should also be subject to the 90-day tolling of the 150-
day period.
   New section 3349b retains existing statutes that provide, with
respect to any independent establishment headed by a single offi-
cer, that that officer can serve after the expiration of his term and
until a successor is appointed or a specified period of time has
elapsed. Whereas section 3347 retains those statutes that provide
a means of succession for an acting person to perform the duties
of a specified office, section 3349b retains statutes affecting specific
independent establishments headed by a single officer that do not
provide for an acting officer, but which instead permit the officer
to serve until his successor is appointed or for a specified period of


                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
time. These statutes govern the Chairman of the National Endow-
ment for the Arts (20 U.S.C. § 954(b)(2)), the Chairman of the Na-
tional Endowment for the Humanities (20 U.S.C. § 956(b)(2», the
Special Counsel of the Office of Special Counsel (5 U.S.C.
§ 1211(b», and the Commissioner of the Social Security Administra-
tion (42 U.S.C. § 90I(a)(3». Independent establishments headed by
a single officer previously covered by the Vacancies Act continue to
be so covered under this legislation.
   New section 3349c provides that the Vacancies Reform Act shall
not apply to any member appointed by the President by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate to a board, commission, or
similar entity that is composed of multiple members, and governs
an independent establishment or Government corporation. The
Committee believes that this has always been the case with the re-
spect to the Vacancies Act and wishes to avoid any confusion that
might result from the enactment of a replacement statute on this
point. Thus, vacancies in these positions are not covered by this
legislation. Section 3349c excludes commissioners of the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission from the Vacancies Act as well,
since it is an anomaly: the only multi-member independent agency
that Congress has not placed in an independent establishment but
in a department. Subsection (b) of section 3349c makes technical
and confirming changes.
   Section 3 of the legislation specifies its effective date. The legisla-
tion takes effect on the date of enactment, and shall apply to any
office that becomes vacant after the date of enactment of this legis-
lation or that is vacant on that date, although, as to the latter, its
provisions shall apply as though such office first became vacant on
that date. Thus, the 150-day period for those offices that are vacant
on the date the legislation is enacted begins on the date the legisla-
tion is enacted, rather than the date the vacancy arose.
                VII.   REGULATORY IMPACT STATEMENT
   Paragraph l1(b)(I) of rule XXVI of the Standing Rules of the
Senate requires that each report accompanying a bill evaluate "the
regulatory impact which would be incurred in carrying out this
bill."
  The enactment of this legislation will not have significant regu-
latory impact.




                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
             VIII. COST ESTIMATE OF THE LEGISLATION
                                        U.S. CONGRESS,
                             CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE,
                                  Washington, DC, July 1, 1998.
Hon. FRED D. THOMPSON,
Chairman, Committee on Governmental Affairs, U.S. Senate, Wash-
     ington, DC.
  DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: The Congressional Budget Office has pre-
pared the enclosed cost estimate for S. 2176, the Federal Vacancies
Reform Act of 1998.
  If you wish further details on this estimate, we will be pleased
to provide them. The CBO staff contact is John R. Righter.
       Sincerely,
                                       JUNE E. O'NEILL, Director.
  Enclosure.
           CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE COST ESTIMATE
S. 2176-Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998
   S. 2176 would amend the Vacancies Act to clarifY requirements
relating to vacancies in and appointments to executive branch posi-
tions, including limitations on the amount of time that unconfirmed
appointees can remain in office. It also would require the head of
each executive branch agency to submit certain information regard-
ing vacancies and appointments to the General Accounting Office.
CBO estimates that enacting S. 2176 would have no significant im-
pact on the federal budget.
   Pay-as-you-go considerations: None.
   Intergovernmental and private-sector impact: S. 2176 contains no
intergovernmental or private-sector mandates as defined in the Un-
funded Mandates Reform Act and would have no impact on state,
local, or tribal governments.
   Estimate prepared by: John R. Righter.
   Estimate approved by: Paul N. Van de Water, Assistant Director
for Budget Analysis.
                   IX. CHANGES IN EXISTING LAW
   In compliance with paragraph 12 of rule XXVI of the Standing
Rules of the Senate, changes in existing law made by the bill, as
reported are shown as follows (existing law proposed to be omitted
is enclosed in black brackets, new matter is printed in italic, exist-
ing law with no change proposed is shown in roman):




                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

                   UNITED STATES CODE
 TITLE 5, GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
            AND EMPLOYEES
                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

                         PART III-EMPLOYEES
               Subpart B-Employment and Retention
      CHAPTER S3-EXAMINATION, SELECTION, AND PLACEMENT
                               [Subchapter III-Details
[3341. Details; within Executive or military departments.
[[3342. Repealed.]
[3343. Details; to international organizations.
[3344. Details; administrative law judges.
[3345. Details; to office of head of Executive agency or military department.
[3346. Details; to subordinate offices.
[3347. Details; Presidential authority.
[3348. Details; limited in time.
[3349. Details; to fill vacancies; restrictions.]
             Subchapter III-Details, Vacancie., and Appointment.
3341. Details; within Executiue or military departments.
[3342. Repealed.}
3343. Details; to international organizations.
3344. Details; administratiue law judges.
3345. Acting officer.
3346. Time limitation.
3347. Application.
3348. Vacant office.
3349. Reporting of uacancies.
3349a. Presidential inaugural transitions.
3349b. Holdouer prouisions relating to certain independent establishments.
3349c. Exclusion of certain officers.

                      PART III-EMPLOYEES
         Subpart B-Employment and Retention
       CHAPTER 33-EXAMINATION, SELECTION, AND
                     PLACEMENT
                        [Subchapter III-Details]
    Subchapter III-Details, Vacancies, and Appointments
[§ 3345. Details; to office of head of Executive agency or
           military department
  [When the head of an Executive agency (other than the General
Accounting Office) or military department dies, resigns, or is sick
or absent, his first assistant, unless otherwise directed by the
President under section 3347 of this title, shall perform the duties
of the office until a successor is appointed or the absence or sick-
ness stops.]


                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
§3345. Acting officer
   (a) If an officer of an Executive agency (including the Executive
Office of the President, and other than the General Accounting Of-
fice) whose appointment to office is required to be made by the
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, dies,
resigns, or is otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties
of the office-
         (1) the first assistant of such officer shall perform the func-
      tions and duties of the office temporarily in an acting capacity,
      subject to the time limitations of section 3346; or
         (2) notwithstanding paragraph (1), the President (and only
      the President) may direct a person who serves in an office for
      which appointment is required to be made by the President, by
      and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to perform the
      functions and duties of the office temporarily in an acting ca-
      pacity, subject to the time limitations of section 3346.
   (b) Notwithstanding section 3346(a)(2), a person may not serve as
an acting officer for an office under this section, if-
         (1) on the date of the death, resignation, or beginning of in-
      ability to server of the applicable officer, such person serves in
      the position of first assistant to such officer;
         (2) during the 365-day period preceding such date, such per-
      son served in the position of first assistant to such officer for
      less than 180 days; and
         (3) the President submits a nomination of such person to the
      Senate for appointment to such office.
   (c) With respect to the office of the Attorney General of the United
States, the provisions of section 508 of title 28 shall be applicable.
[§ 3346. Details; to subordinate offices
   [When an officer of a bureau of an Executive department or mili-
tary department, whose appointment is not vested in the head of
the department, dies, resigns, or is sick or absent, his first assist-
ant, unless otherwise directed by the President under section 3347
of this title, shall perform the duties of the office until a successor
is appointed or the absence or sickness stops.]
§ 3346. Time limitation
   (a) The person serving as an acting officer as described under sec-
tion 3345 may serve in the office-
         (1) for no longer than 150 days beginning on the date the va-
      cancy occurs; or
        (2) subject to subsection (b), once a first or second nomination
      for the office is submitted to the Senate from the date of such
      nomination, for the period that the nomination is pending in
      the Senate.
   (b)(1) If the first nomination for the office is rejected by the Sen-
ate, withdrawn, or returned to the President by the Senate, the per-
son may continue to serve as the acting officer for no more than 150
days after the date of such rejection, withdrawal, or return.
   (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), if a second nomination for the
office (of a different person than first nominated in the case of a re-
jection or withdrawal) is submitted to the Senate after the rejection,


                                                   Automated Records Mwsemelll ~y~tem
                                                   Hex-Dwnp Convoralon
withdrawal, or return of the first nomination, the person serving as
the acting officer may continue to serve-
        (A) until the second nomination is confirmed; or
        (B) for no more than 150 days after the second nomination
     is rejected, withdrawn, or returned.
  (c) If a person begins serving as an acting officer during an ad-
journment of the Congress sine die, the ISO-day period under sub-
section (a) shall begin on the date that the Senate first reconvenes.
[§ 3347. Details; Presidential authority
   [Instead of a detail under section 3345 or 3346 of this title, the
President may direct the head of another Executive department or
military department or another officer of an Executive department
or military department, whose appointment is vested in the Presi-
dent, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to perform
the duties of the office until a successor is appointed or the absence
or sickness stops. This section does not apply to a vacancy in the
office of Attorney General.]
§3347. Application.
   (a) Sections 3345 and 3346 are applicable to any office of an Ex-
ecutive agency (including the Executive Office of the President, and
other than the General Accounting Office) for which appointment is
required to be made by the President, by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, unless-
        (1) another statutory provision expressly provides that the
      such provision supersedes sections 3345 and 3346;
        (2) a statutory provision in effect on the date of enactment of
      the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998 expressly-
              (A) authorizes the President, a court, or the head of an
           Executive department, to designate an officer or employee to
          perform the functions and duties of a specified office tempo-
           rarily in an acting capacity; or
              (B) designates an officer or employee to perform the func-
           tions and duties of a specified office temporarily in an act-
           ing capacity; or
        (3) the President makes an appointment to fill a vacancy in
      such office during the recess of the Senate pursuant to clause
      3 of section 2 of article II of the United States Constitution.
   (b) Any statutory provision providing general authority to the
head of an Executive agency (including the Executive Office of the
President, and other than the General Accounting Office) to delegate
duties to, or to reassign duties among, officers or employees of such
Federal agency, is not a statutory provision to which subsection
(a)(2) applies.
[§ 3348. Details; limited in time
  [(a) A vacancy caused by death or resignation may be filled tem-
porarily under section 3345, 3346, or 3347 of this title for not more
than 120 days, except that-
       [(1) if a first or second nomination to fill such vacancy has
    been submitted to the Senate, the position may be filled tempo-
    rarily under section 3345, 3346, or 3347 of this title-
            [(A) until the Senate confirms the nomination; or




                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
             [(B) until 120 days after the date on which either the
          Senate rejects the nomination or the nomination is with-
          drawn; or
        [(2) if the vacancy occurs during an adjournment of the Con-
     gress sine die, the position may be filled temporarily until 120
     days after the Congress next convenes, subject thereafter to
     the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
   [(b) Any person filling a vacancy temporarily under section 3345,
3346, or 3347 of this title whose nomination to fill such vacancy
has been submitted to the Senate may not serve after the end of
the 120-day period referred to in paragraph (l)(B) or (2) of sub-
section (a) of this section, if the nomination of such person is re-
jected by the Senate or is withdrawn.]
§ 3348. Vacant office
  (a) In this section-
       (1) the term "action" includes any agency actions as defined
     under section 551(13); and
       (2) the term "function or duty" means any function or duty of
     the applicable office that-
             (A)(i) is established by statute; and
             (ii) is required by statute to be performed by the applica-
          ble officer (and only that officer); or
             (B)(i)(l) is established by regulation; and
             (II) is required by such regulation to be performed by the
          applicable officer (and only that officer); and
             (ii) includes a function or duty to which clause (l) (l) and
          (II) applies, and the applicable regulation is in effect at any
          time during the lBO-day period preceding the date on
          which the vacancy occurs, notwithstanding any regulation
          that-
                   (l) is issued on or after the date occurring 1BO days
                before the date on which the vacancy occurs; and
                   (II) limits any function or duty required to be per-
                formed by the applicable officer (and only that officer).
  (b) Subject to section 3347 and subsection (c)-
       (1) if the President does not submit a first nomination to the
    Senate to fill a vacant office within 150 days after the date on
     which a vacancy occurs:-
             (A) the office shall remain vacant until the President sub-
          mits a first nomination to the Senate; and
             (B) in the case of an office other than the office of the
          head of an Executive agency (including the Executive Office
          of the President, and other than the General Accounting Of-
          fice), only the head of such Executive agency may perform
          any function or duty of such office, until a nomination is
          made in accordance with subparagraph (AJ;
       (2) if the President does not submit a second nomination to
     the Senate within 150 days after the date of the rejection, with-
    drawal, or return of the first nomination-
             (A) the office shall remain vacant until the President sub-
          mits a second nomination to the Senate; and                    .
             (B) in the case of any office other than the office of the
          head of an Executive agency (including the Executive Office



                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          lielt-Dtlmp:COnverSion
            of the President, and other than the General Accounting Of-
            fice), only the head of such Executive agency may perform
            any function or duty of such officer, until a nomination is
            made in accordance with subparagraph (A); and
         (3) if an office is vacant after 150 days after the rejection,
      withdrawal, or return of the second nomination-
               (AJ the office shall remain vacant until a person is ap-
            pointed by the President, by and with the advice and con-
            sent of the Senate; and
               (B) in the case of an office other than the office of the
            head of an Executive agency (including the Executive Office
            of the President, and other than the General Accounting Of-
            fice), only the head of such Executive agency may perform
            any function or duty of such office, until an appointment is
            made in accordance with subparagraph (A).
   (c) If the last day of any 150-day period under subsection (b) is
a day on which the Senate is not in session, the first day the Senate
is next in session and receiving nominations shall be deemed to be
the last day of such period.
   (d)(1) Except as provided under paragraphs (1)(B), (2)(B), and
(3)(B) of subsection (b), an action shall have no force or effect if such
action-
         (A)(i) is taken by any person who fills a vacancy in violation
      of subsection (b); and
         (ii) is the performance of a function or duty of such vacant
      office; or
         (B)(i) is taken by a person who is not filling a vacant office;
      and
         (ii) is the performance of a function or duty of such vacant
      office.
   (2) An action that has no force or effect under paragraph (1) may
not be ratified.
   (e) this section shall not apply to-
         (1) the General Counsel of the National Labor Relations
      Board;
         (2) the General Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations Au-
      thority; or
         (3) any Inspector General appointed by the President, by and
      with the advice and consent of the Senate.
[§ 3349. Details; to fill vacancies; restrictions
   [A temporary appointment, designation, or assignment of one of-
ficer to perform the duties of another under section 3345 or 3346
of this title may not be made otherwise than as provided by those
sections, except to fill a vacancy occurring during a recess of the
Senate']
§ 3349. Reporting     of vacancies
   (a) The head of each Executive agency (including the Executive
Office of the President, and other than the General Accounting Of-
fice) shall submit to the Comptroller General of the United States
and to each House of Congress-
        (1) notification of a vacancy and the date such vacancy oc- .
      curred immediately upon the occurrence of the vacancy;


                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Holt.Dump Conversion
       (2) the name of any person serving in an acting capacity and
     the date such service began immediately upon the designation;
       (3) the name of any person nominated to the Senate to fill the
     vacancy and the date such nomination is submitted imme-
     diately upon the submission of the nomination; and
       (4) the date of a rejection, withdrawal, or return of any nomi-
     nation immediately upon such rejection, withdrawal, or return.
  (b) If the Comptroller General of the United States makes a deter-
mination that an officer is serving longer than the l50-day period
including the applicable exceptions to such period under section
3346, the Comptroller General shall report such determination to-
       (1) the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate;
       (2) the Committee on Government Reform and Oversight of
     the House of Representatives;
       (3) the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and
    House of Representatives;
       (4) the appropriate committees of jurisdiction of the Senate
    and House of Representatives;
       (5) the President; and
       (6) the Office of Personnel Management.
§3349a. Presidential inaugural transitions
   (a) In this section, the term "transitional inauguration day"
means the date on which any person swears or affirms the oath of
office as President, if such person is not the President on the date
preceding the date of swearing or affirming such oath of office.
   (b) With respect to any vacancy that exists during the 60-day pe-
riod beginning on a transitional inauguration day, the l50-day pe-
riod under section 3346 or 3348 shall be deemed to begin on the
later of the date occurring-
       (1) 90 days after such transitional inauguration day; or
       (2) 90 days after the date on which the vacancy occurs.
§3349b. Holdover provisions relating to certain independent
            establishments
   With respect to any independent establishment for which a single
officer is the head of the establishment, sections 3345 through 3349a
shall not be construed to affect any statute that authorizes a person
to continue to serve in any office-
        (1) after the expiration of the term for which such person is
     appointed; and
       (2) until a successor is appointed or a specified period of time
     has expired.
§ 3349c_ Exclusion of certain officers
   Sections 3345 through 3349b shall not apply to-
       W any member who is appointed by the President, by and
    with the advice and consent of the Senate to any board, com-
    mission, or similar entity that-
            (A) is composed of multiple members; and
            (B) governs an independent establishment or Government
         corporation; or
      (2). any commissioner of the Federal Energy Regulatory Com-
    mLSSlOn.




                                             Automated Records Managemel",( SYSli.:L'
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
   The Committee on Governmental Affairs has a long list of legis-
lative accomplishments that have enhanced the efficiency and effec-
tiveness of the Federal government. These milestones were
achieved with bipartisan support in both Democratic and Repub-
lican controlled Administrations and Congresses. The Vacancies
Act should be no exception. As the Majority's Report well explains,
the Vacancies Act is in need of reform. For too long, the Executive
Branch's interpretation and implementation of that law have
stripped it of its original intent and, on occasion, effectively de-
prived the Senate of its constitutional right to partake in the ap-
pointment of a number of Federal officers. Nevertheless, although
we share the Majority's desire to amend the Vacancies Act-and
agree with many, if not most, of the policy choices contained in S.
2176-we write separately to emphasize a number of concerns we
have about the current draft of the bill. Although these concerns
were not sufficient to prevent us from voting to report the bill out
of Committee, they are nonetheless serious and, we believe, need
to be addressed before the bill is ready for final action on the Sen-
ate floor.
   Some of our reservations about the bill are largely technical, re-
flecting our concern that the bill, in fact, could be misinterpreted
and fail to do what the Committee intends it to do. Others are
more substantive in nature and rest on our fear that the Commit-
tee's understandable desire to protect the Senate's constitutional
prerogatives may have led it to create a situation that could pre-
vent the Executive Branch from efficiently and effectively fulfilling
its constitutional duties to execute the Congress' laws. We discuss
these concerns in detail below. We remain hopeful that, in the bi-
partisan spirit in which this legislation has thus far progressed, we
can work out all of them before moving this bill further in the leg-
islative process.
   We are pleased that the Majority included us in the discussions
leading up to the introduction and markup of S. 2176, and we be-
lieve that, due to those discussions, agreement was reached in four
significant areas: (1) the time period of 150 days for service by an
acting official absent a nomination, (2) the need for a "cure" in the
case of a nomination made subsequent to the expiration of such pe-
riod to allow an acting official to resume the functions and duties
of the vacant office, (3) the exclusivity of the Act except in cases
in which Congress makes clear it is specifying an alternative or
supplemental means for filling vacancies, and (4) the necessity of
an enforcement mechanism to encourage nominations to be made
in a timely manner.
   While these four areas are addressed in the bill, we remain con-
cerned that § 3348, the enforcement mechanism, as drafted, may
not operate to achieve our goals. We must be sure that the oper-
                                (30)




                                             Automated Records Management System
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
  ation of this provision does not cause an unintended shutdown of
  the Federal agency within which the vacancy exists due to adminis-
  trative paralysis and that the provision is drafted clearly so that
  its scope, mainly the extent of government functions and duties it
  would affect, is well understood. We must be clear that the non-
  delegable duties we intend to have performed only by the agency
  head in the event of a vacancy beyond the 150 days without a nom-
  ination are only those expressly vested by law or regulation exclu-
  sively in the vacant position. In this regard, we acknowledge and
  appreciate the Majority's statement that "all the normal functions
  of government thus could still be performed." For example, where
  a statute or regulation specifies that an Assistant Secretary for Pol-
  icy Development is responsible for overseeing policy development,
  the development of policy would continue, but if a non-delegable
  approval is necessary to implement the policy, that approval must
  be performed by the agency head during a vacancy.
     One other concept in § 3348 bears emphasis. The non-delegable
  duties of an agency head are not addressed in this legislation be-
  cause the Committee expects that there will never be a case where
  a nomination for these positions is not timely submitted.
     We would like to see serious consideration given to who, other
  than the first assistant or another Presidentially-appointed, Senate
  confirmed official designated by the President, as a qualifYing act-
  ing official. We recognize the policy of maintaining the continuity
  and regularity of the vacated office by allowing a first assistant to
  automatically succeed to the position and the policy of allowing any
. individual nominated by the President and confirmed by the Sen-
  ate to fil! any "advice and consent" position. However, we believe
  that more flexibility is advisable and that our ultimate goal should
  be to ensure that the most qualified individual available fills the
  position. One possible alternative would be to allow a third cat-
  egory of individuals to temporarily fill positions, such as a qualified
  individuals who have worked within the agency in which the va-
  cancy occurs for a minimum number of days and who are' of a mini-
  mum grade level.
     On related point, we believe the length of service requirement for
  first assistants who are nominees should be reevaluated. Senator·
  Glenn offered an amendment at the Committee's June 17, 1998
  markup to shorten the period required for an acting official who
  was a first assistant to be a nominee. As Senator Glenn noted at
  markup, this requirement would preclude service by a first assist-
  ant who naturally ascends to that position from within the agency,
  who might be a logical choice to fill the vacancy on a permanent
  basis. In considering shortening this requirement, we should strive
  to ensure the smooth flow of government activity, not penalize the
  individual, the agency or the taxpayers. We reiterate our pref-
  erence for shortening this requirement.
     We would also like to see a "safety valve" provision considered
  which would extend the 150-day period for a temporary appoint-
  ment for an additional period of time if the President certifies that
  it is in the national interest to suspend or lengthen the period.
  Such "interests" could include reasons relating to national security,
  public health and safety, or financial stability. We recommend that



                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
information be gathered to determine which critical functions affect
such interests.
   We believe that special consideration should be given to a situa-
tion in which a new president is being inaugurated. In such a case,
especially when there is a change in the political party of the new
president, there is unlikely, in many cases, to be a first assistant
who, according to the bill's length of service requirement, would be
eligible to both serve as the acting official and be the nominee. This
limits a new Administration which may want to put its qualified
people in acting positions and nominate them as well. The Senate
should consider whether it is advisable to prohibit this type of serv-
ice categorically or whether a more narrow compromise would be
possible. In addition, we should ensure that the extended time pe-
riod for temporary appointments at the beginning of a new Admin-
istration 1 accurately reflects the reality of the nomination process
when a new President assumes office. We would not want to ham-
per future Administrations' ability to become operational as quickly
as possible.                                                       .
   At markup, the Committee also discussed whether nominations
could be sent up during a recess of the Senate. Specifically, we be-
lieve it is still unclear whether the bill, as written, would allow the
Administration to cure a violation by making a nomination during
recesses of the Senate. While it is clear that the Senate regularly
authorizes itself to accept Presidential messages during its re-
cesses,2 and the President is permitted to submit nominations to
the Senate at any time,3 in practice, nominations are not sent up
during recesses. We are concerned with assuring the smooth func-
tioning of Government. One of our overriding concerns in reforming
the Vacancies Act should be to ensure that we are not overburden-
ing an agency head with the non-delegable responsibilities of other
positions where such a situation can be avoided. We urge the Sen-
ate to consider remedying this situation by allowing the President
to effectively notice the Senate with a letter of intent including the
name of a nominee and a statement that he intends to nominate
that person when the Senate reconvenes. By allowing such letter,
the Senate would allow the President to exercise good faith where
he wants to avoid using a recess appointment. 4
   Finally, we would hope that consideration will be given to in-
creasing the one-day requirement of § 3348(c). While we are
pleased that a recess will toll the temporary appointment period,
to guard against an Administration's inadvertently missing the
one-day window and certain functions and duties unnecessarily
being delegated to the agency head, we recommend adding two
days to the requirement that the President submit a nomination
the day the Senate reconvenes.
   As mentioned above, there are several other issues of concern to
us which we believe are of a technical nature. While they are im-
   1 The extended time periods provided in § 3349b total 240 days 6S the period for temporary
appointments in a new Administration. This time period is applicable to all vacancies that arise
from the date of the inauguration of the new President and for the subsc'Iuent 60 days.
   2 See 139 CR 8 (1993), 141 CR S9 (daily cd. Jan. 4, 1995), 143 CR S8 daily cd. Jan. 7, 1997).
   :I See Floyd M. Riddick and Alan S. Frumin, Riddick's Senate Procedure, p. 949 (Rev. Ed.
1992).
   4. President Clinton has exercised his Constitutionally mandated recess appointment power 45
times in five years, President Bush made 78 recess appointments in four years and President
Reagan made 239 in eight years.




                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   fl~·D~p Conversion
portant issues in that their resolution affects the way a new law
could be interpreted, because there is agreement between Majority
and Minority staffs to aim to address these issues in a Managers'
Amendment as the bill is considered by the full Senate, such issues
will not be enumerated here. It is our hope that all of our concerns
will be addressed in future discussions before S. 2176 is presented
for debate on the Senate floor.
   We cannot leave the topic of the process by which the President
nominates federal officials without touching on the process by
which the Senate confirms them. It is getting increasingly difficult
to attract the best and brightest to government service, and those
who serve in Presidentially-appointed, Senate confirmed positions
are doing so for an average of less than two and a half years. And
because the time period from vacancy through confirmation has be-
come increasingly lengthy, we must go through this arduous proc-
ess often multiple times within a single Administration. We agree
that the Executive Branch too often takes too long to submit nomi-
nations to the Senate and that this delay not only intrudes upon
the Senate's constitutional prerogatives but also impedes the good
functioning of government. At the same time, however, we would
be truly remiss if we failed to acknowledge that blame in this area
does not rest in the Executive Branch alone; the Senate has fre-
quently declined to exercise its advice and consent responsibility in
a timely and appropriate manner. Too often, nominations die in
Committee, languish on the Executive Calendar, or simply take
months or years to move through this Chamber. While the Senate
remains free to reject the President's nominees when appropriate,
it owes it to both the Executive, and more importantly, the Amer-
ican people, to discharge its constitutional duty to offer-and not
withhold-its advice and, where appropriate, timely consent. We
hope that in the future the Senate is willing to commit itself to act
to reform its confirmation process in the same bi-partisan spirit we
expect it to exhibit in enacting this legislation.
                                   JOHN GLENN.
                                   CARL LEVIN.
                                   JOE LIEBERMAN.
                                   MAx CLELAND.
                                   ROBERT TORRICELLI.




                                                Automated Records Management System
                                               HeX-Dump Conversion
   While we associate ourselves with the concerns outlined in the
Additional Views of Senator John Glenn, our serious reservations
abut the bill prevents us from supporting this legislation in its
present form. Revisions to the Vacancies Act must reflect the reali-
ties of the nomination and confirmation process as it have evolved
over the last several years. Furthermore, it is important to recog-
nize the implication of imposing unrealistic expectations or restric-
tions on the process which could force the President to expand the
use of recess appointment authority.
   We recognize the need to safeguard the Senate's constitutional
prerogative to advise and consent to nominations of executive offi-
cers, and do not oppose efforts to clarify and bolster the Vacancies
Act as the executive mechanism (with limited and explicit excep-
tion) for the President to designate officials to temporarily fill va-
cancies in positions requiring Senate confirmation. Unfortunately,
this bill goes well beyond that justifiable but limited goals.
   We are concerned that this bill would impede the functioning of
the Executive Branch. Concerns about the inability of Presidents to
promptly submit nominees to fill positions requiring Senate con-
firmation has been a driving force prompting periodic reevaluation
of Vacancies Act provisions throughout the last two centuries, in-
cluding the present instance. Yet merely adding 30 days to the
time permitted under current law for positions to be temporarily
filled by an acting official is, in our opinion, wholly inadequate and
impractical.
   While the White House certainly bears some responsibility for
the time it takes to select and advance nominees, it is a respon-
sibility that is shared by the Senate. Given that the protracted, ar-
duous, and unduly politicized Senate confirmation process contrib-
utes to making it increasingly more difficult to identify, recruit,
and screen candidates for Federal appointments, it is imprudent to
impose rigid statutory deadlines and to limit the persons eligible
to serve temporarily as acting officers in vacant positions. Within
substantial changes, we cannot support this bill.
   First, this legislation too narrowly restricts who can function in
an "acting" capacity. Section 3345(a)(l) of the bill can be read to
provide that, aside from another Senate-confirmed Presidential ap-
pointee designated by the President, only the "first assistant" to
the particular Senate confirmed officer who dies, resigns or is other
unable to perform the functions and duties of the position, can be
an acting officer. Early in the Administration of a newly-inaugu-
rated President, virtually the only person who could serve as acting
officers would be the first assistants from the prior Administration,
since transferring another PAS person would merely create a new
vacancy elsewhere. Moreover, the Senate could prolong the tenure
of those holdover officers simply by delaying or failing to confirm
                                 (34)




                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
the President's nominee. No President should have to accept such
a state of affairs.
   Moreover, mandating that only first assistant or Senate-con-
firmed officials are eligible to serve as acting officers promotes no
legitimate public policy. Indeed, this limitation prevents a Presi-
dent from naming an experienced career employee as an acting offi-
cial, in favor of a person lacking broad experience who was brought
into Department by the departing official. Consequently, the bill
could preclude the President from naming the most qualified per-
son to serve as an acting officer. In addition, the lack of a first as-
sistant to a particular office that becomes vacant would leave the
position vacant until such time as the President designates a pre-
viously Senate-confirmed official to temporarily fill that vacancy as
an acting official. Given the tight time period of the Act, we fail to
see why this provision should be so narrowly drawn. Without any
justification based on its institutional interests, the Senate would
do a great disservice by adopting such a restrictive measure. There-
fore, we endorse Senator Glenn's suggestion that serious consider-
ation be given to establishing a third category of individuals eligi-
ble to temporarily fill vacant positions.
   Second, the unalterable 150 day time limit on service by acting
officers is far too rigid. Indeed, it could impair the national inter-
est. Circumstances may arise under which the President is unable
to nominate an individual for a particular office within 150 days
of a vacancy. Under this bill, the office would have to remain va-
cant even if that vacancy would undermine national security, im-
pede public health and safety, threaten financial stability, or inter-
fere with law enforcement. We believe there should be a flexible
"safety valve" available for exceptional situations, whereby the
President could certifY to the Senate that a reasonable amount of
additional time is needed to designate the appropriate nominee and
that it is essential for the acting officer to continue to perform
these critical tasks in the interim without interruption.
   Third, while it would not affect this President, experience has
shown that at the beginning of a new Administration, filling posi-
tions in the government requires time far longer than that speci-
fied in this bill. At the outset of a new Administration, a President
must nominate individuals to at least 320 positions in the 14 exec-
utive departments in addition to appointing hundreds of other em-
ployees who do not require confirmation. The new President cannot
possibly make all required nominations within the 240 days al-
lowed by the bill. In 1993, when the nominations process was, if
anything, simpler than it is today, the new Administration was
able to forward only 68% of nominations within the first 240 days,
leaving 32% of positions unfilled. Unless this time period is
changed, the next Administration could effectively be facing depart-
mental shutdowns before the new President can even begin to ac-
complish what he was elected to do.
   Finally, our concern about these time limitations and the con-
straints on who can be appointed is magnified many times by the
enforcement mechanism the bill establishes. It is essentially a
sanction of administrative immobilization. Section 3348 of the bill
specifies that if the President fails to forward a nomination within
the 150-day span following the occurrence of a vacancy or the with-




                                                  Automated Records Management Syfl1em
                                                  Hex.Dump Conversion
drawal, rejection, or return of a first nomination, the office in ques-
tion must remain vacant until a nomination is made. No one-
apart from the head of the agency-can perform the functions and
duties of the office. It is imperative that the bill unequivocally en-
sure that the affected functions and duties of the office are only
those that are expressly deemed nondelegable by statute or regula-
tion. Absent that clarity, whole components of federal agencies
would have to stop their work. The potential bottleneck created by
this provision would prevent the Executive Branch from doing its
job. The Senate has tried before to enforce its policy preferences by
shutting down the federal government. It was a bad idea then, and
its still is now.
   As we noted, the Senate bears partial responsibility for the time
it takes to nominate officials from Senate confirmed positions. To
further amplify, this Congress has subjected the Administration's
nominees to unprecedented scrutiny, using almost any prior alleged
indiscretion-no matter how trivial-by a nominee as an excuse to
delay or prevent a vote. Senators have also interjected themselves
into the President's nominations process to an unparalleled degree.
As a result, that process-the selection, recruitment, and vetting of
candidates-takes longer than ever before. While the Administra-
tion may well bear some responsibility for the slow/ace of nomina-
tions, we find it troublesome that the Senate woul so severely re-
strict the ability to fill vacant positions temporarily and to conduct
the people's business while at the same time impeding the nomina-
tions process and confirming nominees at a snail's pace.
   This President has made every effort to accommodate Senators'
views about particular positions and nominees. Moreover, this
President has used his power to make recess appointments far less
than his predecessors. President Reagan made 239 recess appoint-
ments in eight years; President Bush made 78 recess appointments
in four years. President Clinton has made only 45 recess appoint-
ments in his first five years in office. If this bill passes, we antici-
pate that the President will have no alternative but to make more
recess appointments. That will hardly vindicate the Senate's advise
and consent function.
   We are anxious to craft a bill that fully protects the Senate's ad-
vise and consent function, while affording the Executive Branch the
flexibility it needs to faithfully discharge the laws. In its current
form, this bill does not do that. Without changes to address the
problems identified above, we cannot support it.
                                    RICHARD DURBIN.
                                    DANIEL K. AKAKA.

                                  o




                                                          Automated Records Management Sy stelll
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


