 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TlME:21-JUL-1998 15:43:20.00

 SUBJECT:   Latest rough draft

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Latest draft of rural agenda for Thursday.
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP on 07/21/98
 03:42 PM ---------------------------




 Jonathan A. Kaplan
 07/21/98 03:19:39 PM
 Record Type:    Record

 To:      Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP
 cc:      Lowell A. Weiss/WHO/EOP
 Subject:         Latest rough draft




 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D9]MAIL45495680H.226 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF57504313130000010A02010000000205000000EB730000000200006F4D01814CA8911FB93468
 90B4E873AC5E69F23F8BC2801C5AB947792053957DC79861C911B7083106FE9C4ED8A55D9B4380
 95AA155E19A1855310BE49D52E94A4B9698139905BA7F767ECA6204OA91205CABF30330FDD88E7
 COB60BF51CDC8F7D1CD89C5EE45F43C042E676D7E2002679170430F62203B4CC2B9296DD5EE88E


FIVE AND A HALF YEARS OF PROGRESS. For five and a half years, President Clinton and Vice
President Gore have worked to expand opportunity for rural Americans and farm families. The
Administration has worked to help farmers manage risk and address market volatility, provided
critical disaster assistance to rural homeowners, farm owners, and business owners, as well as to
ranchers who have lost livestock, expanded U.S. agricultural exports, improved our school lunch
programs by buying surplus commodities, and worked to diversify the sources of enterprise and
income in rural America.

SEVERAL CHALLENGES REMAIN. But rural America still faces challenges -- with the economic
crisis in Asia weakening some of our best customers for farm products, with strong world crop
production bringing prices down, and with farmers facing floods and fires and drought and crop
disease. President Clinton's four-point action plan for rural America addresses these challenges
by:

              Expanding the rural economy through exports and development;
              Improving the farm income safety net;
              Strengthening our rural infrastructure by improving transportation, protecting
              universal service, and improving our schools; and
              Promoting health and welfare for rural America


               A FOUR-POINT ACTION PLAN FOR RURAL AMERICA

1.     EXPANDING THE RURAL ECONOMY THROUGH EXPORTS AND DEVELOPMENT

      Implementing the Wheat Purchase Initiative. On Saturday, President Clinton took strong
       steps to help our family farmers and to reduce crop surpluses at home. He directed the
       Secretary of Agriculture to purchase more than 80 million bushels of wheat, which could lift
       prices as much as 13 cents a bushel. With this wheat, the President will launch a new food
       aid initiative to press the world struggle against hunger. Secretary Glickman, working with
       our Agency for International Development, will oversee substantial donations of U.S. wheat
       to countries where the need is greatest -- places such as Sudan and Indonesia. Donations
       will also be made to private humanitarian groups. It's good for American farmers and good
       for our economy.

      Exempting Food Exportsfrom U.S. Sanctions Policy. President Clinton signed into law
       an exemption for US food exports from economic sanctions required by the nuclear
       non-proliferation law. This law will allow American farmers to sell wheat to Pakistan, the
       market for 7 percent of US wheat. But, Congress should do more to give us the broadest
       possible flexibility. [ADD SANCTIONS/EU PIECE FROM SIEWERT/LAEL]

      Fighting for Full Funding of the IMF to Shore Up America's Customers Around the

                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
     International Monctary Fund so that we can stabilize and help to reform Asian economies
     that are such important customers for America's farmers, and for our other exporters who are
     responsible for 30 percent of the remarkable growth we have enjoyed since 1993.

    Promoting an Aggressive Regional Approach to Free Trade. The Clinton Administration
     has put in place a comprehensive approach to opening agricultural markets in each of our
     key export markets. NAFTA opened Mexico and Canada to U.S. exports; now, exports are
     up _ percent [eK]. We have established an agricultural negotiating group in the FT AA
     talks and important discussions on specific agricultural products in APEC. And for the first
     time ever under the Transatlantic Economic Partnership, we have a mechanism in place to
     facilitate cooperation with Europe on a range of issues, including approval of genetically
     modified organisms.

    Enforcing Our Trade Agreements. This administration has brought and won a number of
     important agricultural disputes, including the European Union's restrictions on hormone
     grown beef, bananas and pork in the Phillippines. We have been aggressive in using every
     tool at our disposal to ensure that agreements made are agreements kept.

    Carrying Over EEP Balances. Congress has consistently refused to fully fund our efforts
     to enhance the ability of American business to export their farm products around the world.
     We are now looking at ways to ensure that the Export Enhancement Program has ("EEP") is
     flexible enough to move balances lefty at the end of the year into other programs to fund
     additional sales of US crops. The Administration's FY 1999 Budget already proposes that
     unused balances be carried over into subsequent years to expand U.S. exports.

    Announcing New USDA Initiative on Rural Development. Today, President Clinton is
     announcing that (1) USDA is awarding more than $10 million in loans and grants for rural
     housing in 11 states, including Alabama, Florida, Indiana, Michigan, Mississippi, New
     Mexico, North Dakota, South Dakota, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Washington; (2) he is
     instructing Secretary Glickman to target $237 million in existing funding into the Northern
     Great Plains Initiative, funding rural development projects in South Dakota, North Dakota,
     Iowa, Minnesota, and Nebraska; and (3) USDA is providing $1 million in rural business
     enterprise grants. [USDA NEEDS TO CHECK THIS]

    Increasing Access to Capital in Rural America. The Clinton Administration has invested
     more than $175 million in the nation's three rural empowerment zones and 33 rural
     enterprise communities (EZ/ECs) since 1995, creating or saving over 7,000 jobs. Arid more
     than 700,000 rural citizens now receive additional services in the EZ/EC's as a result of
     USDA loans, grants, and programs. [NEED TO ADD INFO FROM USDA, SBA, CDFI?]

2.   IMPROVING THE FARM INCOME SAFETY NET

    Helping Farmers and Ranchers in Need. The President urged emergency funding in the
     FY 1999 Agriculture Appropriations bill to address extraordinary conditions in many regions


                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
    conference committee to include emergency funding for the three purposes the President
    originally recommended:

           Supplemental Crop Insurance Benefits. A new supplemental crop insurance
           payment would be made to farmers who have had losses sufficient to trigger regular
           crop insurance indemnity payments in three out of the last five years (on the
           condition that the indemnity payment was greater than the insurance premium paid
           by both the farmer and USDA). This option avoids market intervention while
           providing assistance to areas in greatest need. It would benefit about
           45,000-50,000 farmers at a cost of about $400 million in the first year, and
           substantially less thereafter.

           Crop and Pasture Flood Compensation. Payments would be made to farmers and
           ranchers whose crop or pasture land is under standing water (a problem particularly
           in certain parts of the Dakotas). They would receive payments equal to the rental
           value of the land each year the land is flooded. It would cost about $40-60 million
           annually.

           Replenish the Disaster Reserve for Livestock Feed Losses. This would replenish
           with USDA-held forfeited grain a fund used over the last two years to provide
           emergency feed and livestock assistance to cover and prevent losses due to natural
           disasters. The 1996 Farm Bill limited the disaster reserve to about $60 million in
           resources; these resources are now almost exhausted and there is no authority to
           replenish the fund. The program has been of particular help in getting feed to cattle
           after blizzards in the Dakotas, New Mexico and the Midwest, but has also aided
           livestock producers in New York and California. The cost would be about $15
           million for the first year.

   Enhancing the Fund for Rural America. The Fund provides additional resources for rural
    development and innovative agricultural research that are vitally needed to improve the
    quality of life in rural America and increase the productivity of U.S. farmers. The
    Administration proposed creating the Fund in 1996 to boost the overall Federal investment
    in these activities. Congress recently passed by overwhelming margins the Agricultural
    Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998, which extended the authority for
    the Fund while increasing its resources. Unfortunately, Congress has refused to fund this
    effort in the FY 1999 Agriculture Appropriations bill. The Administration strongly urges
    full funding in this appropriations bill.

   Improving Crop Insurance. The President has instructed Secretary Glickman to redouble
    his efforts to augment the current crop insurance program to more adequately meet farmers'
    needs to protect against farm income losses. Federal crop insurance represents a
    fundamental fabric of the farm safety net, yet circumstances in some regions reveal the
    shortcomings of the current program.

           The proposed Supplemental Crop Insurance Benefit (above) is a designed to meet a
                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
            USDA is working on pilot programs, including one for dairy fanners.

            USDA is exploring the feasibility of a Whole Fann Coverage Insurance Program,
            based on the fanner's income tax information. The appeal of such a product is that
            producers could insure their whole fann, not just individual crops as under the
            current program. Whole fann insurance could also potentially address the problem
            of insuring minor crops and livestock. However, there are a number of rating issues
            that need to be addressed and USDA lacks legal authority to insure livestock under
            permanent programs.

    [PUT TEXAS DISASTER ASSISTANCE HERE]

3.   STRENGTHENING OUR RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE BY IMPROVING TRANSPORTATION,
     PROTECTING UNIVERSAL SERVICE, AND IMPROVING OUR SCHOOLS

    Investing in Rural Transportation Systems. President Clinton recently signed the
     Transportation Equity Act for the 21 st Century (TEA-21), which guarantees nearly $200
     billion over six years to continue rebuilding America's transportation infrastructure. Rural
     America will benefit from increased investment in new and expanded rural transportation
     systems, including highways and highway safety, rural transit systems, small and rural rail
     carriers, an~ "essential air service" to small communities. TEA-21 requires greater
     consultation between state and local officials, to ensure a more efficient, far-reaching
     transportation system in rural areas. TEA-21 also provides funding for transportation
     services to help welfare recipients get to jobs, training programs and child care centers; 20
     percent of the funds are set aside for rural areas. Finally, TEA-21 extends the Ethanol Tax
     Credit through FY2007, to encourage the use of ethanol in gasoline and protect the
     environment.

    Announcing the Administration's Long-Term Agricultural Transportation Strategy. On
     July 27-28, in Kansas City, USDA Secretary Glickman will host a summit on "Agricultural
     Transportation Challenges for the 21 st Century." Department of Transportation Secretary
     Rodney Slater will join with Secretary Glickman in announcing the Clinton Administration's
     Long-Term Agricultural Transportation Strategy, to respond to these important challenges.

    Protecting Universal Service. President Clinton strongly supports universal service, a
     long-standing goal of ensuring that all Americans have access to affordable telephone
     service. More than 38 million residential and business subscribers are served by telephone
     companies that receive support for serving "high cost" (rural) areas. Without universal
     service, telephone rates would be prohibitively expensive for many Americans living in rural
     areas and, as a result, they would not be able to enjoy the benefits ofIntemet access and
     phone service. All Americans would then lose, since our telecommunications system is
     much more valuable to the nation when we are all connected. The President also supports
     the e-rate, which would expand universal service to include schools, libraries, and rural
     health care providers. Unfortunately, some members of Congress have introduced
     legislation which would repeal the e-rate and undermine universal service. The President

                                                          Automated Recor~ Manas\lm~t System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion           .
    Pushing for Rural School Modernization. Almost one-half of the nation's 80,000 public
     elementary and secondary schools are located in rural or small town areas. According to the
     U.S. General Accounting Office, 30 percent of those rural and small town schools (educating
     4.5 million children) have at least one building in need of extensive repair or replacement.
     We must move forward this year with a comprehensive effort to address the needs of rural
     schoolchildren.

    Building a Digital Library for Rural America. The goal of this initiative is to dramatically
     increase the quantity, quality and accessibility of networked information related to agriculture
     and rural development by leveraging USDA's existing investment in research and education
     at our nation's land-grant colleges.

    Developing Distance Learning. President Clinton has proposed legislation that would make
     it easier for Americans to gain access to new skills using distance learning. In its proposal
     for reauthorization of the Higher Education Act (HEA), the Clinton Administration is
     seeking to broaden opportunities for distance learners by: including computers in the "cost of
     attendance" for purposes of financial aid; allowing institutions that offer more than 50
     percent of their courses using distance learning to be eligible for student aid; and providing
     grants to ''virtual universities" and other experiments with distance learning with a program
     called "Learning Anytime, Anywhere Partnerships."

4.   PROMOTING HEALTH AND WELFARE FOR RURAL AMERICA

    Advancing Telemedicine. The President has set a goal of connecting all rural clinics and
     hospitals to the "information superhighway." In 1996, he signed the
     Telecommunications Act, which expanded the definition of universal service to include
     rural health care providers (hospitals, clinics, community health care centers, local
     health departments, and medical schools). The program (administered by an
     independent corporation established by the FCC) is designed to ensure that rural
     health care providers pay no more than their urban counterparts for
     telecommunication services. This will help improve the quality of care in rural America
     by allowing patients to receive advice from the best specialists in the country.

    Improving Food Safety. The President's Food Safety Initiative is a comprehensive plan for
     improving food safety, including education, new technology, standards and more inspectors
     to make sure all food, including food that is imported, is safe. Congress should fund this
     $101 million initiative when it is raised in Agricultural Appropriations conference.




                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

   $3 Billion to Help Move More People from Welfare to Work. Because of the President's
    leadership, the 1997 Balanced Budget Act included the total funding requested by the
    President for the creation of his $3 billion welfare-to-work fund. The Department of Labor
    is committed to ensuring that roughly 30 percent of these grants are provided to rural areas.
    This program will help states and local communities move long-term welfare recipients, and
    certain non-custodial parents, into lasting, unsubsidized jobs. These funds can be used for
    job creation, job placement and job retention efforts, including wage subsidies to private
    employers and other critical post-employment support services.

   Educational Opportunity zones (EOZ) in high-need urban and rural school districts.
    This is $1.5 billion over 5 years to help high-need urban and rural school districts undertake
    serious reforms to raise standards -- including ending social promotion, intervening in failing
    schools, and dealing with low-performing teachers.

   Tech Lit. Connect every classroom in America to the internet and provide support for
    high-quality on-line content and software, computers, and for teachers to learn how to use
    tehcnology in the classroom. This involves e-rate and a host of technology programs
    including the Technology Literacy Challenge Fund, distance learning programs, technology
    challenge grants, and a new proposal unveiled by the President at his MIT speech earlier this
    summer.

   High-quality after-school programs in high-need urban and rural schools. The President
    got $40 million for this program as part of the balanced budget, and he has proposed $1
    billion over 5 years to help an additional 500,000 children get access to quality after-school
    programs each year.




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex.Dump Conversion


