RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diano Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-JUL-1998 13:56:07.00

SUBJECT:   Draft briefing for Erskine meeting

TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
On Thursday, Erskine will meet with Alexis Herman and Tony Coelho about
the disability task force we created in March, and their idea for a small
ADA-related event in the next week. Attached is a briefing and talking
points for Erskine that Jeanne and I agreed upon.  I will forward to
Erskine's office tonight. An event seems unlikely from a scheduling point
of view.


Briefing for Meeting with Secretary Herman and Tony Coelho
on PresidentD,s Task Force on Employment of Adults with Disabilities

Summary
As Chair and Vice-Chair of the new PresidentD,s Task Force on Employment
of Adults with Disabilities, Secretary Herman and Tony Coelho want to
brief you on their progress since beginning their work in March. They
also will request that the President do an event in the coming days to
commemorate the eight anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(The anniversary is July 26.)   Their concept is that the President would
acknowledge the anniversary at a small event where he would sign some
Presidential direct'ives prepared by the Task Force. We are currently
vetting these potential directives, several of which have budget
implications. Moreover, the President may not have time to do such an
event in the first place.

We recommend that you listen to the progress report, congratulate Alexis
and Tony on their work to date, and hear out their arguments for an event,
but hold open the question of whether an event is possible.

Background
In March of this year, the President signed an executive order creating
this Task Force.  Its mandate is to determine what the federal government
can do to help bring the employment rate of adults with disabilities to a
rate D&as close as possibleD8 to that of the general population. The Task


Force is composed entirely of Administration agency heads, including those
at HHS, SSA, Education, Treasury, Commerce, Transportation, SBA, VA, EEOC,
OPM, and the National Council on Disability.  It has met once so far.

The Task Force is mandated to issue its first report on November   15, with
subsequent reports in 1999, 2000, and 2002. However, Alexis and    Tony have
decided to issue an early report now, at their second meeting in   July, to
show that the Task Force will move quickly to address this issue   so
critical to the disability community.

The proposal for the PresidentD,s signing of the Executive Order grew
partly out of the disability communityD,s dissatisfaction with our recent
progress on issues important to them.  In early 1997, you met with a group
of Administration appointees with disabilities, led by Marca Bristo, where
the group expressed its strong support for the President but stated that
they felt disability issues too often took a back seat to other
Administration initiatives.  In September 1997, the President met with a
group of disability advocates, where he spoke knowledgeably about
disability issues, and endorsed the idea of a task force.  He signed the
executive order in March.

(Tonyu,s role in the Task Force arises from his role as Chair of the
PresidentD,s Committee on Employment of people with Disabilities, as well
as his own longstanding interest in this subject as a person with a
disability. Alexis and DOL had not previously been very involved in these
issues, but have embraced them since we made the decision to have DOL
chair the Task Force.)



Specifics of Event Request
Alexis and Tony would like an event in the Roosevelt Room with 25-30
representatives of the disability community. Their proposed format is (1)
Alexis and Tony would present the President with their July report; (2)
the President would sign some directives they have prepared; and (3) the
President would make brief remarks acknowledging the anniversary.

Alexis   and Tony submitted an earlier request to Scheduling for a much
larger   event -- for the President to attend a meeting of the Task Force
before   an audience of 200. There was little interest here in such an
event,   and they have now scaled back their request.

Substantive Concerns
There are two unresolved problems with the task forceD,s suggestions for
immediate action by the President, and therefore with the concept of an
event itself.    First, most of their suggestions either cost money that we
have not yet agreed to spend, or else they are fairly small items that may
not rise to the level of a Presidential directive.    (See attached summary
of suggestions.)   Therefore, we are trying to sort through this
hodge-podge to determine whether there is enough meat to warrant a
Presidential event, should we decide to hold one. Second, this event
would come at an awkward point in the debate on health insurance for
people with disabilities who go to work.   The disability communityD,s top
priority is legislation to allow people to keep Medicaid or Medicare when
they leave the SSI or SSDI rolfs to return to work.    Senators Jeffords and
Kennedy have introduced a bill with a cost of $5 billion that is
tremendously popular with the community.   In addition to the tremendous
difficulty of finding $5 billion in offsets, we have major policy concerns
with the bill (e.g., partial benefit package, means-testing of Medicare).


We have been silent about the bill publicly, but are now working quietly
with Jeffords and Kennedy on a lower-cost alternative. We do not know if
we will reach agreement with the Hill on this issue within the next week
or so, but it seems unlikely.

Alexis and Tony are aware of these issues, but are still optimistic that
we will resolve the health issue or find some middle ground. They also
believe that the worst outcome would be no event at all.



Talking Points

 Thank you so much for your hard ,work on this critical issue in the four
months since the President signed the Executive Order in March.   I
understand that the Task Force has gotten off to a very strong start.

 Thanks especially to Seth Harris [counselor to Secretary Herman, who has
organized the work of the Task Force to date] and to Becky Ogle [newly
named Executive Director of the Task Force; an activist who handled
disability issues for the 1996 campaign].

 In spite of advances in civil rights and technology that should make it
possible for more of the 50 million Americans with disabilities to work, I
know that far too many do not, especially those with severe disabilities.
Determining how to remove barriers to work for people with disabilities is
the critical work that we have asked the Task Force to undertake.   I
assure you of our commitment to work constructively with you and to
consider seriously all the recommendations you make.

 Because of the PresidentD,s busy schedule, it is not clear at this time
whether he can do an event.  However, I know you have been working
productively with staff from Scheduling, DPC, NEC, and OMB.  I encourage
you to continue to do so over the next few days as we determine whether an
event is indeed possible.



Suggestions by Task Force for Immediate Presidential Action

Major Proposals with Budget Impact
- New health initiative that is an D&incremental stepD8 toward
KennedY-Jeffords.
- New tax credit for employers and/or individuals with disabilities with
extraordinary disability-related expenses, such as assistive technology or
a personal assistant.
- New BRIDGE grant program for states and locals to better coordinate
assistance for those seeking to return to work.

(The task force proposes that the President direct the relevant agency to
propose these items for inclusion in the FY2000 budget.  If we were able
to reach agreement on any of these in time for an event, presumably we
would instead simply announce that it would be in the FY2000 budget.)

Other Presidential Directives (still being vetted by OMB and agencies)
- Direct SBA to educate people with disabilities about eligibility for
Section 8(a) program.
- Direct HHS to inform states and people with disabilities about a new
Medicaid buy-in that the Administration proposed and championed, and that
was enacted as part of the Balanced Budget Act last year.  It will help


people with disabilities keep health coverage under Medicaid as their
earnings increase.   (This is our answer to Kennedy-Jeffords, but
unfortunately no states have yet embraced this state option.)
- Direct federal agencies to evaluate whether the Lechnblogy they use is
accessible to employees with disabilities, as called for in legislation we
support.
- Direct federal agencies to make their Internet sites accessible by July
1999.
- Direct OMB to ensure that federal agencies know they are no longer under
headcount ceilings that formerly served as a disincentive for them to hire
people with disabilities who need a personal assistant, such as a reader
for a blind employee.
- Challenge Congress to extend the Work Opportunity Tax Credit and
Welfare-to-Work Tax Credit, and direct federal agencies to publicize that'
the credit can be used to hire people in the federal SSI and vocational
rehabilitation programs.
- Direct DOJ and EEOC to develop a public education campaign on ADA
requirements.
- Direct EEOC, DOJ, and SBA to educate small businesses about ADA
requirements.
- Direct federal agencies to ensure that people with disabilities are
integrated into One-Stop Centers, and that AmericaO,s Job Bank is
accessible to people with disabilities.
- Direct VA and Labor to work better together to return disabled veterans
to work.
- Direct.federal agencies to increase the number of student interns with
disabilities.
- Direct agencies to encourage universities to increase the number of
candidates with disabilities for the Presidential Management Interns and
Presidential Scholars programs.
- Direct DOT to do a better job on outreach on the ADA and other laws.

Presidential Challenges or Statements
- Challenge Congress to enact O&Ticket to Independence~J8 proposal that we
proposed and has now been passed by the House.
- Challenge Congress to pass the Patient Bill of Rights, to help people
with disabilities who move from the disability rolls to private employment
and health insurance.
- Challenge Congress to reauthorize the Rehabilitation Act.


