RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. FreeOrnan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JUL-1998 10:13:52.00

SUBJECT:   Latest draft of Thursday paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here's the latest version of rural plan.==================== ATTACHMENT       1 ========
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D64]MAIL45742290T.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043AF130000010A02010000000205000000C86E000000020000B87FCA0511E5C374D13792
018AODB6E60324DE576895AFCFDB563D6564DF27262666D460EA6BOA1FF1801D146AC77918EA9B


FIVE AND A HALF YEARS OF PROGRESS, BUT CHALLENGES REMAIN. For five and a half years,
President Clinton and Vice President Gore have worked to expand opportunity for rural Americans
and farm families. The Administration has helped farmers manage risk and address market
volatility, provided critical disaster assistance to rural homeowners, farm owners, and business
owners, as well as to ranchers who have lost livestock, expanded U.S. agricultural exports,
improved our school lunch programs by buying surplus commodities, and worked to diversify the
sources of enterprise and income in rural America.

But rural America still faces challenges -- with the economic crisis in Asia weakening some of our
best customers for farm products, strong world crop production bringing prices down, and farmers
facing floods and fires and drought and crop disease.

TODAY, PRESIDENT CLINTON ANNOUNCES IMPORTANT STEPS TO ADDRESS THESE CHALLENGES.
    An Action Plan for Rural America. President Clinton today is laying out a four-point
     action plan for rural America that:
             Expands the rural economy through exports and development;
             Improves the farm income safety net;
             Strengthens our rural infrastructure by improving transportation, protecting universal
             service, and improving our schools; and
             Promotes health and welfare for rural America

      Exemption of Food Exportsfrom U.S. Sanctions Policy. [ADD SANCTIONS/EU
       PIECE FROM SIEWERT/LAEL] President Clinton signed into law an exemption for US
       food exports from economic sanctions required by the nuclear non-proliferation law. This
       law will allow American farmers to sell wheat to Pakistan, the market for 7 percent of US
       wheat. But, Congress should do more to give us the broadest possible flexibility.

      Agriculture Disaster Assistance for Texas Counties. [President Clinton today is announcing
       disaster assistance for [XX] Texas counties, making additional help available to agricultural
       producers whose crops have been ravaged by drought.] [ADD] The President will also be
       sending Sec. Glickman to Texas and Oklahoma next week to survey the hardest- hit regions
       and to report back on other steps that we should take.

      New USDA Loans and Grants on Rural Development. Today, President Clinton is
       announcing that (1) USDA is awarding more than $7 million in loans and grants for rural
       housing in 8 states, including Alabama, Florida, Indiana, Michigan, Mississippi, New
       Mexico, Pennsylvania, and Washington; and (2) USDA is providing roughly $1 million in
       rural business enterprise grants.


               A FOUR-POINT ACTION PLAN FOR RURAL AMERICA


                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Convenion

    Implementing the Wheat Purchase Initiative. On Saturday, President Clinton took strong
     steps to help our family farmers and to reduce crop surpluses at home. He directed the
     Secretary of Agriculture to purchase more than 80 million bushels of wheat, which could lift
     prices as much as 13 ceI1ts a bushel. With this wheat, the President will launch a new food
     aid initiative to press the world struggle against hunger. Secretary Glickman, working with
     the U.S. Agency for International Development, will oversee substantial donations of U.S.
     wheat to countries where the need is greatest -- places such as Sudan and Indonesia.
     Donations will also be made to private humanitarian groups. It's good for American
     farmers and good for our economy.

    Fightingfor Full Funding of the IMF to Shore Up America's Customers Around the
     World. We must keep the market for our products growing by paying our dues to the
     International Monetary Fund so that we can stabilize and help to reform Asian economies
     that are such important customers for America's farmers, and for our other exporters who are
     responsible for 30 percent ofthe remarkable growth we have enjoyed since 1993.

    Promoting an Aggressive Regional Approach to Free Trade. The Clinton Administration
     has put in place a comprehensive approach to opening agricultural markets in each of our
     key export markets. NAFTA opened Mexico and Canada to u.S. exports; now, exports are
     up _ percent [CK]. We have established an agricultural negotiating group in the FTAA
     talks and important discussions on specific agricultural products in APEC. And for the first
     time ever under the Transatlantic Economic Partnership, we have a mechanism in place to
     facilitate cooperation with Europe on a range of issues, including approval of genetically
     modified organisms.

    Enforcing Our Trade Agreements. This administration has brought and won a number of
     important agricultural disputes, including the European Union's restrictions on hormone
     grown beef, bananas and pork in the Phillippines. We have been aggressive in using every
     tool at our disposal to ensure that agreements made are agreements kept.

    Promoting Farm Exports. The Clinton Administration has boosted USDA export
     financing by one-third in the past year to nearly $5 billion. On July 7, the Administration
     proposed legislation to ensure the flexibility to move Export Enhancement Program (EEP)
     balances left at the end of the year into other programs to fund additional sales of US crops.
     The President's FY 1999 Budget already proposed that unused balances be carried over into
     subsequent years to expand US exports. Congress should approve these initiatives.

    Increasing Access to Capital in Rural America. The Clinton Administration has invested
     more than $175 million in the nation's three rural empowerment zones and 33 rural
     enterprise communities (EZ/ECs) since 1995, creating or saving over 7,000 jobs. And more
     than 700,000 rural citizens now receive additional services in the EZ/EC's as a result of
     USDA loans, grants, and programs. [ADD INFO FROM USDA, SBA, CDFI?]
2.   IMPROVING THE FARM INCOME SAFETY NET
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
    In his letter to Sen. Daschle and Rep. Gephardt of July 15, 1998, President Clinton called on
    Congress to relieve farm financial stress, urging emergency funding in the FY 1999
    Agriculture Appropriations bill to address extraordinary conditions in many regions of the
    country. The bill is now going to conference, and the Administration urges the conference
    committee to include emergency funding for the three purposes the President recommended:

           Supplemental Crop Insurance Benefits. A new supplemental crop insurance
           payment would be made to farmers who have had losses sufficient to trigger regular
           crop insurance indemnity payments in three out of the last five years (on the
           condition that the indemnity payment was greater than the insurance premium paid
           by both the farmer and USDA). This option avoids market intervention while
           providing assistance to areas in greatest need. It would benefit about
           45,000-50,000 farmers at a cost of about $400 million in the first year, and
           substantially less thereafter.

           Crop and Pasture Flood Compensation. Payments would be made to farmers and
           ranchers whose crop or pasture land is under standing water (a problem particularly
           in certain parts of the Dakotas). They would receive payments equal to the rental
           value of the land each year the land is flooded. It would cost about $40-60 million
           annually.

           Replenish the Disaster Reserve for Livestock Feed Losses. This would replenish
           with USDA-held forfeited grain a fund used over the last two years to provide
           emergency feed and livestock assistance to cover and prevent losses due to natural
           disasters. The 1996 Farm Bill limited the disaster reserve to about $60 million in
           resources; these resources are now almost exhausted and there is no authority to
           replenish the fund. The program has been of particular help in getting feed to cattle
           after blizzards in the Dakotas, New Mexico and the Midwest, but has also aided
           livestock producers in New York and California. The cost would be about $15
           million for the first year.

   Enhancing the Fund/or Rural America. The Fund provides additional resources for rural
    development and innovative agricultural research that are vitally needed to improve the
    quality oflife in rural America and increase the productivity of U.S. farmers. The
    Administration proposed creating the Fund in 1996 to boost the overall Federal investment
    in these activities. Congress recently passed by overwhelming margins the Agricultural
    Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998, which extended the authority for
    the Fund while increasing its resources. Unfortunately, Congress has refused to fund this
    effort in the FY 1999 Agriculture Appropriations bill. The Administration strongly urges
    full funding in this appropriations bill.

   Improving Crop Insurance. The President has instructed Secretary Glickman to redouble
    his efforts to augment the current crop insurance program to more adequately meet farmers'
    needs to protect against farm income losses. Federal crop insurance represents a

                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
     shortcomings of the current program. In one effort, USDA is currently exploring the
     feasibility of a Whole Farm Coverage Insurance Program, based on the farmer's income tax
     information. The appeal of such a product is that producers could insure their whole farm,
     not just individual crops as under the current program.

3.   STRENGTHENING RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE BY IMPROVING TRANSPORTATION,
     PROTECTING UNIVERSAL SERVICE, AND IMPROVING OUR SCHOOLS

    Investing in Rural Transportation Systems. President Clinton recently signed the
     Transportation' Equity Act for the 21 st Century (TEA-21), which guarantees $198 billion
     over six years to continue rebuilding America's transportation infrastructure. Rural
     America will benefit from new and rebuilt roads, expanded lifeline paratransit services, a
     greater voice in transportation investment decision-making to ensure that rural areas receive
     their fair share offederal funds. TEA-21 also dedicates funding to help rural welfare
     recipients get to jobs, and extends the Ethanol Tax Credit through 2007, protecting the
     environment by encouraging the use of ethanol in gasoline.

    Continuing Air Service. President Clinton has continued the record $50 million in annual
     Essential Air Service operating subsidies to smaller, more isolated communities that
     otherwise would not be served by commercial carriers. This will ensure continued access to
     air service for America's heartland.

    Announcing the Administration's Long-Term Agricultural Transportation Strategy. In
     Kansas City on July 27-28, Secretary Glickman will host a summit on "Agricultural
     Transportation Challenges for the 21 st Century." Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater
     will join Secretary Glickman in announcing the Clinton Administration's Long-Term
     Agricultural Transportation Strategy to help meet these important challenges.

    Protecting Universal Service. President Clinton strongly supports universal service, a
     long-standing goal of ensuring that all Americans have access to affordable telephone
     service. More than 38 million residential and business subscribers are served by telephone
     companies that receive support for serving "high cost" (rural) areas. Without universal
     service, telephone rates would be prohibitively expensive for many Americans living in rural
     areas and, as a result, they would not be able to enjoy the benefits ofIntemet access and
     phone service. All Americans would then lose, since our telecommunications system is
     much more valuable to the nation when we are all connected. The President also supports
     the e-rate, which would expand universal service to include schools, libraries, and rural
     health care providers .. Unfortunately, some members of Congress have introduced
     legislation which would repeal the e-rate and undermine universal service. The President
     urges the Congress tO'join him in supporting universal service.

    Pushing for Rural School Modernization. Almost one-half ofthe nation's 80,000 public
     elementary and secondary schools are located in rural or small town areas. According to the
     U.S. General Accounting Office, 30 percent of those rural and small town schools (educating


                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
     We must move forward this ycar with a comprehensive effort to address the needs of rural
     schoolchildren.

    Building a Digital Library for Rural America. The goal of this initiative is to dramatically
     increase the quantity, quality and accessibility. of networked information related to agriculture
     and rural development by leveraging USDA's existing investment in research and education
     at our nation's land-grant colleges.

    Developing Distance Learning. President Clinton has proposed legislation that would make
     it easier for Americans to gain access to new skills using distance learning. In its proposal
     for reauthorization of the Higher Education Act (HEA), the Clinton Administration is
     seeking to broaden opportunities for distance learners by including computers in the "cost of
     attendance" for purposes of financial aid; allowing institutions that offer more than 50
     percent of their courses using distance learning to be eligible for student aid; and providing
     grants to "virtual universities" and other experiments with distance learning with a program
     called "Learning Anytime, Anywhere Partnerships."

4.   PROMOTING HEALTH AND WELFARE FOR RURAL AMERICA

    Advancing Telemedicine. The President has set a goal of connecting all rural clinics and
     hospitals to the "information superhighway." In 1996, he signed the
     Telecommunications Act, which expanded the definition of universal service to include
     rural health care providers (hospitals, clinics, community health care centers, local
     health departments, and medical schools). The program (administered by an
     independent corporation established by the FCC) is designed to ensure that rural
     health care providers pay no more than their urban counterparts for
     telecommunication services. This will help improve the quality of care in rural America
     by allowing patients to receive advice from the best specialists in the country.

    Improving Food Safety. The President's Food Safety Initiative is a comprehensive plan for
     improving food safety, including education, new technology, standards and more inspectors
     to make sure all food, including food that is imported, is safe. Congress should fund this
     $101 million initiative when it is raised in Agricultural Appropriations conference.




                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


