RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-JUL-1998 22:59:39.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
EK:

Additional two-pager w/details on organizations and people from each
city. Also, additional Q/A from OLC on establishment clause.   please
forward to press if these work for you ... jc3

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D37]MAIL41590880N.226 tq ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504348050000010A02010000000205000000263E0000000200003FOCDD4BAF6824F1218388
7F9843E64E64C9D6799701216D804AA14866FAAA7CE8C206A0133C848BF88B88A9996D301CEFF8
7E1452E586820623C86A3613FD292142D734972EA4646EDEE3B32FADA6232D5E8299DFD93EA73E
                                  Question and Answer

Q:   Isn't a grant offederal funds to a religiously-affiliated organization inconsistent
     with the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment?

A:   As the Supreme Co.urt reco.gnized in Bo.sto.n v. Kendrick, when the federal go.vernment
     enlists the help o.fprivate gro.ups to. address so.cial pro.blems in a neutral program~
     religio.usly-affiliated o.rganizatio.ns can participate equally with no.nreligio.us entities.
     "[R]eligio.us institutio.ns need no.t be quarantined fro.m public benefits that are neutrally
     available to. all." 487 U.S. 608 (1988) (quo.ting Ro.emer v. Maryland, 426 736, 746
     (1976)).

     Go.vernment funding o.f religio.usly-affiliated o.rganizatio.ns must satisfy two. requirements.
      First, the go.vernment must ensure that its direct aid is no.t used to. advance religio.us
     activities. Seco.nd, no. direct aid can flo.w to. "pervasively sectarian" institutio.ns, such as
     churches.

     All pro.grams funded under the Values-Based Vio.lence Preventio.n Initiative will co.nfo.rm
     to. these co.nstitutio.nal principles. In particular, no. funds under this initiative will be used
     to. proselytize o.r o.therwise advance religio.us activities.




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

        Under the Values-Based Initiative launched by the President today, community collaboratives in the
following cities will receive grants of up to $135,000 to target youth violence, gangs, truancy, and other
juvenile problems. Coupled with the Administration's other initiatives targeting juvenile crime and
violence in these cities, the following organizations and community leaders will be able to work with other
community-based and religiously-affiliated organizations to promote common sense values and
responsibility to our youth.

BALTIMORE, MD -- In Baltimore, the YMCA will take the lead in implementing the Values-Based Initiative.
In addition to other youth programs, the YMCA sponsors a special program called STAR (Success Through
Accelerated Responsibility,) where certain middle school students are identified by teachers and
administrators as being at-risk for gang activity. Attendees from Baltimore will include: Kacy Conley, the
director of the YMCA's Urban Programs; and Joyce Jones a Master Teacher in the YMCA's Dunbar
Extended Day program.

CHARLESTON, SC - The lead organization in Charleston will be the federally-designated Enterprise
Community. The Enterprise Community has helped community members to work together with the Charleston
Police Department to resolve local problems, foster economic opportunity, and promote self-sufficient
neighborhoods. Attendees from Charleston will include: Chief Rueben Greenberg, Police Chief of
Charleston since 1982; and Reverend Charles Young, pastor of the Ebenezer AME Church and Chairman
of the Enterprise Community.

CHICAGO, IL - Two organizations will be the focus of Chicago's Value-Based Initiative: the Northwest Austin
Council (NAC), a community-based organization that was formed in response to the deterioration of Chicago's far
west side; and the Westside Ministers Coalition, which provides services to the disadvantaged in the Austin area,
including spiritual guidance and counseling. Attending from these organizations will be: Leola Spann, President
ofNAC; and Reverend Lewis Flowers, Executive Director of the Westside Ministers Coalition and Chairman of
the Church and Clergy Subcommittee for the 25th District Police Station.

DETROIT, MI -- El-Beth-El Temple, which provides its community residents with everything from
computer training to Bible School to substance abuse treatment, will be the focus of the Values-Based
Initiative in Detroit. Attending will be Pastor Henry G. Sims, Sr, founder of the El-Beth-El Temple.

HEMPSTEAD, NY -- COMET/STAR, an extended school day program that offers academic enrichment,
counseling and personal development services to students, is at the center ~f Hempstead's values-based
initiative. Representing Hempstead will be Dr. Nathaniel Clay, Superintendent of Schools for the
Hempstead Public School District.

INDIANAPOLIS, IN - Westside Community Ministries, a non-profit organization that strives to increase
the capacity of Christian churches to strengthen families and enhance the quality of life for the residents of
Westside Indianapolis, will be the lead organization in Indianapolis. Participants at today's event will
include: Reverend Melvin Jackson, a member of the Washington-based National Center for Neighborhood
Enterprise (NCNE); and Reverend Olgen Williams, an associate Minister at the Victory Tabernacle
Church.

KANSAS CITY, MO - The state-of-the-art Central Computer Unlimited High School will be the focal
point of Kansas City's Values-Based Initiative. Located in the inner city, this facility provides its students
with resources that rival many colleges and universities. Willie Buie, Principal of Central Computer
Unlimited High School, will represent Kansas City today.
                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
Initiative: the Central American Resource Center (CARECEN), a non-profit organization whose mission is to
empower Central Americans in Los Angeles; and the Martin Luther King Legacy Association, a leadership
development and training program. Attending from these organizations will be: Angela Sanbrano, Executive
Director ofCARECEN; and Mark Wilson, project administrator for the King Legacy Association's Youth
Empowerment Project.

MIAMI, FL -- Two youth-focused organizations are participating in Miami's Values-Based Initiative.
They are: the National Shoot for the Stars Institute, which helps to deter children from socially and
personally destructive behavior; and the African-American Council of Christian Clergy, which seeks to
instill values in children at-risk. Representing these organizations will be: Wali Jones, a former NBA
Philadelphia 76er and currently the Miami Heat's Vice President for Community Relations; and Reverend
Richard Bennett, Jr., Executive Director of the African American Council of Christian Clergy.

PIDLADELPIDA, PA - The lead organization in Philadelphia will be United Neighbors Against Drugs
(UNAD), which runs safe havens and after-school programs in the Norris Square Neighborhood.
Attending on behalf of Philadelphia will be Sister Carol Keck, a former Catholic school principal that currently
directs UNAD and other neighborhood efforts.

PORTLAND, OR -- Portland's Urban League and Emanuel Community General Services will take the lead
in promoting the Values-Based Violence Prevention Initiative. Attending from Portland will be: Lawrence
Dark, President.and CEO of the Urban League; and Bishop Adolph A. Wells, founder ofthe Emmanuel
Temple Church and President of the Emmanuel Community General Services, Inc.

RICHMOND, VA - The lead organization for the initiative in Richmond will be the Sixth Mount Zion
Baptist Church Gilpin-Jackson Family Skills Center After School and Summer Program. This
collaboration of churches runs Kid's Cafe, where more than 200 children are given meals four times a
week, and a weekly summer science camp for 90 elementary school students. Reverend Robert Dortch,
Pastor of Shiloh Baptist Church, will attend from Richmond.

SALINAS, CA - The lead organization in Salinas will be the Violent Injury Prevention Coalition (VIPC), a group
dedicated to eliminating violence committed by and against youth. Salinas attendees will include: Lupe Garcia,
creator of the Parent Patrol Group; and Reverend Kenneth Feske, chair ofVIPC's Community
AwarenesslEducation Committee.

SAN ANTONIO, TX -- San Antonio's Fighting Back, a comprehensive effort to address substance abuse,
crime and violence in the city, will implement the Values-Based Initiative here. Beverly Watts-Davis, Vice
President of United Way of San Antonio and Executive Director of San Antonio Fighting Back, will attend
from San Antonio.

SEATTLE, W A-- In Seattle, there will be two lead organizations for the Values-Based Initiative: Seattle Team for
Youth, a joint effort by the city's Police Department and Department of Housing and Human Services to
assist at-risk youth; and Safe Futures, an anti-gang program that provides assistance for gang-involved
youth who have been suspended or dropped out of school. Attending from Seattle will be: Larry Taylor,
Deputy Director for the Seattle Department of Housing and Human Services; and Grigori Green, Supervisor
for Seattle Team for Youth.

WASIDNGTON, DC -- In Washington, D.C., three organizations will be the focus of the initiative: Refuge of
Hope, which provides after-school programs and crisis interVention counseling; Browne Junior High, which
serves as a Safe Haven for young people; and See Forever, which is devoted to helping young people in the
juvenile justice system develop into self-sustaining adults. Attending from these organizations will be:

                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
Principal of the Browns Junior High School; David Domenici, founder and director of See Forever, and
Reverend Lewis Anthony, Senior Pastor at the Metropolitan Wesley African Methodist Episcopal Zion
Church.




                                                                                  Management System
                                                              Automated Records
                                                               Hex..])unIp Conversion
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 080 - FOLDER -007


[07/22/1998]


