RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JUL-1998 11:48:23.00

SUBJECT:   Rural radio press conference remarks-- newest draft

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP   @   EOP [ OPD 1· )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
FYI.
---------------------- Forwarded by Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP on 07/22/98
11:47 AM ---------------------------




Lowell A. Weiss
07/22/98 10:36:54 AM
Record TYPe:    Record

To:      Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP, Jake Siewert/OPD/EOP, Jonathan A.
Kaplan/OPD/EOP, Linda Ricci/OMB/EOP
cc:
Subject:         radio press conference remarks --10:40 draft

Draft 7/22/98 10:40am
Lowell Weiss
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
OPENING REMARKS FOR RADIO PRESS CONFERENCE
THE WHITE HOUSE
July 23, 1998

        Thank you, Sec. Glickman.  Before I take your questions I would like to
make a few comments on how we must help the rural communities that are now
suffering from the effects of plummeting crop prices and an almost
Biblical string of natural disasters.

        Today, most Americans are enjoying the dividends of the strongest
economy in a generation. But with the economic crisis in Asia hurting
American farm exports, with crop prices squeezed by abundant world
supplies, and with farmlands devastated by floods and fires and drought,
farming communities in parts of the South and Upper Plains are withering.
In Texas, almost three quarters of the vital cotton crop is lost.  Even in
states like Washington and the Dakotas, where crops are growing well,
farmers are coping with 1948 prices -- and 1998 expenses.  Retired
auctioneers are being pressed into duty just to handle all the thousands
of families who are being forced to sell their farms.

        As the former governor of a state that depends heavily on
agriculture, I know· that we must never turn our backs on our farmers when
Mother Nature or the world economy turn a callous eye. AmericaO,s farm


communities feed our nation and the world. And they nourish the values on
which America was born:  faith and family, hard work and commitment to
neighbors, devotion to community and to the land. America cannot flourish
if we let our rural roots shrivel and decline.

        For five and a half years, I have worked to expand opportunity for
our farm families.  WeD,ve strengthened crop insurance, provided critical
disaster assistance to ranchers who have lost livestock, purchased surplus
commodities for school lunches, worked to diversify the sources of
enterprise and income in rural America, and doubled our use of export
credits during the past year alone.

        But this yearD,s growing farm crisis demands that we provide
additional help to the farmers who are now teetering on the edge.   On
Saturday, I directed Sec. Glickman to buy more than 80 million bushels of
wheat to help lift prices as much as 13 cents a bushel for American
farmers, while easing h~nger in the developing world.

        Today, I am announcing that we will provide disaster assistance
for farmers in [XX] Texas counties, to help those whose crops and
livestock have been ravaged by drought. Next week, I will send·Sec.
Glickman to Texas and Oklahoma to talk with drought-stricken farmers and
assess what other help they may need.  And once again, I calIon Congress
to provide $500 million in emergency assistance for farmers and ranchers
in other parts of the country hit hard by fires, floods, and other natural
disasters.

        With these measures we can help farmers weather the current
crisis. But to strengthen rural America for the long-term, we must do
more.  First, we must revive the rural economy through exports and
community development. Today, I am announcing an Initiative on Rural
Development to build new homes, spur new enterprise, and spark new
opportunities in rural communities throughout America. We must also keep
our farm exports growing by forging more regional trade partnerships and
strengthening enforcement of our existing trade agreements. Whenever
possible, we must exempt food exports when we impose unilateral sanctions,
as Congress has recently done with India and Pakistan.  Food sanctions
hurt our farmers, cause unnecessary suffering among the innocent in other
countries, and rarely achieve their intended foreign policy ends.   And as
I have been urging Congress for more than six months, we must pay our dues
to the International Monetary Fund so that our people can sell their
products abroad.

        Second, we must strengthen the farm safety net. We should expand
eligibility for direct and guaranteed loans, extend marketing loans when
crop prices are low, and give farmers more flexibility to plant other
crops when their primary crops fail.

        Third, we must improve the infrastructure in rural communities.
We must preserve universal service so all rural homes can count on
affordable telephone rates, and schools, libraries, and rural health
centers can tap into the promise of the Internet. We must improve the
quality of rural health care through advanced telemedicine, modernize
rural schools, improve rural transportation systems, and fund my
AdministrationD,s historic food safety initiative to ensure that all food,
including imported food, is safe.

        These steps are in the best tradition of our nation. Whenever
disaster strikes, Americans join together as one community to help see
their neighbors· through. That is what happened recently in Florida, when


