RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Beverly J. Barnes ( CN=Beverly J. Barnes/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TlME:22-JUL-1998 21:29:02.00

SUBJECT:   Cover Memo and Briefing Paper for EBB for Asian Pacific American Mtg

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Alphonse J. Maldon ( CN=Alphonse J. Maldon/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP[ OPD ] ).
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura K. Demeo ( CN=Laura K. Demeo/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Doris O. Matsui ( CN=Doris O. Matsui/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D56]MAIL46169590R.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750433C060000010A020100000002050000008E3A000000020000F8A1C6683DFA48A9C8BF71
52181BA37192DF845D9507C44CEF5A8B8153FA090D4947F35A75EC484CF7A98762D14E9FF6C70E

MEMORANDUM FOR ERSKINE BOWLES

FROM:          Beverly Barnes

RE:            Meeting with Asian Pacific American Leaders

You are scheduled to meet Friday afternoon with representatives from the Asian Pacific
American community. This is a follow-up meeting to one you held with the same individuals in
October oflast year.

Doris Matsui has prepared a briefing memo covering the issues that are likely to be raised. You
will find a separate attachment from Bob Nash on Asian Pacific American appointments, which
is the topic Doris believes is foremost in the minds of the meeting participants.

Doris will join you for the meeting. Bob Nash is prepared to be there, if you would like him to
participate. In addition, Doris said immigration/naturalization, welfare reform and Filipino vets
issues could come up. Elena Kegan and Al Maldon, who has been following the vets issue, are
prepared to join you at the meeting as well, if you would like. Please let Carole know ifyou
would like anyone or all three to participate.

Scheduled to attend the meeting are:
Gloria Caoile
National Federation of Filipino Americans

NancyChoy
National Asian Pacific American Bar Association

ToaDo
National Coalition of Vietnamese American Voters

Matt Finucane
National Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance

Chung-Wha Hong
National Korean American Service and Education Consortium, Inc.

Daphne Kwok
Organization of Chinese Americans

Karen N arasaki
National Asian Pacific American Legal Consortium

                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
Japanese American Citizens League

Dong Suh
Asian and Pacific Islander Health Forum

KaYing Yang
Southeast Asian Resource Center

Francie Youngberg
Asian Pacific American Institute for Congressional Studies




                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

MEMORANDUM TO ERSKINE BOWLES

FROM:         DORIS MATSUI

CC:           MINYON MOORE

RE:           ASIAN PACIFIC AMERICAN LEADERS MEETING

Many in the Asian Pacific American community are very pleased with the Administration's
efforts on behalf of Asian Pacific Americans and will acknowledge the progress we have made.
The following are the major issues of concern.

Political Appointments

Appointments continue to concern the community. Several points will be presented:

      Lack of cabinet and subcabinet level appointments
      Lack of promotion of current AP A appointees
      Lack of AP A senior person in White House Personnel
      Need for AP A to replace Dang Pham, Deputy Director of OBEMLA at Education
      Need to continue to push for confirmation of Paul Igasaki at EEOC & Bill Lann Lee

Talking Point
      This administration has appointed more Asian Pacific Americans (over 200) to
       senior-level positions than any other administration. The Administration is committed to
       continuing such appointments. (See attachment from Bob Nash.)

Immigration and Naturalization

The Asian Pacific American community wants leadership on appropriations to address the
backlog of INS cases.

Background
The dramatic increase in naturalization applications (from 540,000 in FY 1994 to almost
1.6 million in FY 1997), along with the dedication of substantial resources over the past
nine months to implement quality procedures, has resulted in an increase in the number of
pending applications to nearly 1.9 million as of the end of May 1998. Most applicants are
experiencing a wait time of 18-24 months.

At the same time, the INS plans to increase the fees on naturalization, which fund the
program, from $95 to $225 as of October 1. (This increase will more accurately reflect


                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

OMB and DPC are working with the INS to develop a credible backlog-reduction plan that
focuses on management and process reforms.

Talking points:
      We agree that the growing backlog is unacceptable. The Administration is
       committed to both management reforms and providing the resources necessary to
       steadily reduce and eventually eliminate the waiting time. The Domestic Policy
       Council and the Office of Management and Budget already are working with the
       INS and Department of Justice to develop a comprehensive plan to achieve this goal.


         In the past year, the INS has implemented several reforms to the naturalization
         process that are designed to expedite processing, while maintaining integrity.
         However, we recognize that there are enormous challenges ahead. We are committed to
         addressing those challenges in an expeditious manner.

         In addition, our FY 1999 budget anticipates significant further reductions to waiting
time.
If asked about the fee increase:
         Given the budget realities, an increase in the fee is the only way to reduce the backlog.
         We recognize that in some cases the anticipated fee increase will create a hardship. We
         will make sure that any proposal to increase the fee is accompanied by a waiver for those
         for whom the burden is too great.

Campaign Finance Reform

In two previous meetings last fall, one with you and another with the President, members of the
AP A community requested a review ofthe policy which disallowed campaign contributions to
the Democratic party from legal permanent residents. Last January the DNC changed its policy
in order to allow donations from legal permanent residents.

At this meeting, partiCipants will raise the issue once again, as it applies to the legal permanent
resident ban in the pending campaign finance reform legislation.

Talking Point:
      We are also concerned about this issue. Working on a bipartisan basis, we will continue
       to encourage fair and meaningful reforms.

Census

The Asian Pacific American community is grateful to the administration for standing firm on


                                                                                                      2
                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
on the various categories of AP As in a consistent manner. The meeting partidpants also would
like to work with the federal agencies to develop a strategic media plan to educate the AP A
community of the importance of participating in the census process.

Talking Point:
      Thank you for your support of sampling. It's clear that you understand all too well the
       connection between census and programs and policies. I hope you will continue your
       effort to educate the public on the importance of a fair and accurate census.

President's Initiative on Race

While appreciative of the administration's efforts, there is a concern that Asian Pacific
Americans lack visibility in public forums. They would like an assurance that AP As will be
represented in the President's Report to the American people and included in its
recommendations.

Talking Point:
      We encourage you to work with the Race Initiative staff on the report. It's important that
       your voices are heard. I will speak with the Initiative's Executive Director Judy Winston
       about ensuring that she solicits your input.

Filipino Veterans of WWII

The Filipino American community continues to advocate for the extension of veteran's benefits
to Filipino veterans who fought alongside US soldiers in WWII. Constituents continue their
efforts, both on the Hill and at the White House, to move forward legislation currently pending.

A hearing before the Veterans Affairs Committee took place today, Wednesday, July 22, 1998.
Response to the hearing was sympathetic, yet budgetary constraints remain the impediment to a
solution deemed appropriate by the Filipino veterans. As you know, there also is considerable
opposition within the veterans' community and the House Veterans Affairs Committee.

Talking Points:
      We acknowledge the heroism of the Filipino Veterans. Your efforts to educate the
       public about this issue have been effective.

      As you know, the President recognizes that the situation of the Filipino vets is special.
       Therefore, the President's FY 99 budget would end the 50 percent-level for
       service-connected disability for Filipino vets and would offer full disability benefits to
       disabled Filipino veterans living in the United States. (Note: This option will benefit
       1,600 Filipino veterans currently receiving 50 percent benefits, at a cost of $5 million a
       year, $25 million over 5 years).


                                                                                                       3
                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

Background
Current immigration law requires the INS and the State Department to determine whether an
applicant for admission to the United States is likely to become a ''public charge." In doing so,
the INS and State Department often take into consideration whether the applicant receives certain
public benefits. The word has spread within the immigrant community that enrolling yourself or
your children in Medicaid or other benefit programs puts you at risk with the INS.

DPC and OMB have been leading an inter-agency process to determine whether, given the
increased use of Medicaid and food stamps by working families and children and our increased
efforts to insure that all eligible children and families receive these benefits, the agencies should
revise their policies.

Talking points:
      We are grateful for your help in successfully winning back the immigrant provisions of
       the welfare bill and restoring food stamp benefits for legal immigrants. Together we
       corrected a wrong.

       Now we are concerned about policies or practices that would endanger our efforts to
       enroll eligible children and families in Medicaid and food stamp programs.

      DPC and OMB have been leading an inter-agency process to look at this issue. We are at
       the tail end of that process and hope to reach a clear resolution soon.

Health care

The health care concerns for the AP A community are:
      Medicaid coverage oflegal immigrant children through the Children's Health Insurance
       Program proposed in the FY99.

      An Asian Pacific American Executive Order which would increase the participation of
       AP As in federal government programs targeting effective access to and utilization of
       health and human services and encouraging research. (Note: Draft is circulating for final
       sign-off).

Talking Points:
      Right now legal immigrant children are eligible for coverage through the Children's
       Health Insurance Program if they entered the country before the 1996 welfare law was
       enacted. Our proposed FY 1999 budget would extend the law to cover children who
       entered the country after 1996. Unfortunately, Congress rejected this proposal. We are
       committed to ending this disparity and will continue to work with Congress, as we did on


                                                                                                        4
                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
      We are moving forward in the process on an executive order. As you know, executive
       orders require the input and comment of many offices, which makes the approval process
       lengthy.

Attention to APA Community

The Asian Pacific American community was thrilled by the Vice President's appearance at the
Organization of Chinese American's national conference last week. They hope that the
President, Vice President, First Lady and Mrs. Gore will attend future AP A events.

Talking Point:
      We intend to continue our involvement in AP A events.




                                                                                              5
                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 080 - FOLDER -008


[07/22/1998 - 07/23/1998]


