RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CRRATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JUL-1998 09:29:02.00

SUBJECT:   FYI: Browner on Newshours with Jim Lehrer

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Daniel J. Chenok ( CN=Daniel J. Chenok/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
We're sitting down with EPA staff arid others to discuss the issues today
at 1:00.


ONLINE FOCUS

                            SMOKE SCREEN?

                                    July 21, 1998

                        The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer Transcript




     A federal judge ruled the Environmental Protection Agency based their
decisions
     on the deadly effects of second-hand cigarette smoke on "selective
information."
     Carol Browner of the EPA and Charles Blixt of RJ Reynolds tobacco
company
     discuss the investigation.


     KWAME HOLMAN: Thirty-four years after a
     landmark surgeon general's report issued the
     warning, there is no dispute cigarette smoking is a
     health hazard. But whether the smoke generated in
     the process is a threat to nonsmokers nearby long
     has been controversial.

     In 1993, the federal environmental protection agency
     said second-hand smoke is harmful. The EPA report


     stated second-hand smoke "is responsible for
     approximately 3,000 lung cancer deaths each year in
     nonsmoking adults and impairs the respiratory health
     of hundreds and thousands of children." six months
     later, the tobacco industry filed a lawsuit that
     challenged the EPA's findings.

     The judge's ruling.

     Last week, in North Carolina, the federal judge in the
     case sided with the industry, saying the EPA made
     serious mistakes five years ago in evaluating the risk
     of second-hand smoke. In his ruling, Federal District
     Judge William Osteen said the "EPA publicly
     committed to a conclusion before research had
     begun" and the "EPA disregarded information and
     made findings on selective information."

     That, the judge said, put into question the agency's
     1993 decision to designate secondhand smoke a
     Class A carcinogen or a proven cause of cancer in
     humans. Only 15 other highly reactive substances,
     including asbestos and radon, are ranked Class A
     carcinogens.

    The EPA report on second-hand smoke was the
    impetus for hundreds of jurisdictions around the
    United States to ban smoking in public places,
    including restaurants, office buildings, and airports.
    The report also has been used as evidence in lawsuits
    against the tobacco companies. In a video news
    release a tobacco executive said the new ruling
    attacking the EPA report is likely to undercut the
    basis for future suits claiming injury from
    second-hand smoke.

    ELLEN MERLO, Senior Vice President Corporate
    Affairs, Philip Morris: I think was this ruling gives us
    is an opportunity for reasonable dialogue, for
    developing reasonable options and solution to deal
    with the whole issue of secondhand smoke, like
    ventilation technology, working together to ensure
    that we're upholding the rights and the preference of
    both smokers and nonsmokers alike.

    The ruling "an opportunity for reasonable dialogue."

     JIM LEHRER: Carol Browner is the administrator of the Environmental
Protection
     Agency. Charles Blixt is the Executive Vice President and General
Counsel of RJ
     Reynolds tobacco company. He was a lead lawyer of the industry when
it first
     challenged the EPA.

    JIM LEHRER: Was the EPA wrong in 1993, MS. Browner?

     CAROL BROWNER, EPA Administrator: We stand by our science. I think
there's
     wide agreement. The American people certainly recognize that exposure


to
     second-hand smoke brings with it a whole host of health problems, not
only lung cancer
     and those who choose not to smoke but a lot of problems for our young
children. The
     EPA report found problems in terms of respiratory illnesses.
Subsequent studies have
     shown decreased birth weight, asthma in children, sudden infant death
syndrome. There
     are real public health problems and what we did is we put out a
scientific report that
     was independently peer reviewed. Eighteen well-respected scientists
looked at it,
     agreed with the conclusion it is EPA reached. The judge simply made a
procedural
     ruling.

     Did the EPA ignore evidence?

     JIM LEHRER: But the judge said you had foregone conclusions and
ignored evidence
     that didn't support your conclusion.

     CAROL BROWNER: Absolutely not true. We all know that the EPA report
in 1993
     was only one in a series of reports. You had in 1986 the Surgeon
General saying
     tobacco smoke was a problem. You had the National Academy of
Sciences. As a
     result of those 1986 reports, it is true that EPA sought to educate
the American people
     about the dangers of tobacco smoke. That's part of our job, to
educate the American
     people. But then we undertook a comprehensive review, 31 independent
scientific
     studies were reviewed, 18 scientists from outside of EPA looked at
the conclusions, the
     weight of the evidence, and the~ all unanimously agreed that
second-hand tobacco
     smoke brings with it real health problems.

     JIM LEHRER: And the judge's decision last week doesn't change
anything from your
     point of view?

     CAROL BROWNER: We stand by our science. I think the judge made a
procedural
     ruling. What he essentia+ly said is that industry, that R.J. Reynolds
should have sat at the
     table to review the science. And we don't agree with that. We think
independent
     scientists -- as we did -- are the appropriate people to review a
body of scientific
     evidence.

     Charles Blixt: "This opinion was about abuse of power by
     the EPA."

     JIM LEHRER: Mr. Blixt, in your point of view a procedural ruling or
something


     sweeping about second-hand smoke?

     CHARLES BLIXT, RJ Reynolds executive vice president and general
counsel: This
     opinion wasn't about any abuse of procedure, Jim. This opinion was
about abuse of
     power by the EPA. What the EPA essentially did was deliberately
mislead about the
     American people what about what science has proven about second-hand
smoke. The
     judge's opinion cut right to the heart of that science. Sixty pages
of the opinion
     discussed the science that the EPA supposedly conducted in evaluating
and conducting
     this risk assessment.

     And as your lead-in story said, the judge specifically found that the
EPA came to a
     pre-determined conclusion then cherry picked data, excluded any data
which didn't
     support their pre-determined conclusion, changed the rules of
science, didn't follow the
     law, and didn't follow its own internal regulatory procedures. All of
which the judge
     used to strike down six of the chapters of the EPA report.

     JIM LEHRER: So is it your position, the industry's position, that
second-hand smoke is
     not harmful to health?

     CHARLES BLIXT: It's not our position that second-hand smoke is not
harmful to
     health. It's our position that the science doesn't support any
finding or any conclusion
     that second-hand smoke causes cancer or heart disease or any of these
other diseases
     that were listed. In fact, if it were proved, why would the World
Health Organization be
     currently conducting the largest single study of this kind, spending
millions of dollars, a
     study that's been going on for several years and the preliminary
report of which says
     that the risk of cancer from second-hand smoke has not been
established.

     JIM LEHRER: And that's your position? Not that it isn't there, that
it may not be
     possible ... that it just hasn't been established yet?

     CHARLES BLIXT: Well, science can't prove a negative, Jim. Science
can't prove
     that something doesn't happen. All they can do is look at ate
hypothesis, not a
     pre-determined conclusion, as the EPA did, but form a hypothesis,
undertake a
     scientific inquiry and determine if the hypothesis is proven by the
data and in this case
     it's not.

     Second-hand smoke: A health hazard?



     JIM LEHRER: Let's move together from the 1993 report to where we are
today.
     Make your best case for the fact that second-hand smoke is, in fact,
a health hazard,
     does, in fact, cause 3,000 people to die each year.

     CAROL BROWNER: Study after study, studies that came after the EPA
study-

     JIM LEHRER: Such as?

     CAROL BROWNER: The French study issued by the medical department of
France.
     The U.K. study. Even the World Health Organization study. You know,
let's not
     mislead the American people. I have a statement from the scientists
in the World Health
     Organization and they say their results support previous studies in
Europe and the
     United States which indicate that passive smoking -- secondhand smoke
-- increases
     the risk of lung cancer in humans. That's a statement from the
scientists.

     CHARLES BLIXT: But it's not ...

     CAROL BROWNER: Excuse me, hold on, my turn.

     CHARLES BLIXT: She's reading from a report. The biennial report of
the International
     Agency for Research ...

     CAROL BROWNER: I'm reading from a statement from the scientists who
did the
     study and I'm ...

     JIM LEHRER: Let her answer the question.

     CAROL BROWNER: More importantly, what you have here is a judge. A
judge in
     Winston-Salem, North Carolina essentially trumping the scientific
opinion of 18
     independent scientists. Trumping the opinion of the Surgeon General,
the National
     Academy of Sciences. You know, there's nothing else like this in
EPA's history. We did
     what we're supposed to do. We looked at all of the science, we
reached conclusions,
     we presented those to independent scientists, we asked the tobacco
industry what they
     thought ·about those in a draft form. They gave us thousands of pages.
They appeared
     for hours before the scientists reviewing these findings and at the
end of the day, the
     conclusion was unanimous. Secondhand smoke is bad.

     And you know, it's extremely important that the American people
understand that   .
     nothing in this judge's ruling has changed that. There are real


health problems both in
     adults and most particularly our children. And Jim, just one last
thing. The tobacco
     industry did not challenge EPA's scientific findings with respect to
our children. The
     respiratory findings that EPA made.

     Carol Browner: "What you have here is a judge ... essentially
     trumping the scientific opinion of 18 independent
     scientists."

     JIM LEHRER: Is that true?

     CHARLES BLIXT: Well, the two chapters which dealt with respiratory
diseases in
     children doesn't need to be attacked then.

     CAROL BROWNER: You agree,   then?

     CHARLES BLIXT: It was so much weaker than the purported science the
EPA had
     on the lung cancer issue.

     CAROL BROWNER: But the judge let the two chapters stand.

     CHARLES BLIXT: Let's get a couple factors correct. It wasn't a judge
in
     Winston-Salem, North Carolina. It was a federal judge in the middle
district of North
     Carolina which sits in Greensboro. The same judge who a year ago
ruled contrary to
     what the tobacco industry desired--that the FDA had the authority to
regulate the
     tobacco industry - an opinion which is now on appeal to the fourth
circuit. The
     implication that it was a single judge in Winston-Salem

     CAROL BROWNER: It is a single judge. One judge's opinion.

     CHARLES BLIXT: He's a federal judge.

     CAROL BROWNER: I don't disagree. It's a federal judge. But it's one
judge trumping
     18 scientists.

     CHARLES BLIXT: But, he didn't trump 18 scientists.

     CAROL BROWNER: He did.

     CHARLES BLIXT: If you read the opinion, Jim, he used the internal
scientists from the
     EPA itself, and I'll cite you to page 64 of the opinion where he
quotes four or five
     different scientists inside of EPA, a member of the scientific advisor
y board of the EPA
     all of whom said before the final draft was written that this was
wrong.

     The practical applications of this decision.


      JIM LEHRER: We'll get back to all of the procedures in a moment. What
I'm interested
      in tonight is the practical effect this should have on the way people
conduct their lives
      and from your point of view, Mr. Blixt, what would you say to some
body listening to
      this tonight? Does this change the way they should handle their
attitude toward
      second-hand smoke?

     CHARLES BLIXT: It's always been our position that the attitude
towards smokers
     should be one of accommodation and we still believe that. We believe
smokers and
     non-smokers can be accommodated, can live together. Can be
accommodated in the
     workplace, can be accommodated in the service industry, in
restaurants and bars and
     we don't need the EPA to trump up science to come to an incorrect
conclusion.

     JIM LEHRER: We heard you on that.

     CHARLES BLIXT: And then try to regulate where people can smoke.

     CAROL BROWNER: Wait. No, no, no, no, no.

     JIM LEHRER: Let me just finish with Mr. Blixt. As you know, as a
result, as Kwame
     said in his report, as a result of the EPA report in 1993 and
subsequent reports, there
     are a lot of city ordinances, a lot of state laws that have to do
with smoking in public
     places, etc. Is it the industry's position that those things should
be -- that they should be
     looked at, they should be reexamined, there should be a second look
taken at all of
     those as a result of what this judge did in North Carolina?

     CHARLES BLIXT: Well. Clearly what the EPA did was establish a
foundation for all
     those regulations which is have been passed subsequent to that? That
foundation has
     been pulled out from underneath the EPA and underneath all of these
regulations. Does
     that mean all of these municipalities and states are going to go back
and

     JIM LEHRER: Should they? Do you think they should?

     CHARLES BLIXT: Well, I think there's been, as a result partially of
the EPA's report
     and as a result of the anti-smoking industry's crusade to ban smoking
I think that there's
     been an extreme and almost ridiculous separation of smokers. In some
communities you
     can't even smoke in a public park. That's not accommodation and it's
not reasonable. I
     think that people should look at these things, employers should look
at these, businesses


     should look at it, restaurants, bars, the service industry, and
accommodate both
     smokers and non-smokers. I know there's a lot of people who are
annoyed by smoke
     and they shouldn't have to be exposed to it if they don't want to be.

     Should this ruling change laws and attitudes?

     JIM LEHRER: Now, Ms. Browner, what do you think should be done as a
result of
     this judge's ruling? Should anything change?

     CAROL BROWNER: Absolute any nothing should change. The American people
     need too know that second-hand tobacco smoke is bad for their health,
it's bad for
     adults and it's bad for children. And no city, no business that's
made a sensible decision
     to protect people from second-hand smoke should change those
decisions. They're
     right, that's what the American people want, that's what the American
people have
     come to expect. I don't think we want to go back to a time when you
enter a public
     building, when you enter an airplane and you gag because of the
amount of smoke. If
     you choose not to smoke, you deserve to be protected. Our science was
thorough on
     this. We stand by the science and nobody should walk away.

     JTM LEHRER: Are you going to ... Is the federal government or the EPA
going to
     appeal Judge Osteen's decision?

      CAROL BROWNER: We're looking at all of our options and clearly at the
top of the
      list and what's most likely is we will appeal this. Again, we've
never seen a judge go into
      a body of science -- a body of science not just reviewed by EPA but
reviewed by 18
      scientists from outside of EPA -- the head of the Yale Medical
Center, the New York
     Medical Center -- they all, all 18, unanimously concurred with the
conclusions that
      second-hand smoke causes lung cancer and it causes respiratory
problems in our
      children.

     JIM LEHRER: Is the industry going to pursue this to its final
conclusion? In other
     words, if EPA appeals, you go with it and go all the way to the
supreme court if you
     have to?

     CHARLES BLIXT: Certainly we'll pursue whatever avenue in this
litigation is necessary
     to see that the power of the EPA is not abused. Clearly that's what's
happened here.

     JIM LEHRER: What is it that you want ... When this is all said and
done, if you win,


     what do you want to win?

     CHARLES BLIXT: Well, when this started five years ago, Jim, all we
were trying to do
     was to hold the EPA to its scientifically rigorous standards of doing
a risk assessment. It
     may be politically correct to contend that smoking causes these
diseases. It's not
     scientifically correct and a judge has now ·said it's not legally
correct.

     EPA regulation?

     JIM LEHRER: So what do you want to do?

     CHARLES BLIXT: What we want out of this case is for ... as has now
happened, the
     entire report dealing with cancer has been invalidated, we have a
pleading on file, a
     supplemental pleading, to stop the EPA from trying to regulate in
this area as they have
     tried to do.

     CAROL BROWNER: We don't regulate as you know. Now wait, Jim,   this is
     important.

     CHARLES BLIXT: They have tried to conduct regulation and the judge
found they
     have de facto regulated this industry.

     CAROL BROWNER: No. No. No. Now hold on just a moment.

     CHARLES BLIXT: It was a finding of the judge.

     CAROL BROWNER: Excuse me. EPA issued a scientific report. Cities and
businesses
     across the country of their own volition put in place regulations to
ban smoking.

     JIM LEHRER: There's no EPA regulation?

     CAROL BROWNER: There's no EPA ... there is absolutely no EPA
regulation on
     smoking. Now, admit that. That's true!

    CHARLES BLIXT: What the judge has found ...

    CAROL BROWNER: Chuck, you know that's true. NO.

    CHARLES BLIXT: What the judge has found ...

    CAROL BROWNER: Cite the regulation.

     CHARLES BLIXT: What the judge has found is that this is de facto
regulation by the
     EPA.

    CAROL BROWNER: No. No.

    CHARLES BLIXT: The EPA, according to our supplemental complaint,


which will
     now be litigated--

     CAROL BROWNER: We issued a sciencific L·eport.

     CHARLES BLIXT: ... has tried to invade the private arena and tried to
regulate the
     tobacco industry.

     JIM LEHRER: I have a hunch we haven't heard the last of this but we
have right at this
     moment. Thank you both very much.


