RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas I,. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-JUL-1998 09:07:09.00

SUBJECT:   Q's that will get asked today

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary.L. Smith   CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHOIO=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
USDA got the reporters to tell them what questions they want to ask.
(Some draft answers are also attached) .==================== ATTACHMENT   1 =========
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D59)MAIL465246901.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504381050000010A02010000000205000000964C0000000200000F22AE25F8199D2C17DE4E
449E57E5941CA5B7BFD15342A5931967F96DF4F70A44C9CBOECB71E700F45A68D36A31AB4F90Fl
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


                    Audio-bridge with President Clinton and Secretary Glickman
                                Thursday, July 23 @ 3:00 p.m. ET
                                          Questioner list

Brownfield Network
Interviewer: Shelley Beyer
Phone: 573-893-5700
Topic: What can we do about low farm prices?        Also interested in fast track and IMF.

Based in Jefferson City, Missouri, this network has 200+ affiliate stations in Arkansas,
Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska and Tennessee.

Q:             What are you going to do about the rapid dedine in farm income?

A:             The first thing that we need to recognize is that this is a major drought coupled
               with other things that are beyond the control of the farmer -- severe weather and a
               serious economic downturn in Asia where many of our biggest customers are.
               That's why government must reposnd quickly to farmers and ranchers who are
               suffering.

               That's why we are pushing Congress to approve emergency assistance for farmers
               and ranchers who are experiencing financial stress from natural disasters and low
               prices. In addition, we are purchasing surplus wheat which will be used to help
               needy people overseas. We are also challenging Congress to improve the farm
               safety net in a number of very specific ways. We are also looking for ways to
               strengthen crop insurance, which is a key component of the safety net so that
               those who suffer repeated disasters are adequately compensated.

Q:             Why is IMP funding so important to farmers and ranchers?

A:             When major U.S. agricultural markets like Indonesia, Korea, Russia, and other
               countries in Southeast Asia experience an economic crisis, they can't afford to buy
               our goods. The IMF helps stabilize those economies, while they make important
               structural reforms to open their economies. This provides U.S. farmers and
               ranchers with both benefits, because it ensures that our customers around the
               world are strong enough to buy American farm products.

               That's why it is so disturbing that Congress has failed to act to provide full
               funding for the IMF. delaying this important legislation is a mistake that puts
               American jobs, farmers, and savers at risk. There is no doubt that the
               resources of the IMF are stretched dangerously thin -- especially in the wake
               of the Russia package. Failing to act responsibly now only increases the
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                            '   ..
       risks to American jobs and exports.




Q:   What about Fast Track?

A:   Fast track is critical to our long term ability to negotiate strong agreements to break
     down unfair trade barreiers around the world.         I applaud the agricultural
     community's support for free trade. Agriculture stands to gain perhaps more than
     any other sector of our economy from breaking down trade barriers overseas.
     That's why we have put agriculture at the top of the agenda for WTO trade
     negotiations set to begin in 1999.

     But the most important thing we can do this year to give the IMF the funds it needs
     to improve help American farmers. The IMF helps stabilize those economies,
     while they make important structural reforms to open their economies. This
     provides U.S. farmers and ranchers with both benefits, because it ensures that our
     customers around the world are strong enough to buy American farm products.

     That's why it's so disturbing that Congress has failed to act to provide full funding
     for the IMF. Delaying this important legislation is a mistake that puts American
     jobs, farmers, and savers at risk. There is no doubt that the resources of the
     IMF are stretched dangerously thin -- especially in the wake of the Russia
     package. Failing to act responsibly now only increases the risks to American
     jobs and exports.
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
WHO-AM, Des Moines, Iowa
Interviewer: Gary Wergen
Phone:       515-242-3550
Topic:       Gary will ask what we can do about low farm prices -- uncapping loans;
            accelerating payments.   And, trade, specifically, IMF, sanctions and fast track.

WHO-AM is a 50,000 watt clear-channel radio station that reaches most of Iowa and several
  surrounding states. The President has previously interviewed with WHO-AM.

See above, for farm prices Q&A

See above, for IMP Q&A
                                                                         Hex-Dump' coanagement System
                                                                                     nvers/on
Arkansas Radio Network -- Agriculture
Interviewer: Stewart Doan
Phone:       501-661-7612
Topic:       Will ask about low commodity prices and reaction to the Democratic
            Congressional proposals to improve the safety net.      Also interested in IMF funding
                     and fast track.

Based at KARN-AM/FM in Little Rock, this network has 29 Ag stations and 67 statewide
   affiliates. Stewart Doan will be the interviewer and is a farm broadcaster based in Little
   Rock. Mr. Doan is also the current president of the National Association of Farm
   Broadcasters. The NAFB will make audio from the entire program available to its more than
   2000 radio station affiliates nationwide.

Q:          How would you strengthen the Farm Safety Net?

A:          When I signed the 1996 Farm Bill, at a time when prices were strong, I made clear
            my concern that there was not an adequate safety net for farmers. The bill had to
            be signed to avoid putting farmers in an even more difficult situation under the old
            1949 Farm Bill.

            We have also proposed legislation to Congress to improve the 1996 Farm Bill to
            strengthen the safety net for family farmers. Our proposals would extend the term of
            marketing assistance loans; increase planting flexibility; allow flexibility in farmers
            can receive advance AMTA payments, improve credit availability and modify the
            "one strike" policy for farmers who have had a debt writedown; let farmers use
            USDA guaranteed operating loans to refinance; expand and improve crop
            insurance; compensate farmers whose crop and pasture land is flooded; and provide
            emergency feed assistance to livestock producers suffering from drought, and allow
            us to use leftover EEP funds in future years for food aid and other purposes.
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
Texas State Ag Network
Interviewer: Tony Purcell (Julius Grawas backup)
Phone:      817·543·5525
Topic:      Concerned about drought relief for Texas.   Also, the recent decision to purchase
           surplus wheat for humanitarian efforts.

Based at KRLD·AM in Dallas, this network has 50 affiliate stations throughout Texas.     This
   network is also affiliated with the Texas State Radio Network, which has an additional 60
   stations (total of no statewide stations).

Q:         Why can't you do more to help livestock producers who suffer losses due to drought?

A:         Unfortunately, the 1996 Farm Bill suspended USDA's emergency feed programs until
           2002. This is authority we would like to have back. We expended all available
           funds from the sale of grain in the Disaster Reserve Assistance Program addressing
           last year's livestock emergencies and have no congressional authority to replenish
           those stocks. Last week, I proposed emergency legislation to replenish this reserve
           with commodities forfeited to the USDA. Congress should move quickly to get this
           legislation to my desk to sign it.
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

Red River Farm Network
Interviewer:Mike Hergert
Phone:      701-795-1315
Topic:      Wants to follow up on Saturday's announcements.     And, are we considering any
            changes to crop insurance?

     Based in Grand Forks, North Dakota, this network has 14 affiliate stations in Northwest
     Minnesota, and Eastern North Dakota.

Q:          What are you doing to improve crop insurance?

A:          In addition to all our recent announcements, I have asked the Secretary to look at
            other ways we can help get our farmers through these tough times. We have already
            made several changes to crop insurance and we are studying new ways to make it
            better.
Interviewer:BiU Ray                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
Phone:      919-480-1372
Topic:      What are the Administration's suggestions for long term help for farmers. Would
           we consider returning to provisions from the pre-1996 farm bill?

Based in Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina, this network has 300+ affiliates in Delaware,
   Maryland, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, South
   Carolina, New York, Illinois, Ohio, South Dakota, Texas and Wisconsin

Q:         Would you consider returning to provisions from the pre-1996 Farm Bill

A:         I have no intention of returning to the supply management programs of the past. We
           don't want to go back to the days when government micro-managed farmers, telling
           them what to plant and when to plant. The Farm Bill's flexibility has proven to be
           very beneficial to American agriculture in our global economy. Today, our farmers
           and their products are second to none in innovation and productivity.

           But, when I signed the Farm Bill two years ago, I said I was very concerned about its
           failure to provide an adequate safety net. Unfortunately, that bill took away our
           authority to respond quickly to disasters. We still are not satisfied that the 1996 Farm
           Bill provides an adequate safety net for farmers and we have put forward a number of
           proposals to strengthen it.
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
WGNS-AM; Murfreesboro, Tennessee
Intemewer:Bart Walker
Phone:    615-893-5373
Topic:    What can we do to save the family farm.  And, what do you see as the differences
          between the Republican and Democratic proposals to help farmers.

WGNS-AM is 1,000 watt radio family owned and operated talk-news-sports station in
  Murfreesboro. The station does heavy early morning and late afternoon news and ag
  coverage and has high listenership among the local farm community.

Q:        What can we do to save the family farm?

A:        I am very concerned about the decline in family farms. We believe a comprehensive
          approach is needed to help keep farmers on the land. That's why we are working to
          expand markets abroad for American farm products and to make sure that there is a
          safety net when unforeseen events devastate people's lives and livelihoods.

          Family farmers also need access to credit and that's why we have endorsed legislation
          which would give farmers a second chance by modifying the "one strike and you're
          out" provisions in the 1996 Farm Bill. The Agriculture Deaprtment has also
          established an Office of Outreach to provide technical assistance to farmers so they
          can remain competitive. In addition, we're targeting our agricultural research to
          address their needs.

Q:        What is the difference between the Republican and Democratic proposals to help
          farmers?

A:        There are some in Congress who just think we should leave the market alone and
          leave these families to the ups-and-downs of the market. They are apparently content
          to ride out this economic downturn and focus on increasing exports, even though
          many of our farmers and ranchers are suffering from economic and natural disasters
          that require action.

          We believe the farm safety net needs to be strengthened. We have put forward
          proposals to address the inadequacies of the safety net which have not been acted
          upon by Congress. In the meantime, we have exercised what administrative authority
          we have to help farmers and ranchers -- buying surplus wheat and donating it to
          people around the world facing real hunger ..

          On the trade front, we are pushing Congress to provide full funding for the
          International Monetary Fund, which can help restore stability to the Asian economies,
          which are such critical customers for America's farmers. We are also pushing for a
          more rational sanctions policy that exempts basics such as commerical exports of
          food and medicine except under compelling circumstances.


