RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-JUL-1998 10:10:39.00

SUBJECT:   NEC paper on event:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
any changes?
---------------------- Forwarded by Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP on 07/23/98
09:56 AM ---------------------------




Jake Siewert
07/23/98 09:41:04 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP, Linda Ricci/OMB/EOP
cc:
Subject:         One Last Look



please take one last look, b/c we'd like to get out before the event.
Thanks.



==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D12]MAIL46587690L.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504354130000010A02010000000205000000B66D0000000200007836A3BCF9753818EE3416
49F33695CF45256E3AC4484FF1E6D297BDC6443C6D97FB4F9F70DCD19E1DE75281D2259C18C3CA
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

                                           July 23, 1998


FIVE AND A HALF YEARS OF PROGRESS, BUT CHALLENGES REMAIN. For five and a half years,
President Clinton and Vice President Gore have worked to expand opportunity for rural Americans
and farm families. The Administration has provided critical disaster assistance to rural
homeowners, farm owners, and business owners, as well as to ranchers who have lost livestock,
fought to expand U.S. agricultural exports, improved our school lunch programs by buying surplus
commodities, and worked to diversify the sources of enterprise and income in rural America. But
rural America still faces challenges -- with the economic crisis in Asia weakening some of our best
customers for farm products, strong world crop production bringing prices down, and farmers facing
floods and fires and drought and crop disease.

TODAY, PRESIDENT CLINTON ANNOUNCES IMPORTANT STEPS TO ADDRESS THESE CHALLENGES.
    An Action Plan for Rural America. President Clinton today is laying out a four-point
     action plan for rural America that:
             Expands the rural economy through exports and development;
             Improves the farm income safety net;
             Strengthens our rural infrastructure by improving transportation, protecting universal
             service, and improving our schools; and
             Promotes health, welfare, and a clean environment for rural America.

      Agriculture Disaster Assistance for Texas Counties. President Clinton today is
       announcing that all Texas counties are eligible for disaster assistance, making additional
       help available to producers whose crops have been ravaged by drought. The President will
       dispatch Secretary Glickman to Texas and Oklahoma next week to survey the hardest-hit
       regions and to report back on other steps that we should take.

               A FOUR-POINT ACTION PLAN FOR RURAL AMERICA

1.     EXPANDING THE RURAL ECONOMY THROUGH EXPORTS AND DEVELOPMENT

      Implementing the Wheat Purchase Initiative. On Saturday, President Clinton took strong
       steps to help our family farmers by reducing crop surpluses. He directed the Secretary of
       Agriculture to purchase 80 million bushels of wheat, which will lift prices for all wheat.
       The President launched a new initiative to press the struggle against world hunger, donating.
       U.S. wheat to countries where the need is greatest -- places such as Sudan and Indonesia.

      Fightingfor Full Funding of the IMF to Shore Up America's Customers Around the
       World. We must keep the market for our products growing by giving the International
       Monetary Fund the resources it needs to stabilize Asian economies that are critical
       customers for America's farmers. Farm and other exports are responsible for 30% of the
       economic growth we have enjoyed since 1993.
      Exempting Food Exportsfrom U.S. Sanctions Policy. The President believes that
       commercial exports of food and other basic human necessities should be excluded from
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

    economic sanctions as a matter of general principle -- except under compelling
    circumstances. President Clinton signed into law an exemption for US food exports from
    economic sanctions required by the nuclear non-proliferation law. This law allows
    American farmers to continue selling wheat to Pakistan, the market for 7 percent of US
    wheat. But Congress should do more to give us the flexibility we need to protect our
    domestic interests, without harming our foreign interests. This could best be accomplished
    by including in any sanctions legislation authority for the President to determine whether
    exempting food would be in the national interest.

   Aggressively Opening Markets Around the World. The Clinton Administration has a
    comprehensive approach to opening agricultural markets in our key export markets --
    bilaterally, regionally and multilaterally. Agricultural exports to Mexico have surged over
    the last year. In Latin America, we have established a negotiating group focused on
    agricultural trade in the Free Trade Area of the Americas process, and in the Asia-Pacific
    region, we have kicked off discussions aimed at lowering barriers to specific agricultural
    products. Across the Atlantic, the President and British Prime Minister Blair announced a
    new initiative with the European Union last May to address regulatory barriers to
    bioengineered agricultural exports. In his recent speech at the World Trade Organization,
    the President laid out an ambitious agenda for the next round of global agricultural
    negotiations, starting with a launch next year in the United States. And last month, the
    Secretary of Agriculture and the U.S. Trade Representative initiated an Administration-wide
    effort to combat phony technical barriers to agricultural exports.

   Enforcing Our Trade Agreements. We have been aggressive in using every tool at our
    disposal to ensure that agreements made are agreements kept. The United States is bringing
    and winning more cases in the WTO than any other country, and over one third of the cases
    we have initiated involve agriculture. For instance, the Administration has won important
    agricultural disputes at the WTO challenging the European Union's restrictions on some
    American-produced beef and Philippine barriers to pork and poultry. And now, the
    President and Vice President are pressing France to clear the way for $200 million in U.S.
    com exports to Europe. We have also made clear that we support legislation to create a
    new review mechanism to identify and address unfair trade practices in agriculture.

   Promoting Farm Exports. The Clinton Administration has nearly doubled USDA export
    financing in the past year to nearly $6 billion. On July 7, the Administration proposed
    legislation to ensure the flexibility to move Export Enhancement Program (EEP) balances
    left at the end of the year into other programs to fund additional sales of U.S. crops. This
    year, the President proposed that unused balances be carried over into subsequent years to
    expand U.S. exports. Congress should move quickly to approve these initiatives.

   Increasing Access to Capital in Rural America. The Clinton Administration has invested
    more than $175 million in the nation's three rural empowerment zones and 33 rural
    enterprise communities (EZ/ECs) since 1995, creating or saving over 7,000 jobs. And more
    than 700,000 rural citizens now receive additional services in the EZ/EC's as a result of
    USDA loans, grants, and programs. The Administration wants to build on this effort to
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion


     bring economic development to distressed rural areas by providing $40 million in mandatory
     grants to each ofihe fi ve new rural EZ' s over the next 10 years.

2.   IMPROVING THE FARM INCOME SAFETY NET

    Urging Congress to Help Farmers and Ranchers in Need through Emergency Funding.
     Last week, President Clinton called on Congress to relieve farm financial stress, urging
     emergency funding to address extraordinary conditions in many regions of the country. The
     bill is now going to conference, and the Administration urges the conference committee to
     include emergency funding for the three purposes the President recommended:

            Supplemental Crop Insurance Benefits would make new supplemental crop insurance
            payments to farmers who have had losses sufficient to trigger regular crop insurance
            indemnity payments in three out of the last five years (on the condition that the
            indemnity payment was greater than the insurance premium paid by both the farmer
            and USDA). This option avoids market intervention while providing assistance to
            areas in greatest need and would benefit about 45,000-50,000 farmers.

            Crop and Pasture Flood Compensation would make payments to farmers and
            ranchers whose crop or pasture land is under standing water (a problem particularly
            in parts of the Dakotas). They would receive payments equal to the rental value of
            the land each year the land is flooded.

            Replenish the Disaster Reserve for Livestock Feed Losses to replenish a fund used to
            provide emergency feed and livestock assistance to cover and prevent losses due to
            natural disasters. The 1996 Farm Bill limited the disaster reserve to about $60
            million in resources, and those resources are now almost exhausted. The program
            has helped get feed to cattle after blizzards in the Dakotas, New Mexico and the
            Midwest, but has also aided livestock producers in New York and California.

     The Administration is assessing the damage that farmers and ranchers have suffered because
     of natural disasters and will be providing the most current estimates to Congress.

    Enhancing the Fund/or Rural America. The Fund provides additional resources for rural
     development and innovative agricultural research that are vital to improving the quality of
     life in rural America and increasing the productivity of U.S. farmers. The Administration
     proposed creating the Fund in 1996 to boost the overall Federal investment in these
     activities. Unfortunately, Congress is not giving a penny to the Fund for Rural America this
     year. We will continue to fight for full funding -- $300 million over the next five years.

    Modernizing Agricultural Research. The President recently signed into law the
     Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998, which puts funding
     for crop insurance on a sure footing for the future, and boosts investment on agricultural
     research and rural development. Unfortunately, the House has moved to block $120 million
     of this mandatory funding for next year.
    Improving Crop Insurance. The President has instructed Secretary Glickman to redouble
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

     his efforts to augment the current crop insurance program to more adequately meet farmers'
     needs to protect against farm income losses. Federal crop insurance represents a
     fundamental fabric of the farm safety net, yet circumstances in some regions reveal the
     shortcomings of the current program.

3.   STRENGTHENING RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE BY IMPROVING TRANSPORTATION,
     PROTECTING UNIVERSAL SERVICE, AND IMPROVING OUR SCHOOLS

    Investing in Rural Transportation Systems. President Clinton recently signed the
     Transportation Equity Act for the 21 st Century (TEA-21), which guarantees $198 billion
     over six years to continue rebuilding America's transportation infrastructure. Rural
     America will benefit from new and rebuilt roads, expanded life-line paratransit services, a
     greater voice in transportation investment decision-making to ensure that rural areas receive
     their fair share offederal funds. TEA-21 also dedicates funding to help rural welfare
     recipients get to jobs, and extends the Ethanol Tax Credit through 2007.

    Developing a Long-Term Agricultural Transportation Strategy. In Kansas City on July
     27-28, Secretary Glickman will host a summit on "Agricultural Transportation Challenges
     for the 21st Century." Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater will join Secretary Glickman
     in announcing plans to develop a Long-Term Agricultural Transportation Strategy to help
     meet these important challenges.

    Continuing Air Service. President Clinton has continued the record $50 million in annual
     Essential Air Service operating subsidies to smaller, more isolated communities that
     otherwise would not be served by commercial carriers.

    Protecting Universal Service. President Clinton strongly supports universal service to
     ensure that all Americans have access to affordable telephone service for
     telecommunications. More than 38 million residential and business subscribers are served
     by telephone companies that receive support for serving "high cost" (rural) areas. Without
     universal service, telephone rates would be prohibitively expensive for many Americans
     living in rural areas, and they would not be able to access the Internet or phone service. All
     Americans would then lose, since our telecommunications system is much more valuable to
     the nation when we are all connected. The President strongly supports expanding universal
     service to include schools, libraries, and rural health care providers. Unfortunately, some
     members of Congress are threatening repeal of the e-rate and undermine universal service.

    Pushing/or Rural School Modernization. Almost one-half of the nation's 80,000 public
     elementary and secondary schools are located in rural or small town areas. According to the
     U.S. General Accounting Office, 30 percent of those rural and small town schools (educating
     4.5 million children) have at least one building in need of extensive repair or replacement.
     We must move forward this year with a comprehensive effort to address the needs of rural
     schoolchildren.

    Improving Distance Learning. President Clinton has proposed legislation to make it easier
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


     for Americans to gain access to new skills using distance learning. In his new Higher
     Education Act proposal, the President seeks to broaden opportunities for distance learners by
     including computers in the "cost of attendance" for purposes of financial aid; allowing
     institutions that offer more than 50 percent of their courses using distance learning to be
     eligible for student aid; and providing grants to "virtual universities" and other experiments
     with distance learning with a program called "Learning Anytime, Anywhere Partnerships."
     The Administration's Distance Learning initiative includes loans and grants to help bring the
     most modern technology and education to rural America.

4.   PROMOTING HEALTH, WELFARE, AND A CLEANER ENVIRONMENT FOR RURAL
     AMERICA

    Advancing Telemedicine. The President has set a goal of connecting all rural clinics and
     hospitals to the "information superhighway." In 1996, he signed the
     Telecommunications Act, which expanded the definition of universal service to include
     rural health care providers. The program is designed to ensure that rural health care
     providers pay no more than their urban counterparts for telecommunication services.
     This will help improve the quality of care in rural America by allowing patients to
     receive advice from the best specialists in the country.

    Improving Food Safety. The President's Food Safety Initiative is a comprehensive plan for
     improving food safety, including education, new technology, standards and more inspectors
     to make sure all food, including food that is imported, is safe. Congress should fund this
     $101 million initiative when it is raised in conferences on appropriations bills. The
     President has also called on Congress to pass the Food Safety Enforcement Enhancement
     Act, which gives USDA the ability to assess civil fines and to order mandatory recalls of
     unsafe meat and poultry products.

    Welfare-to-Work. One of the biggest barriers facing people who move from welfare to
     work, particularly in rural areas, is finding transportation to get to jobs, training, and
     child care centers. The President's new transportation bill authorizes $750 million over
     five years for his initiative to help those on welfare get to work. Last year's balanced bill
     included $3 billion to help move the people who are hardest to place people into jobs -- $700
     million of it to be awarded on a competitive basis -- about 30% to rural areas.

    Promoting Clean Water. To promote private conservation efforts, the President's new
     Clean Water Action plan includes about $100 million a year in new resources for farmers to
     help control polluted runoff, create 2 million miles of buffer zones next to waterways, and
     develop pollution prevention plans covering more than 35 million acres.

    Providing Safe Drinking Water: In 1994 President Clinton launched the Water 2000
     Initiative to help upgrade and expand drinking water service in rural communities plagued
     by some of the nation's worst water quality, quantity, and dependability problems. Water
     2000 has already improved drinking water quality or provided a public water supply for the
     first time to some 2.5 million people in over 1,300 rural communities nationwide.
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
   Making Rural Areas Safer. The President has awarded more than $2.3 billion in
    COPS grants to 10,500 law enforcement agencies serving small communities. 49%
    of the grants were awarded to communities with populations of fewer than 10,000.


