 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:23-JUL-1998 10:15:19.00

 SUBJECT:   Revised Q & A on Rural Ag event

 TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @   ~OP   [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 This is the long Q and A, as opposed to the ones tht answer the specific
 questions USDA expects will be asked at the radio address.
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP on 07/23/98
 10:13 AM ---------------------------




 Megan C. Moloney
 07/23/98 10:05:55 AM
 Record Type:     Record

 To:      Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP
 cc:
 Subject:         Revised Q & A on Rural Ag event


 ---------------------- Forwarded by Megan C. Moloney/WHO/EOP on 07/23/98
 10:10 AM ---------------------------



 Megan C. Moloney
 07/22/98 08:56:44 PM
 Record Type:     Record

 To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
 cc:
 Subject:         Revised Q & A on Rural Ag event

 A final (we are always hopeful) update of the expanded Q&A for this ag
 event ....


Message Sent
To: ______________________________________________________________
Barry J. 'l'oiv/WHO/EOP
Darby E. Stott/WHO/EOP
Anne M. Edwards/WHO/EOP
Brenda M. Anders/WHO/EOP
Jonathan Murchinson/WHO/EOP
Joseph P. Lockhart/WHO/EOP
Megan C. Moloney/WHO/EOP
Lori L. Anderson/WHO/EOP
Elizabeth R. Newman/WHO/EOP
Julia M. Payne/WHO/EOP
Julianne B. Corbett/WHO/EOP
Estela Mendoza/WHO/EOP
Kara Gerhardt/WHO/EOP
Mark D. Neschis/WHO/EOP
Nanda Chitre/WHO/EOP
Amy W. Tobe/WHO/EOP
James M. Teague/WHO/EOP
Beverly J. Barnes/WHO/EOP
Michael D. McCurry/WHO/EOP
Mark A. Kitchens/WHO/EOP
Jason H. Schechter/WHO/EOP
Dorinda A. Salcido/WHO/EOP
Dag Vega/WHO/EOP




==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D77]MAIL4l409690S.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504395l200000l0A020l0000000205000000A2E5000000020000F33003A24601A96884021A
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
Question:   Is the farm sector in a crisis?

Answer:     Overall, the U.S. agricultural economy is performing well, but some sectors of
            agriculture are under stress, and in certain states, considerable stress. Declining
            commodity prices are taking their toll, particularly on farmers in the Northern
            Plains, where wheat accounts for roughly 45 percent of the value of all
            agricultural production. In recent weeks, the Kansas City market for wheat
            dropped below $3 per bushel for the first time since 1991. In the Northern
            Plains, farm income has fallen sharply due to three straight years of record and
            near-record world wheat production, declining exports, and repeated years of
            sustained crop losses.

            The problems are not limited to the Northern Plains: this year, farm income from
            wheat, com, and soybeans will be well below the five year average. With corn,
            cattle, and soybean prices all down, these regional problems are growing and are a
            cause for national concern.

Question:   Why are prices weak for major commodities?

Answer:     There are many reasons. For one, world grain production is up: this is the third
            year in a row of record and near-record wheat, corn, and soybean crops. At the
            same time, demand is down: this year our producers face a triple challenge on the
            export front: weak demand in Asia, increased export competition due to large
            world supplies, and a stronger U.S. dollar.
                                                                      Hex·Dump ConveiSlon
STRENGTHENING THE FARM SAFETY NET

Question:   What are you going to do about the rapid decline in farm income?

Answer:     We are purchasing surplus wheat which will be used to help needy people
            overseas. We are also pushing Congress to provide emergency assistance for
            farmers and ranchers who are experiencing financial stress from natural disasters
            and low prices. And we are challenging Congress to improve the farm safety net
            in a number of very specific ways.

Question:   How would you assess Freedom to Farm?

Answer:     We have seen that it works well during good economic times, but it fails to
            provide an adequate safety net.    However, planting flexibility has certainly been
            a success, as have been the conservation programs.

Question:   What is the difference between the Republican and Democratic proposals to help
            farmers?

Answer:     The Majority really hasn't put forward any new proposals. They are apparently
            content to ride out this economic downturn, even though many of our farmers
            and ranchers are suffering from economic and natural disasters that require action.


            We on the other hand, believe the farm safety net needs to be strengthened. We
            have put forward proposals to address the inadequacies of the safety net which
            have not been acted upon by Congress. In the meantime, we have exercised what
            administrative authority we have to help farmers and ranchers.

            On the trade front, we are pushing Congress to provide full funding for the
            International Monetary Fund, and a more rational sanctions policy that exempts
            basics such as food and medicine -- except under compelling circumstances.

Question:   Would you consider returning to provisions from the pre-1996 Farm Bill

Answer:     We have no intention of returning to the supply management programs of the past.
             We don't want to go back to the days when government micro-managed farmers,
            telling them what to plant and when to plant. The Farm Bill's flexibility has
            proven to be very beneficial to American agriculture in our global economy.

            But, when the President signed the Farm Bill, he made clear his concerns about
            the adequacy of the safety net. It took away much of our authority to respond
            quickly to disasters. We still are not satisfied that the 1996 Farm Bill provides an
            adequate safety net for farmers and we have put forward a number of proposals to
            strengthen it.
                                                                            ex-Dump Conversion
Question:   How would you strengthen the Farm Safety Net?

Answer:     When I signed the 1996 Farm Bill, at a time when prices were strong, I made
            clear my concern that there was not an adequate safety net for farmers. The bill
            had to be signed to avoid putting farmers in an even more difficult situation under
            the old 1949 Farm Bill.

            We have also proposed legislation to Congress to improve the 1996 Farm Bill to
            strengthen the safety net for family farmers. Our proposals would extend the term
            of marketing assistance loans; increase planting flexibility; allow flexibility in
            farmers can receive advance AMTA payments, improve credit availability and
            modify the "one strike" policy for farmers who have had a debt writedown; let
            farmers use USDA guaranteed operating loans to refinance; expand and improve
            crop insurance; compensate farmers whose crop and pasture land is flooded; and
            provide emergency feed assistance to livestock producers suffering from drought,
            and allow us to use leftover EEP funds in future years for food aid and other
            purposes.

Question:   Do you support Speaker Gingrich's call to make over $5 billion in payments to
            producers in October?

Answer:'    We should give farmers the opportunity to receive their AMTA payments earlier
            than December IS, as the 1996 Farm Bill provides. Secretary Glickman
            proposed this earlier this year. I must remind everyone that the Gingrich plan does
            not offer additional income to family farms - it simply accelerates payments by a
            few months. We need more substantiate improvements in farm policy if we are
            to provide a proper safety net for family farmers.
                                                                         Hex-Dump Converslor,


Question:   What has USDA proposed to improve access to credit for financially strapped
            borrows?

Answer:     Currently under the 1996 Farm Bill imposes a lifetime ban, without exception, on
            FSA loans to family farmers who have previously received FSA debt forgiveness.
            We have requested Congressional authority to give creditworthy USDA borrowers
            a second chance. Unless this provision changes, many of these borrowers will be
            forced out of business, even though they have the ability to repay the loans they
            need.
AGRICULTURAL EXPORTS                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

Question:        Why have U.S. agricultural exports fallen so sharply?

Answer:           There are three main causes for this year's decline. The first has been the Asia
                  crisis which is largely to blame for U.S. exports to the region falling by 17
                  percent over the first eight months of the year. This region accounts for almost
                  40 percent of worldwide U.S. exports. The second has been lower commodity
                  prices, especially for grains, which has largely been responsible for the 12
                  percent decline in the value of our worldwide bulk commodity exports. The
                  third is the strength of dollar, which has made U.S. exports less competitive
                  against major exporters including Canada, Australia, and the European Union.

Question:         What are you doing to boost commercial U.S. agricultural exports?

Answer.                 For one, we are making substantial credits available under USDA's export
                        credit guarantee programs. In response to the Asia crisis, we made
                        available $2.4 billion in export credit guarantees in fiscal year 1998 to
                        countries in Asia. Overall, we have announced export credit guarantees
                        of nearly $5.8 billion for fiscal year 1998, up from $3.9 billion at this time
                        a year ago. Our export credit guarantee program has proven to be the right
                        tool at the right time.

          We also continue to help U.S. producers develop foreign markets through a variety of
          programs (Market Access Program, Foreign Market Development Program, Cochran
          Fellowship Program, and Emerging Markets Program).

Question:         Why is IMF funding so important to farmers and ranchers?

Answer:      When major U.S. agricultural markets like Mexico, Korea, and those in Southeast
             Asia experience a macroeconomic crisis, the ensuing chaos and capital flight can
             sharply reduce U.S. agricultural exports to those markets. IMF loan programs helps
             stabilize those economies and induces them to undertake structural reform and trade
             liberalization. This provides U.S. farmers and ranchers with both short term and
             long term benefits. Should another crisis break out, we are concerned about their
             ability to offer assistance and the negative impact that would have on U.S. agricultural
             export interests.

Question:      Why are normal trade relations with China important for farmers and ranchers?

Answer:         MFN is critical for agriculture. At stake is the fate of $3.3 billion in U.S.
                agricultural products. MFN will keep China in the, market for U.S. agricultural
                products. If we were to revoke MFN, it is very likely that China would retaliate
                and turn to other countries, such as Australia, Canada, and the European Union,
                all of whom would line up quickly to fill the void left behind by the United States.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


             Moreover, revoking normal trade relations with China would undermine our
            efforts to resolve several key issues (i.e., access for U.S. wheat from the Pacific
            Northwest, citrus, plums and tobacco) and jeopardize ongoing wro accession
            negotiations.

Question:   How has agriculture fared under NAFfA?

Answer:     NAFfA is now the number one regional market for U.S. agricultural exports.
            Although agricultural exports are down overall, we are seeing strong gains in
            exports to our NAFT A partners, Mexico and Canada. This year, U.S. agricultural
            exports to Mexico are up 19 percent over 1997 and exports to Canada are up 8
            percent over 1997. NOTE: U.S. imports from Canada and Mexico are up as well.
             We are now running a substantial deficit in agricultural trade with Canada.

Question:   Is the Administration still concerned about imports of wheat from Canada?

Answer:     We continue to be concerned about high levels of Canadian wheat and barley
            imports are of significant regional importance to producers in the nortern Pains
            who believe that excessive Canadian imports disrupt their market. Trade must be
            fair as well as free. We continue to monitor very closely shipments of wheat and
            barley from Canada. For the past five years, imports of wheat from Canada have
            been at historically high levels.    As you know, the Canadian Wheat Board
            controls all wheat and barley exports. We are concerned that this gives Canada
            the opportunity to compete unfairly in international markets. This is of particular
            importance to producers in the Northern Plains compete with the CWB. For
            these reasons, we have requested a full audit of Canadian Wheat board sales, and
            hope to work with Canadian officials to address our concerns.

Question:   Will USDA's purchase of wheat encourage more wheat imports from Canada?

Answer:     This should not draw additional wheat into the United States. . We expect typical
            trade patterns between the United States and Canada to continue. We are now in a
            global marketplace. To the extent our actions have a positive effect on price, it
            will be because we are increasing wheat utilization world-wide, not displacing
            commercial sales.


Question:   How are you responding to the EU's continued refusal to allow imports of U.S.
            corn?

Answer:     We continue to press the Europeans, specifically France, to approve unapporved
            corn varieties for import. The Vice President called the Prime Minister of France
            on this very issue on Tuesday morning. We believe these products are safe.
            Biotechnology offers great promise for improving farmers income and
            environmental protection.
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
Sanctions and Agricultural Exports

Q:             Do you support Congressional efforts to exempt agricultural goods from unilateral
               sanctions?

A:             First, we should be prepared to donate food to those around the world at risk of
               malnutrition or starvation. Moreover, I believe as a general principle that
               commerical exports of food and other human necessities should be excluded
               from sanctions, except under compelling circumstances. In implementing
               sanctions we must never forget their humanitarian impact. On July 14, I signed
               into law a bill to exempt USDA credit guarantees from mandatory sanctions under
               the Arms Export Control Act. This allowed U.S. exporters to sell 300,000 tons
               of wheat to Pakistan the very next day.

               And I urge Congress to go further, and to include in any sanctions legislation
               Presidential authority to determine whether exempting food would be in the
               national interest.

Q:             Does this mean you support lifting current restncttons on food and medicine
               exports to Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan or Libya?

A:             I currently could not support legislation lifting or modifying sanctions on any of
               those countries.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
EXPORT SUBSTDIES

Question:   Why are we subsidizing dairy product exports under the Dairy Export Incentive
            Program (DEIP) and driving up the cost of butter?

Answer:     DEIP sales were not a factor in driving up the price of butter in the United States.
              In July 31, 1997, it was anticipated that the full quantity of dairy products
            permitted by the Uruguay Round agreement would be exported under the DEIP
            in the 1997/98 (July/June) year. This commitment was fulfilled for three of the
            four eligible products: nonfat dry milk, whole milk powder, and cheese.

                           For butterfat, less than half was accepted for export under the
                           DEIP. Mter January 1, 1998, only 342 tons were sold under the
                           DEIP. High prices and strong demand within the United States
                           are the principal reasons for the relatively low level of DEIP
                           butterfat exports.

Question:   What is USDA doing about subsidized EU barley?

Answer:     We objected very strongly when the EU subsidized a shipment of barley to
            California last April, and then we retaliated with a shipment of US barley to their
            market using the Export Enhancement Program (EEP.) We remain very
            concerned over the continued high level of EU barley subsidies - still $50 per ton,
            and are closely monitoring the situation to ensure that there is no repeat of last
            April's subsidized EU sale to California.      Global import demand is weak, yet
            competition has intensified with abundant supplies of cheap barley available for
            export from a number of countries.           Consequently, EU subsidies tend to
            exacerbate the downward price spiral as well as disrupt normal, free-trade
            patterns.

Question:   Are you going to authorize an Export Enhancement Program (EEP) for wheat?

Answer:     It is not fair, but American farmers and ranchers still have to compete with
            subsidized exports from the European Union and elsewhere. That is why EEP
            remains an important tool and we will use it where conditions warrant. Under
            the current market circumstances, we believe an EEP for wheat would result in
            lower prices for our farmers. Clearly in these circumstances an EEP for wheat
            would not be productive.

Question:   What is your current position on the recent legislation submitted by the
            Department of Agriculture to allow the use of EEP money for several food aid
            programs?

Answer:     I continue to support this legislation and would hope that Congress would act on
            this proposal. Our legislation would provide the Secretary of Agriculture the
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion



ability to assure that funds designed to benefit U.S. agriculture do just that. My
budget for next year also proposed that unused EEP balances be available for
use in future years.
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

CHARTER ,4CT .4ND FOOD AID

Questiorr.   Under what authority are you operating the initiative you announced last
             Saturday?

Answer:       The CCC Charter Act of 1948 provides broad authority to remove and dispose
             of, or aid in the removal and disposition of, surplus agricultural commodities.
             The wheat will be used for humanitarian donations under the authority of Section
             416(b) of the Agricultural Act of 1949.

Questiorr.   When was the last time these authorities were used?

Answer:      We are currently using the Section 416(b) authority and have used it extensively
             during the last 15 years. The Charter Act authority we are using has not been
             used since at least 1985. In 1985, Congress narrowed the authorities delegated to
             USDA for Charter Act use. With the passage of the 1996 Farm Bill, Congress
             restored much of this Charter Act authority including the authority to remove and
             dispose of, or aid in the removal and disposition of, surplus agricultural
             commodities.

Question:    Are you going to expand the initiative beyond wheat?

Answer:      At this time, we are focusing on wheat, but I have directed Secretary Glickman to
             continue to review the surplus situation facing other commodities.
                                                                         H0x·Dump Conversion
ESTA.TE TAX RELIEF FOR FARMERS

Question:          Farm leaders have called for Congress to provide farmers and ranchers
                   with relief from the Estate Tax. Do you support this?

Answer:     Last summer when I signed tax relief legislation into law, we completely exempted
            96 percent of this nation's farm households from estate taxes and significantly
            reduced the estate tax burden on the remaining four percent. The topic of
            today's discussion should be on improving economic opportunity for all farmers
            and ranchers rather than providing additional relief for just the wealthiest four
            percent.
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

DISASTER ASSISTANCE

Question:   What does your disaster designation mean for Texas farmers?

Answer:     This makes available low-interest USDA emergency loans.


Question:   Why can't you do more to help livestock producers who suffer losses due to
            drought?

Answer:     Unfortunately, the 1996 Farm Bill suspended USDA's emergency feed programs
            until 2002. This is authority we would like to have back. We expended all
            available funds from the sale of grain in the Disaster Reserve Assistance Program
            addressing last year's livestock emergencies and have no congressional authority to
            replenish those stocks. Last week, I proposed emergency legislation to replenish
            this reserve with commodities forfeited to the USDA.
RAIL TRANSPORTATION PROBLEMS                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

Question:   What is the current situation with agricultural transportation?

Answer:     Complicated. A lot of u.s. grain moves directly into the export markets or is
            exported in value-added forms like pork chops or drum sticks. But because of
            the Asian economic crisis, U.S. exports have really fallen off, so prices are low and
            there's a lot of grain in storage right now. The problem is that, as we head into
            the peak harvest period, folks may decide to move out the old grain all at once to
            make room for the new grain. That's the recipe for a real mess, particularly
            when the railroads are really struggling just to provide "routine" service levels.

Question:   What~   USDA doing about the rail transportation problems?

Answer:     Next week, Secretary Glickman will be in Kansas City with Transportation
            Secretary Slater at a national agricultural transportation summit. There will be
            over 200 industry leaders there representing railroads, barge companies, shippers,
            receivers, and farm organizations. We'll be talking about what we can do now
            and how agricultural transportation is changing. A lot of the conference is going
            to focus on long-term issues like the impact of biotechnology, railroad capacity
            issues, the investments some countries like Argentina and Brazil are making in
            their inland waterways, but we'll also take time to review the current grain logistics
            situation.

            Earlier this year, Secretary Glickman signed a memorandum of understanding
            with the Surface Transportation Board, agreeing to work cooperatively to develop
            better information on grain logistics -- such as how the railroads are performing
            and where the grain piles are. We hope that this kind of information will help
            shippers, receivers, and railroads know where the budding problems are and
            where to focus their attention.
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
ORGANIC REGULATIONS

Question:   How dose are we to getting national organic standards?

Answer:     On December 16, 1997, USDA announced the proposed rule governing national
            standards for growing, processing, labeling, importing, and certifying organically
            grown food and fiber. The comment period was open until April 30, 1998.
            The proposed rule was accessible on the Internet at its own website and
            comments were accepted online, and put back out on the Internet for public
            viewing, a government first. More than 275,000 comments were received, which
            will be considered in formulating a second proposed rule, due out by the end of
            1998. USDA is committed to standards that the organic community can embrace.

Question:   Why did USDA rule out the "big three"··products of biotechnology, the use of
            irradiation in food processing, and the application of biosolids (municipal sludge) [n
            organic food production?

Answer:     The first proposed rule did not take a posItIon on these issues; instead, the
            proposal asked for public comment on these items. Biotechnology, irradiation,
            and biosolids are safe and have important roles to play in agriculture, but as the
            comments made clear, they neither fit current organic practices nor meet current
            consumer expectations about organics. Therefore these products and practices
            will not be included in the revised proposal, and food produced with these
            products and practices will not be allowed to bear the organic label.
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
MILK MARKETING ORDERS

Question:   What is the current status of the Milk Marketing Order reform process?

Answer:     At this time, USDA is reviewing the comments that were submitted in response to
            the proposed rule which was issued in January. Almost 4,500 comments have
            been received with more than 3,350 comments being submitted by dairy
            producers. Over half of the comments have been received from the Northeastern
            United States. The comments primarily address the issues of the Class I price
            structure (fluid milk) and the consolidation of the Federal milk orders which were
            set forth in the proposed rule.

Question:   What is the next step in the Federal Order Reform process?

Answer:     After the comments have been reviewed, additional information obtained, and
            further analysis completed on various proposed options, USDA will prepare a
            final decision that will set forth the specifics of the consolidated Federal orders.
            Producers will be provided the opportunity to vote to determine approval or
            disapproval of the consolidated orders. Once the voting process is completed, a
            final order will be issued that will implement the new orders.

            The 1996 Farm Bill mandates that the new orders be effective no later than April
            4, 1999. Currently there is legislation being considered by Congress that would
            extend the effective date by six months.
                                                                           cords
                                                                        ex- ump Conversion
AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH

Question:   What kind of research is being funded by the Agriculture Research Service?

Answer:     ARS research has made significant contributions in the areas of food safety with
            new tests to quickly detect food borne pathogens as well as preventative measures
            to eliminate salmonella in baby chickens. Other research to control wheat scab,
            so vital to the great plains ,to eliminating phosphates in livestock waste and
            control of pfisteria, ARS research is providing the technology to attain a
            sustainable, efficient, and environmentally sound agricultural system.

Question:   How will the recently signed Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education
            Reform Act of 1998 support the needs of farmers, ranchers, and consumers?

Answer:     Needed funds to continue research to provide a safer more nutritious food supply
            while protecting our environment will be made available. Production agriculture
            will gain through research in genomics to produce disease resistant, higher
            yielding crops as well as alternative uses of agricultural products to provide new
            avenues of revenue.
                                                                        Hex.Dump Conversion

TOBACCO

Question:   What will happen to tobacco farmers if Congress passes a streamlined tobacco
            bill?

Answer:     I support a comprehensive approach to resolve the tobacco issue. I have made
            clear on many occasions that any tobacco legislation must protect tobacco farmers
            and their communities.

            I am concerned that the Congress is considering legislation that does not address
            the concerns of tobacco growers. I am also concerned that the individual
            settlements with the State Attorneys General do not address the growers. Most
            tobacco farmers live and work on small family farms; in many cases, their families
            have been growing tobacco for generations. In some states, entire communities
            rely on income from the tobacco crop. I am committed to working with
            Members of Congress in both parties to ensure that we protect the financial
            well-being of tobacco farmers, their families, and their communities.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
RURAL DEVELOPMENT

Question:   What can the Federal Government do in rural areas to promote economic growth?

Answer:     USDA, through its Rural Development Agencies - Rural Business-Cooperative
            Service (RBS), Rural Housing Service (RHS) and Rural Utilities Service (RUS)
            - provides a wide range of assistance: grants and guaranteed loans to existing
            and start-up businesses, distance learning and telemedicine technologies, clean
            drinking water and proper disposal systems, assistance to help rural citizens
            become homeowners, essential community facilities (hospitals, childcare centers,
            fire stations) and numerous other services designed to help communities and their
            citizens realize a better quality oflife.

            In addition, the Empowerment Zone/Enterprise Community (EZ/EC) Initiative
            works with traditionally distressed and under-served communities in a
            comprehensive manner to create jobs, build infrastructure, spur investment
            through leveraging and partnerships, and build stronger communities that endure.
            After a very successful first round of designations, we are now ready to launch a
            second round.

Question:   How much funding does the Federal Government provide for these programs?

Answer:     USDA Rural Development program levels (including grants and loans) is nearly
            $10 billion annually nationwide. In South Dakota, Rural Development expects to
            award       $90 million this year to help South Dakotans meet their housing,
            business and utility needs.

Question:   What types of specific initiatives are presently being done?

Answer:     Obviously everything being done is important.              Successful economic
            development means that you not only create jobs in a community, but also that
            there is affordable housing, safe and reliable utilities, adequate infrastructure,
            good schools, hospitals, etc. Presently, my Administration has a home ownership
            that has pushed home ownership levels to record highs. We also have Water
            2000 which is working to ensure that every rural citizen has access to clean, safe
            drinking water. As I mentioned, the second round to EZ/EC is coming up. We
            also have a Self-help housing Initiative where groups of rural residents partner
            with a not-for-profit organization to build their own homes. The "sweat equity"
            that they provide from physically building their homes is treated as a
            down-payment that they otherwise would not have had.
                                                                               Hex-Dump c;;:~~%;nt System
Question:      What is the REAP Initiative?

Answer:        The Rural Economic Area Partnership (REAP) Initiative was established to
               address the unique problems of the Northern Great Plains: low-density settlement
               patterns, historic dependence on agriculture, continued population loss and
               outmigration, stagnant or declining employment, and isolation that has led to
               disconnection from markets, suppliers, and centers of information and finance.

              Two Zones were designated with each zone completing a strategic plan for
              economic revitalization. As part of this process, federal funds were targeted to the
              zones. To date, nearly $30 million has been invested in the REAP area.


Que~tion:      What is the Administration's position on the House- and Senate-passed versions
               of the FY 1999 appropriations for Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and
               Drug Administration, and Related Agencies?

Answer:       The President's senior advisers have serious reservations about certain aspects of
              both the House and Senate versions of the bill.

Farm Issues: .The total funding in both bills is close to request ($13.7B), but both achieve these
                     levels in part by cutting key programs including 2 in the Ag research bill
                     signed last month: the Fund for Rural America in FY 1999 (-$60M); and
                     agriculture research invesment (-$120M in FY 1999).

               ·      The Senate bill provides $500M in contingent emergency funds to assist
                      farmers and ranchers suffering income loss due to repeated natural
                      disasters and low commodity prices ("the Conrad Amendment")

               ·      Both the House and Senate fail to fund the proposed $7M increase for
                      Outreach for socially disadvantaged farmers. Both versions of the bill
                      include the requested statue of limitations waiver for civil rights
                      complaints.


Other issues: ·       The House has not funded the $7M increase for additional research as part
                      of the Climate Change Technology Initiative or the $23M increase for the
                      Clean Water Action Plan.

               ·      Neither bill accepted increased user fees proposed by the Administration --
                      the largest was $473M to cover meat/poultry inspections by USDA's Food
                      Safety and Inspection Service.

               ·      There are no objectionable environmental riders in either bill.


               ·      The House bill contains a provision that would prohibit the Food and Drug
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

    Administration from using funds for the testing, development, or approval
    of any drug for the chemical inducement of abortion. The Secretary of
    Health and Human Services would recommend that the President veto
    any bill that includes this provision. No Senate provision.

·   Both the House and the Senate fail to fund the proposed $IOOM increase
    for FDA's efforts to reduce tobacco use among young people.

·   The House bill would freeze WIC funding at the FY 1998 level of
    $3,924M. This level is $157M below the request and would result in cuts
    to the proposed participation level of 7.5M of over 100,000 participants.
    Senate bill $24M more than the House.


