RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-JUL-1998 14:37:45.00

SUBJECT:   Firearms Follies

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Rahm/Bruce/Elena:

The Child Safety Lock amendment to the Senate CJS approps bill, which
failed Monday night, triggered a bit of an uproar that continued until
late last night.  In brief, 3 important amendments came up:

(1) Smith (of New Hampshire) offered an amendment complicating
implementation of the Brady Insta-Check system.  It passed by a vote of
69-31 and is discussed below.

(2) Sessions raised the juvie bill, but it was ultimately deferred.  Both
D's and R's agreed to try and negotiate a time agreement for sometime in
September.

(3) Durbin and Chafee offered their CAP bill, but it was tabled on 69-31
vote. The CAP amendment did not include Treasury and DOJ's changes, and
was amended to include NRA-supported language linking increased gun
tracing with the increased prosecution of federal gun cases.

The Brady amendment is of particular interest, especially if we're
thinking of doing an in August to announce our support for extending the
5-day waiting period.  Generally, the amendment would:

(1) prohibit the FBI from retaining any records from background checks
(the FBI currently plans to keep records of its checks for up to 18 months
for audit purposes);

(2) prohibit the FBI from charging a fee for each check (the FBI currently
plans to charge gun dealers about $15 per check to cover the operating
costs of Insta-Check); and

(3) create a federal cause of action for anyone aggrieved by a violation
of this provision, as well as allow successful plaintiffs to be awarded
damages and attorney's fees.

This provision undermines Brady in several ways. Most importantly,
though, it will put us in the position of either under funding the
Insta-Check system (estimated at $80 million per year) or robbing from
other FBI crime accounts (i.e., terrorism) to fund Insta-Check. An even


more likely result, however, is that the FBI will procure a separate
appropriation for Insta-Check that will effectively cut other, less
popular priorities were fighting for in the overall CJS bill (i.e., Legal
Services). Additionally, a similar, and perhaps worse, version of this
amendment may come up on the House CJS bill today or tomorrow.

To date, Democratic appropriators have not wanted to fight on this issue.
The NRA has characterized the Brady user fee as a "gun tax" and the FBI's
record-keeping requirement as "federal gun registration." Moreover, the
Administration is a bit split on how to approach this issue.  OMB feels
strongly that we don't have the money to cut a deal and ask for a separate
FBI appropriation. Justice prefers being able to charge a fee, but will
settle for a separate appropriation that comes out of somebody else's
funds.  The FBI will do whatever it takes to protect its budget, no matter
what we decide.  And Treasury is concerned that, in trying to cut a deal,
we will look to save money and exempt pawnbrokers from Brady Checks
(estimated to save $30 mfllion and strongly supported by many pro-gunners) .

My recommendation, though it pains me to say this, is that we link our
support for extending the 5-day waiting period to a CJS/Brady-based veto
threat. We could accuse the R's of undermining Brady and of currying
favor with the NRA; threaten to veto the CJS bill over this; and challenge
Congress to strengthen -- not weaken -- Brady by extending the 5-day
waiting period. As it stand, we are already likely to veto the CJS bill
over Legal Services and census sampling -- and Brady is a much more
popular issue. We could do this in early August just after Congress
leaves, and also use it as an opportunity to criticize Congress' lack of
progress on the overall budget.

In the meantime, I would also recommend that we get w/OMB, Leg. Affairs,
DOJ and Treasury -- and discuss what a possible compromise might look
like. Do we really need to charge $15 per check? Does the FBI really
need to hold on to all records for a year and a half? Etc ...

Let me know your thoughts.   Forgive the long e-mail,

Jose'


