RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-JUL-1998 23:17:34.00

SUBJECT:   DC charter schools

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP L OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena

I wanted to give you an update on what has happened in the past 24 hours
on DC charter schools.

House action in subcommittee today on the DC appropriations bill. The
subcommittee mark fully funded charter schools -- increasing the charter
school line item from $12 million to $32 million -- by cutting the same
amount from the DC public school system.  However, according to OMB,
Congressman Moran spoke in the mark-up about the need to fully fund
charter schools and the rest of the DC public school system. Congressman
Taylor, the subcommittee chair, supposedly agreed to take this approach in
the mark-up of the bill in full committee next Thursday. Taylor
apparently said the additional funding would come out of the federal
payment to DC -- a payment used for other purposes in the Senate but most
of which Taylor had not planned to appropriate to DC at all. Moreover,
Livingston also attended the mark-up and apparently made a supportive
statement about this approach.   This is obviously better news than
expected, though I don't think we can't be certain that this agreement
will hold -- particularly given that the Taylor's subcommittee took the
wrong approach by cutting funds from the DC school system to fully fund
the charter schools.

Rumors of Senate Action on the floor last night.  Last night about 8:30
pm, we got word that the DC appropriations bill was possibly going to be
brought to the floor of the Senate last night or this morning.    OMB sent
us a SAP to review including language on the charter school issue and a
likely voucher amendment.  Surprised that the bill was coming to the floor
so quickly, Neera and I got a number of people on the line to assess the
situation in the Senate on the bill and on the status of the charter
school issue.  In a conference call with OMB (Carol Thompson Cole, Janie
Jeffers, and Roz Rettman) and eventually Control Board staff (Tim Leath),
we discussed the charter school issue but soon learned that the bill was
not going to the floor of the Senate until next week ... probably later next
week. Therefore, the SAP did not need to be sent last night, though it
may need to be sent early next week.

Last night's conference call -- more information on the Control Board's
and Senate's preliminary positions. Control Board staff indicated that
     ,                                                                             Page 2 of 3
l.


     the Board's efforts this week have been focused primarily on getting very
     broad authority to transfer funding from one portion of their budget to
     another -- an approach with many benefits to the Control Board, only one
     of which is making it possible to transfer funding inco the charter school
     line item.   The Senate apparently was -- not surprisingly -- reluctant to
     provide such broad transfer authority.

     The control board staff also indicated that the Senate was considering two
     options for addressing the charter school issue in a Manager's amendment
     to the appropriations bill. The first option was to take funding from the
     DC surplus to fully fund the charter schools. The second option was
     simply to direct the Control Board to fully fund charter schools. Under
     the second option -- unless further steps were taken in the House or in
     conference to provide the Control Board additional transfer authority -- t
     he Control Board would be forced to increase funding for charter schools
     at the expense of other items in DC's education account. (This account
     includes the DC public school system, UDC, and libraries.)

     When Control Board staff expressed to us concerns with both of these
     options, we outlined another option -- providing the Control Board
     specific authority to transfer funding from anywhere in the DC budget into
     the education account for charter schools. The staffer said he couldn't
     speak for the Control Board but that his recommendation to the Board would
     be that they notask Senate staff to take this approach.   He implied that
     Senate adoption of this option now could jeapordize the Board's attempts
     to secure broader transfer authority      essentially, he implied that he
     didn't want to lose one of his strongest arguments for a broad transfer
     authority simply in order to fix the charter school issue now. He said it
     might be easier to support more specific transfer authority once the bill
     is in conference -- apparently if the Board has given up at that point on
     getting the broader authority.  Finally, the staffer did say that he
     understood the need for the Control Board to publicly state its intention
     to fully fund charter schools.

     OMB calls to Alice Rivlin. After the call, Mike Cohen, Neera and I spoke
     about next steps.   Carol Thompson Cole had said she would call Alice
     Rivlin,  but we agreed that a higher-level call to Rivlin was important.
     Melanne called Jack Lew this morning to ask him to call Alice Rivlin to
     ask for two things:

     1) for the Control Board to support an alternative in the Senate that
     would make it possible to fully fund charter schools without taking the
     funding from the DC public school system -- by granting the Control Board
     specific authority to transfer funding from anywhere in the DC budget into
     the education account for charter schools.   (We also could ask the Control
     Board if it could quietly tolerate cuts in other programs to fully fund
     the charter schools)

     2) for the Control Board to make a public statement -- at the appropriate
     point in the near future -- about its desire to fully fund charter schools
     without taking funds away from the DC public school system.

     I don't believe that Jack Lew and Alice Rivlin spoke today, but I have not
     been able to confirm that.  I will let you know anything more as soon as I
     find out.

     Next steps. Here's my best sense of next steps for Monday. What do you
     think?
     1) Find out what the Control Board's position is on this.  If Jack Lew
     does not speak to Alice Rivlin, I think we need to identify another way to
,                                                                            Page 3 of 3


do this quickly. Their position should affect the approach we take.
2) Convene another meeting to discuss the situation. Determine best
option to pursue.   This clearly needs further discussion, but here's my
best sense of possible options:   (I think option I is probably the most
desirable. According to Control Board staff, options 2 and 4 are
currently being considered by Senate staff.   Option 5 seems to be the
current Control Board strategy.)

OPTION 1 -- Support a Senate amendment granting the Board specific
authority to transfer funding from anywhere in the DC budget into the
education account in order to fully fund charter schools. This may make
the most sense if A) the Control Board is willing to work with us to
include this in the Senate bill and B) commit to using this authority to
fully fund charter schools without significantly cutting the DC public
school system.  It may be hard to get the Senate to include this without
Control Board support.

OPTION 2 -- Support a Senate amendment to take funding from the surplus in
order to fully fund charter schools.    This may make the most sense if
the Control Board is unwilling to work with us, given problems with the
following options.  But OMB may well have serious concerns about this,
given OMB's and the Control Board's past opposition to this.

OPTION 3 -- Identify cuts in other DC programs (outside of the education
account) in order to fully fund charter schools, and get the Senate to
include these recommendations in Senate amendment.

OPTION 4 -- Support Senate amendment directing Control Board to fully fund
charter schools. Absent any new authority for the Control Board to
allocate funds to charter schools from outside the education account, this
would force the Control Board to support charter schools by cutting the DC
public school system.  Support for this approach doesn't seem to make
sense -- given that the only way to fully fund charter schools and the DC
public school system under this approach would be to rely on getting the ri
ght transfer authority In conference.

OPTION 5 -- Do nothing in the Senate.  (We could still encourage the House
committee to honor the apparent commitments made today by Taylor and fully
fund charter schools and the DC public school system -- taking money from
the federal payment that had not been fully' allocated in the subcomittee
mark-up.  Push for the House position or the right fix in conference. But
it seems like a very risky strategy to rely on the House for DC
appropriations issues.)

OPTION 6 -- Encourage the Senate to include language expressing an
interest in fully funding all public schools -- including charter schools
-- without a specific fix.  This perhaps could help leave the door open to
negotiations in conference.

3) Agree on language for a SAP that reflects our decision -- or that is
general enough to cover the options that we are still considering.


