RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-JUL-1998 12:36:26.00

SUBJECT:   country of origin labeling

TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a useful memo on the background, official statements, safety,
trade, costs, and politics of this issue. You will note that there are
congressional splits (Stenholm and Archer for instance oppose) and
consitutent splits (meatpacking and food processing oppose). As you can
see from the memo, we've taken the issue up with USDA and USTR, there is
still a good deal of opposition within USDA and within USTR but we could
work to ameliorate some of their concerns (specifying that the label note
country its from, not just say "imported.")

 If you decide you want to try and make this happen, we should hold a
senior level meeting including at least USTR, USDA, State, OMB, leg.
affairs, the VP's office, HHS (FDA).

I'm still working to see if the August 12th event is still on.==================== A
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D31]MAIL443225611.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504386040000010A02010000000205000000D33B000000020000397A0682199353A2D32596
26AEF87FEE795AF519AC119D8CBCOEBBA3775D84800F48FF129069FC1EB246D387A89E2166641B
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

                           Import and Country of Origin Labeling

Background

         During floor debate, the Senate added two amendments by voice vote/unanimous consent
on import and country of origin labeling to the FY 1999 Agricultural Appropriations bill.
Senator Johnson's (D-SD) amendment applies to beef and lamb; it does not apply to pork,
poultry, or any other meat products. It appears to require "import" labeling rather than
individual country of origin. Senator Graham's (D-FL) amendment, on the other hand, applies
to all fresh and frozen fruits and vegetables sold at retail and specifically requires country of
origin labeling.
         The House FY 99 Agricultural Appropriations bill does not include either provision.
However, legislation similar to these amendments has been introduced in the House. A bill
mandating country of origin labeling for all meat products, HR 1371, was introduced by Rep.
Chenoweth (R-ID) and currently has 39 cosponsors (24 Reps, 15 Oems, 1 Indep.). Several bills
have been introduced in the House to require country of origin labeling on produce -- HR 1232
by Rep. Bono (96 cosponsors, 51 Oems, 44 Reps, and 1 Indep), HR 2332 by Rep. Everett (42
cosponsors), HR 3676 by Rep. Pallone, 29 cosponsors, and HR 4080 by Rep. Dingell (15
cosponsors). None of these bills has been the subject of a hearing or mark-up during this
Congress.

         USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) currently requires imported product
that is retail ready to be labeled with the country of origin. Product that will be further
processed is also labeled, but that identity is lost during processing. For fruits and vegetables,
current country of origin labeling is implemented by the Customs Service. Customs requires
side panel labeling on frozen fruits and vegetables, and imported fresh produce must contain such
information on shipping containers. Consumer ready products must also be labeled.

      The House and Senate are expected to conference on agricultural appropriations in
September. Various Members of Congress and constituencies have expressed interest in the
Administration's position on this issue.

Administration's Views

        The Administration has generally objected to efforts by our trading partners to impose
such requirements on U.S. products. However, USDA has not found any statement of an
official Administration position on country of origin labeling.

        During congressional trade hearings, Administration officials have expressed concerns
about the use of such labeling against U.S. products. During deliberations on fast track, the
Administration agreed, at the request of Senator Daschle, to promote a voluntary labeling
approach for U.S. meat products. USDA has held a public meeting to promote this initiative,
but very little interest has been expressed by industry.
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

Food Safety

         Country of origin labeling should not be characterized as a food safety issue. Imported
meat and poultry products must be inspected in the exporting country under a system equivalent
to the U.S. system, then it is subject to reinspection at the border. Imported meat and poultry
that is further processed in the U.S. undergoes a complete inspection again under U.S. inspection.


        However, while food safety experts generally do not believe that country of origin
labeling would greatly improve our ability to detect and control outbreaks of foodbome illness,
according to some it could prove useful in tracing back the origins of some outbreaks related to
imported fruits and vegetables. FDA officials have disagreed with this assessment arguing that
consumers rarely keep the fruit/vegetable containers that carried the tainted food.

       A further consideration is the fact that the Administration is currently seeking additional
funding for food safety. With limited budgets and efforts focused on actions directly related to
improving food safety, the Administration should carefully consider whether implementing and
enforcing country of origin legislation would be the most effective use of our food safety
resources.

       The Johnson amendment would be implemented by the Food Safety and Inspection
Service (FSIS), which is responsible for meat, poultry and egg safety. In the absence of
additional funding and personnel, FSIS would have to redirect resources away from food safety
focused tasks in order to implement and enforce these provisions.

        While the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has jurisdiction over the labeling of
fruits and vegetables, the Graham amendment gives the Secretary of Agriculture authority to
enforce the legislation. USDA has neither the infrastructure nor the resources to implement
this provision, and would suggest either FDA or Customs as the appropriate enforcement agency.

Trade

        It is possible to require country of origin labeling of imported products under our GATT
and WTO obligations, provided that all imports are treated similarly, the difficulties are reduced
to a minimum, and the labeling does not seriously damage the product or unduly increase its
costs or decrease its value.

         The Administration has generally objected to country of origin labeling when it has been
considered by our trading partners. If the Administration were to support country of origin
labeling, it could be seen as protectionist by our trading partners and would obviously limit our
ability to object to such requirements in the future.

        While many agricultural producers support country of origin labeling, others do not, in
part because of concern that such labeling would be used unfairly against U.S. exports. The
U.S. exports nearly 60 percent more agricultural products than it imports.   For example, it is
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

possible that such labeling will be used to stigmatize imported food products through negative
advertising campaigns. Similar efforts could be made to stigmatize U.S. expOlts to ot.~cr
countries.

         In general, Senator Graham's amendment appears to be consistent with U.S. rights under
Article 9 of the WTO agreement. However, it is possible that an exporting country could
challenge these labeling requirements as unduly increasing the costs of their product, for
example, because the labeling requirements imposed on domestic retailers will (1) either be
passed on to the exporting countries, making their product less competitive, or (2) make domestic
retailers less likely to market imported products.

        While the same general challenge could be made against his amendment, Senator
Johnson's amendment also contains language which appears to violate our international trading
commitments. Specifically, the language appears to require the word "imported" on the label
rather than allowing a specific country of origin, which would violate WTO Article XI. This
concern has been expressed to Senator Johnson's staff but the necessary changes to the language
have not been made.

        In addition, Senator Johnson's amendment may raise other trade issues such as national
treatment, particularly since it appears to be targeted at Canada. Under current law, cattle that is
imported into the U.S. for slaughter is consider U.S. product. The Johnson amendment would
require such product to be labeled as imported. However, if imported cattle are shipped into a
U.S. feedlot prior to slaughter, even for one day, then the product would be considered U.S.
under the Johnson amendment. The Canadian Agriculture Minister has expressed his concerns
about the amendment to Secretary Glickman.

        DPC has discussed the matter with Sean Darragh ofUSTR who expressed USTR's
continued opposition to the concept of country of origin labeling. Faced with the prospect that
the legislation may become law, USTR via Jim Lyons, suggested a change affecting the
importation of live cattle. Sean Darragh stated that USTR would much prefer language
specifying that the imported food will not simply say "Imported" but rather say "product of
country X".

Consumer Right to Know

       While country of origin labeling should not be supported on the basis of food safety,
supporters argue that consumers have the right to know a food product's country of origin. For
example, supporters argue that, if consumers can tell where their clothes come from, they should
be given the same information about their food.

        However, others have expressed skepticism that consumers do in fact believe that country
of origin is important information. In addition, a consumer right to know argument could have
implications for other labeling disputes, such as our current disagreement with the European
Union over the labeling of products of biotechnology.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
Enforceability and Costs

         Any real or perceived benefits to consumers from such a labeling requirement would be
directly related to the ability of agencies to enforce these new requirements. Industry and the
retail sector are strongly opposed to country of origin legislation because of the costs it would
Impose.

        To effectively implement the Johnson amendment, for example, all imported beef would
need to be segregated and extensive records would need to be kept throughout the slaughter,
processing, and distribution chain. Industry talking points against this amendment estimate that
20 percent of ground beef produced is the U.S. is made from imported lean beef blended with
U.S. fed beef trimmings. This would be a difficult and expensive effort, with estimates ranging
up to $60 million annually, depending on the level of enforcement.

        The Graham amendment, on the other hand, applies only to those retailers that purchase
in excess of $230,000 per year in fresh and frozen produce, or about 5,000 of the approximately
180,000 retail stores. However, these 5,000 retailers have approximately 30,000 locations
nationwide, and enforcement at retail establishments would often need to include record checks
at central purchase and distribution points. Preliminary estimates suggest that enforcement
could cost between $15-20 million annually, again depending on the level of enforcement.

Congressional Interest

       Many of the supporters of these provisions are from border states or from states that
compete with imported products. In addition, while there is bipartisan support for these
requirements, there is also bipartisan opposition. For example, both Rep. Skeen, chair of the
House Ag Approps subcommittee, and Rep. Stenholm, ranking Democrat on the House
Agriculture Committee, have expressed concern about these provisions. In addition, Ways and
Means Chairman Archer has expressed his opposition to these provisions in a July 24, 1998 letter
to Appropriations Chairman Livingston, and Agriculture Chairman Smith has also expressed
opposition to authorizing these provisions on an appropriations bill.

       USDA understands that the entire food processing and retail industry is attempting to
meet with the Republican leadership.

Constituent Interest

        The National Farmers Union, American Farm Bureau Federation, and the National
Cattleman's Beef Association have strong grassroots support for the Johnson amendment. The
pork and poultry industry do not support country of origin labeling, but they are also not covered
by the Johnson amendment. The meatpacking and food processing industry vigorously opposes
both amendments. Consumer groups generally support country of origin labeling. Fruit and
vegetable producers do not have consistent support for or opposition to country of origin
labeling.
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

Other Issues

        The Johnson amendment in particular contains a number of potentially problematic
provisions that may simply be due to inartful drafting. For example, one provision could be
construed to change the statutory definition of meat.


