RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREA'fOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-JUL-1998 20:54:06.00

SUBJECT:   pls take quick look at this draft paper on House GOP bill

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:


Please take a quick look at this and tell me if you like the style and
format.

I think we will most effectively discredit this bill if we cite evidence
that raises serious doubts about whether the bill will reduce youth
smoking.  Thus, I thought we should go beyond the typical one pager
without getting too wonky.    While I take the blame for the concept, CD
did all the hard work.  ==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D84]MAIL46094161M.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750438B160000010A02010000000205000000025E000000020000F966CB2B09D793B55D24B9
6E1B16029656C4441ADD94C8DB7F6279D9AADAF084413558B37BF1E5261B65ABB1806EACDE2DFF
E9D1A8E452EB47F2120D4D886AE8BC913743D2A3CE2BOA19B3E07CB75B323DB7733F9030C5B49C
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


        The House Republican Tobacco LegisiationWilI Not Reduce Youth Smoking
                                July 28, 1998 DRAFT

President Clinton has undertaken an historic and unprecedented effort to reduce youth
smoking in order to save 1 million lives over five years. Nearly three years ago the President
proposed tough new rules to require the FDA to regulate advertising targetted at children and
stop sales of tobacco products to underage youth. Last September, the President called on
Congress to pass comprehensive tobacco legislation to stop young Americans from smoking
before they start including: a substantial increase in the price of cigarettes combined with
additional surcharges on companies that continue to sell to kids; full authority for the Food and
Drug Administration to regulate tobacco products; changes in the way the tobacco industry does
business, including an end to marketing and promotion to kids; progress toward other public
health goals, including biomedical and cancer research, a reduction in second-hand smoke, and
smoking cessation programs; and protection for tobacco farmers and their communities.

The House Republican tobacco legislation fails to take the steps necessary to reduce youth
smoking. By advancing their bill, House Republican members are doing what the tobacco
lobby wants, not what American parents want. Three thousand young people start smoking
every day; one thousand will die early as a result. A bill written by the tobacco industry won't
save children's lives, and it won't save the political lives of the politicians who cynically
promote it. The only thing the House Republica!). bill does about teen smoking is to let the
industry keep getting away with it.

THE HOUSE REPUBLICAN BILL:

       Fails to raise the price of cigarettes -- ignoring scientific consensus at the expense of
        children's lives.

               The President proposed raising the price of cigarettes by $1.10 over 5 years -- an
                increase that both the Treasury Department and the Congressional Budget Office
                agree would reduce youth smoking by a third over the next 5 years.

               Numerous scientific studies demonstrate that teen smoking is responsive to
                changes in the price of cigarettes. A consensus view is that the number of teen
                smokers declines by about 7 percent for a 10 percent increase in the real price of
                 .          I
                cIgarettes.

               Moreover, recently released tobacco company documents demonstrate that the
                                                                                       tobacc
                                                                                       o
                                                                                       industr


        I Chaloupka, F., and M. Grossman, "Price, Tobacco Control Policies, and Youth Smoking, NBER
Working Paper #5740, 1996.
                                                        Hex텱ump Conversion
                                                                                      yhas
                                                                                      known
                                                                                      for
                                                                                      years
                                                                                      that
                                                                                      youths
                                                                                      are
                                                                                      very
                                                                                      respon
                                                                                      sive to
                                                                                      pnce.
                                                                                      A 1981
                                                                                      Philip
                                                                                      Morris
                                                                                      memo
                                                                                      analyz
                                                                                      ed the
                                                                                      researc
                                                                                      hand
                                                                                      conclu
                                                                                      ded "it
                                                                                      is clear
                                                                                      that
                                                                                      price
                                                                                      has a
                                                                                      pronou
                                                                                      nced
                                                                                      effect
                                                                                      on the
                                                                                      smokin
                                                                                      g
                                                                                      prevale
                                                                                      nce of
                                                                                      teenag
                                                                                      ers."
   Allows tobacco companies to continue advertising to children. While studies show
    that industry advertising significantly contributes to teen smoking rates, House
    Republicans refuse to impose meaningful advertising restrictions on an industry that has
    preyed upon our children for decades.

          The Treasury Department has estimated that the advertising and marketing
           restrictions proposed by the President would cut youth smoking by about 15
           percent. This is a conservative estimate -- a recent study by the American
           Medical Association found that a full 34% of teen smoking is attributable to
           promotional activities targeting children [cite].


                                            2
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

          The advertising restrictions proposed by the President would be enforced by the
           FDA and include:

           _ Banning outdoor advertising within 1000 feet of schools and public
                       playgrounds;
           _ Restricting advertising to black-and-white text only, except in publications
                   with a predominant adult readership or at adult only facilities;
             Prohibiting the sale or giveaways of promotional products such as caps or gym
               bags that carry cigarette or smokeless tobacco brand names or logos; and
           _ Prohibiting brand-name sponsorship of sporting or entertainment events.

          FDA authority over tobacco advertising will be far more effective in reducing
                                                               youth smoking than placing
                                                               such authority with the
                                                               Federal Trade Commission,
                                                               as proposed by the House
                                                               Republican bill. FTC's
                                                               mission is to preserve a
                                                               competitive marketplace free
                                                               of deceptive trade practices,
                                                               and therefore it can only
                                                               challenge the false, deceptive
                                                               or misleading information
                                                               content of advertising.
                                                               FDA's mission is to protect
                                                               the public health, and could
                                                               consider whether the tobacco
                                                               industry is addicting the
                                                               nation's young people and
                                                               not just lying about its
                                                               products to its current
                                                               customers.

   Proposes weak initiatives that will do little to reduce youth smoking. While
    numerous studies show that significant price increases and advertising restrictions reduce
    youth smoking, research also shows that other related initiatives have the potential to
    reduce youth smoking rates. However, the ultimate effectiveness of these initiatives
    depend on a number of factors -- they must be well-funded, comprehensive in nature,
    combined with other anti-smoking initiatives, and coupled with strong enforcement
    measures. By neglecting many of these factors, the House Republican bill falls short in
    several key respects.

    l< Counteradvertising initiative is underfunded and lacks coordination with other
    efforts.

                                             3
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

               The President proposed $ _ million in annual funding for a comprehensive
                advertising campaign based at the Centers for Disease Control designed to counter
                the attractive images and associations in tobacco advertising that reach teen
                audiences.

               Numerous studies demonstrate that high-quality, well-financed anti-smoking
                advertising campaigns -- such as professionally implemented strategies with
                substantial budgets, similar to major industry campaigns -- can significantly
                reduce smoking rates. 2 For example, Lewit, Coate and Grossman concluded that
                anti-smoking advertising lowered teen smoking by about 20 percent. 3

               Unfortunately, the House Republican budget contains only $ _ million for
                counteradvertising through the Office of National Drug Policy and Control, a level
                of funding which is insufficient for an effective national campaign designed to
                reduce youth smoking.

        x Access restrictions lack a strong and well-funded enforcement mechanism.

               The House Republican bill [complete] ....

               One recent study shows that a range of state and local policies intended to restrict
                youth access to tobacco, including minimum legal purchase ages, which were
                enacted without substantial and active enforcement programs, had little impact on
                youth smoking rates [cite].

               In contrast, a 1991 study in the Journal of the American Medical Association
                                                                                   reported a 69
                                                                                   percent
                                                                                   decline in
                                                                                   daily use by
                                                                                   seventh and
                                                                                   eighth graders
                                                                                   in Woodridge,
                                                                                   Illinois
                                                                                   following
                                                                                   legislation and


         2 Goldman, L., and S. Glantz, "Evaluation of Anti-smoking Advertising Campaigns," Journal of the
American Medical Association, vol. 279, [number?], March II, 1998, pp. 772-777; Hu, T., et. aI., "Reducing
Cigarette Consumption in California: Tobacco Taxes vs. An Anti-Smoking Media Campaign, "American Journal of
Public Health, [vol. #], September 1995, pp. 1218-1222.

       3 Lewit, E.M., D. Coate, and M. Grossman, "The Effects of Govemment Regulation on Teenage
Smoking," Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 24, no.3 [date], 1991, pp. 545-573.


                                                     4
                                                                 He).-tJump Conversion
                                                                                                active
                                                                                                enforcement
                                                                                                of restrictions
                                                                                                on cigarette
                                                                                                sales to
                                                                                                minors. 4
                                                                                                Similarly, a
                                                                                                 1992 study in
                                                                                                Tobacco
                                                                                                Control
                                                                                                reported a 44
                                                                                                percent
                                                                                                decline in
                                                                                                junior high
                                                                                                school
                                                                                                students'
                                                                                                smoking in
                                                                                                Leominster,
                                                                                                Massachusetts
                                                                                                as a result of
                                                                                                strictly
                                                                                                enforced sale
                                                                                                restrictions. 5




        4 Jason, L.A., P. Ji, M.Anes, S. Birkhead, "Active Enforcement of Cigarette Control Laws in the
Prevention of Cigarette Sales to Minors," Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol. 266, no. 22, December
11,1991, pp.3159-61.

        5 DiFranza, J.R., R.R. Carlson, R.E. Caisse, "Reducing Youth Access to Tobacco," Tobacco Control,
1992.


                                                       5
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion


     )<Provisions are neither comprehensive nor combined with other initiatives.
           Studies demonstrate that a comprehensive package of strong anti-smoking
            initiatives that target young people and reinforce one another will be far more
            effective in reducing youth smoking than isolated steps. Unfortunately, the
            House bill does not provide funding for potentially effective interventions such as
            school-based prevention or education programs, and teen cessation programs.

HOUSE REPUBLICAN BILL FALLS SHORT IN OTHER MAJOR RESPECTS:

    Limits the FDA's authority over tobacco products, which will hinder its ability to help
     stop young people from smoking before they start.

    Fails to impose tough lookback surcharges on tobacco companies that do not take the
     steps necessary to reduce youth smoking. Without the incentives necessary to change
     industry behavior, the industry will continue to market to children with impunity.

    Fails to fund a major increase in funding for public health programs or health
     research at the National Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control.

    Fails to protect children and workers from the hazards of environmental tobacco
     smoke.

    Fails to include critical protections for tobacco farmers who have done nothing wrong
     and deserve to be protected. Any tobacco legislation that achieves meaningful
     reductions in smoking rates must contain key protections for farmers and farming
     communities.




                                             6
                                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                Brief Comparison of McCain Manager's Amendment,
                                  McCain as Amended, and Republican House BilI
                                               July 28, 1998 DRAFT


                                 McCain Manager's              McCain as Amended             Republican House BilI*
                                 Amendment

    Significant Price            Yes ($1.10 per pack)          Yes ($1.1 0 per pack)         No
    Increase

    Lookback Surcharges --       Yes                           Yes                           No
    Industry

    Lookback Surcharges --       Yes                           Yes                           No
    Company Specific

    Youth Smoking                Yes (60% over 10 years)       Yes (67% over 10 years)       No
    Reduction Targets

    Full FDA Authority           Yes                           Yes                           No (authority is limited)

    Affirms Advertising          Yes                           Yes                           No {Instead, FTC will
    Restrictions In FDA                                                                      have enhanced authority
    Rule (no billboards                                                                      to regulate tobacco
    within 1000 feet of                                                                      advertising to teenagers).
    schools; requires black
    and white text only; no
    promotional give-aways;
    no sponsorship of
    sporting events)

    Affirms Access               Yes                           Yes                           Unknown.
    Restrictions In FDA
    Rule

 Significant Spending for        Yes                           Yes                           No
 Medical Research,
.Public Health, and the
 States

    Protections of Tobacco       Yes                           Yes                           No
    Farmers

    Environmental Tobacco       Yes                            Yes                           No
    Smoke Provision

    Liability Protections for
    Industry:
       I. Liability Cap         Yes; $8 billion cap.           No (Gregg amendment           No
                                                               struck the $8 billion cap).

      2. Bar on Class           No                             No                            No
    Actions
                                No                             No                            No
      3. Bar on Punitive




*          Based on press reports and 7-point outline.     7
                                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


                            McCain Manager's               McCain as Amended          Republican House BiII*
                            Amendment
      Damages

Penalties for Retailers     Yes                            Yes                        Yes (model program)

Penalties for Minors        Yes (state option)             Yes (state option)          Yes (model program)

Anti-drug Provisions        Yes (allowable use of          Yes (allowable use of      Yes
                            designated state funds)        public health funds and
                                                           designated state funds)

Cap on Attorneys' Fees      Set by arbitration panel       Yes (set by court)         Yes ($ 1000 per hour)

Tax Cut                     No                             Yes                        No

Counter advertising         Yes                            Yes                         Yes




       Based on press reports and 7-point outline.     8
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 081 - FOLDER -003


[07/30/1998 - 0713111998]
