RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L.    Free~~an    ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:31-JUL-1998 13:13:01.00

SUBJECT:   NAS report on single food agency and Exec. Order

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith     CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett      CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a draft executive order establishing a Food Safety Council.
The Council consists of the Secretaries of USDA, HHS, the DPC, and OSTP.
HHS and USDA co-chair and they would appoint an exec. director.  It is
charged with developing a unified food safety budget, a unified food
safety strategy, reviewing the NAS report and making recommendations, and
overseeing the research institute. We have discussed this concept (but
not the actual paper) with USDA and FDA, some people in each agency have
reservations about it, and would likely prefer not to preempt NAS, but to
instead wait and see what it says and what reaction it gets. OMB will
also have concerns and will want time to vet it.  If you are interested in
circulating it, I have some thoughts on how to process it.

Other Information
The NAS report: According to sources, it is still on target for release
August 17. It is still said to be critical of the current structure of
food safety and includes criticism of food safety planning, budget and
standard setting.  It reportedly suggests action on dietary supplements,
critiques current epidemiology, and criticizes the mixing of missions of
promoting food and regulating it.  It also cites specific recent examples
including Guatemalan raspberries and the salmonella in cereal.

Other Steps.
We've asked the agencies to come up with .other steps that could be
announced independently or in conjunction with the above announcement.
Here is what they suggest.

1. Eggs. The agencies say they could be ready to announce the shifting
of responsibility for eggs to USDA, previously it was split between FDA
and USDA.

2.   Achievements. The agencies have prepared a list of areas in which
they do cooperate successfully.

3. Vision statement and public hearings. The agencies have a shared
"vision statement" on creating a "seamless food safety system" that they
would put in the federal register and hold public hearings on.
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    EXECUTIVE ORDER

                       PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY


By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws ofthe United States
of America, and in order to strengthen efforts to improve food safety for American consumers by
establishing a President's Council on Food Safety, it is hereby ordered as follows:

Section 1. Establishment of President's Council on Food Safety.

(a) There is established the President's Council on Food Safety (Council). The Council shall
comprise the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Assistant
to the President for Domestic Policy, and the Director of the Office of Science and Technology
Policy. The Council shall consult with representives of the National Partnership for Reinventing
Government, the Office of Management and Budget, the Environmental Protection Agency, the
Department of Defense, the Commerce Department, and such other senior executive branch
officials as the Council determines.

(b) The Secretaries of Agriculture and Health and Human Services shall serve as Co-Chairs of
the Council. In consultation with other Council members, the Secretaries shall jointly designate
an Executive Director for the Council. Council members may designate senior executive branch
officials as their representatives.

Section 2. Purpose.

The purpose of the Council is to strengthen ongoing efforts to develop and implement a
science-based comprehensive strategy to improve the safety of the food supply, including
enhanced coordination among Federal agencies and with State, local governments and the private
sector. The Council shall build upon the President's Interagency Food Safety Initiative and
shall consult extensively with all concerned parties, including consumers, producers, industry,
academia, and State and local governments.

Section 3. Specific Activities and Functions.

(a) The Council shall annually develop a unified food safety budget to eliminate duplication and
ensure the most effective use of resources. This unified food safety budget shall include food
safety surveillance, inspection, risk assessment, education, and research.

(b) The Council shall develop a science-based, unified plan for improving food safety from the
farm to the table. The fundamental goal of the plan should be the establishment of a seemless
food safety system, including the steps necessary to achieve this goal, and should consider key
public-health, resource, and management questions facing Federal food safety agencies. The
plan should consider both interim and long term food safety issues, including new and emergent
threats and the needs of vulnerable populations. The plan should include education, inspection,
                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


research, surveillance, and should also ensure effective coordination of Federal, State, local, and
private resources to improve food safety, including public-private pal1nerships, where
appropriate                                              .

(c) The Council shall oversee the operation of the Joint Institute on Food Safety Research, and
shall ensure that the Institute focuses on addressing the high priority research needs identified in·
the unified food safety plan. The Council shall also ensure that the Institute issues a report
annually and holds regular public conferences and meetings regarding food safety research
developments and findings, including research conducted by the private sector and academia.

(d) The Council shall review the National Academy of Sciences report, "Ensuring Safe Food
from Production to Consumption", and other reports on the effectiveness of the current food
safety system. After providing opportunity for public comment, including public meetings, the
Council shall report to the President with recommendations for appropriate additional actions to
improve food safety. Any such recommendations should be in the context of the strategic
planning effort of the President's Interagency Food Safety Initiatives.

Section 4. Cooperation.

All actions taken by the Council shall, as appropriate, further partnerships and cooperation with
other public and private sector efforts wherever such partnerships and cooperation are possible
and would further improve the safety of the food supply.

Section 5. Judicial Review.

This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a
party against the United States, its agencies, its officers, or any person.
