RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TlME:30-JUL-1998 19:07:55.00

SUBJECT:   Education weekly

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Charter Schools. The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee reported
out the charter schools bill unanimously, and without amendment.   Before
the bill comes to the floor, there is one remaining issue to be worked out
with Sen. Coats, regarding a requirement in existing law that charter
schools use a lottery to select students if the school is oversubscribed.
Sen. Coats wants the Education Department to provide guidance that
interprets that requirement flexibly, enabling charter schools to
guarantee places for the children of founders and siblings of students
already enrolled. Coats may also push for guidance that would make it
easy for charter schools to have selective admission requirements, rather
than being open to all interested applicants. We are working with the
Education Department to find reasonable accommodations to these issues,
without opening the door to abuses that could increase the number of
racially identifiable schools. We would prefer to work out Education
Department guidance that Coats can live with, rather than have to deal
with these issues in a floor amendment.

National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.  In preparation for
the conference on the Higher Education Act, we are working on a strategy
for removing GoodlingO,s provision that prohibits continued funding for
the NBPTS.   This will be a difficult fight. Goodling appears as dug in on
this issue as he has been on national test. There is little interest in
the Board among House Democrats on the conference committee,  and though
there is bipartisan support for the Board in the Senate, the prospects for
sustaining a veto are weak in light of the overwhelming majorities that
supported the bill in both Houses. While few members on either side of
the aisle share GoodlingO,s antipathy toward the Board, some of his
attacks (e.g., the high salary of the BoardO,s President and the high
financial cost to teachers for seeking board certification) appear to
resonate even with supportive Democrats.  Our overall strategy is to work
with the Board to find compromise language that responds to the criticisms
that are being made while preserving the federal funding stream. We are
also working closely with NEA and AFT to shore up support among key House
Democrats, and will work with Gov. Hunt at the NGA meeting this weekend to
mobilize Republican Governors and business leaders who support the Board
to strengthen the resolve of Senate Republicans.

Ed-Flex. The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee reported out an
Ed-Flex bill which makes all states eligible to receive the authority to
waive federal education requirements if they have academic standards,
tests and school-by-school accountability measures in place. The bill
reflects the principles in the AdministrationO,s proposal you announced at
the NGA meeting last winter, and we supported the bill.  Senate Democrats
tried to stall the bill with a range of amendments, but ultimately, and
unhappily, let it pass. The prospects for floor action are not clear at


     present.

      DC charter schools. The Administration and congressional staff have been
     exploring ways to address a potential shortfall of funding for DC charter
     schools this acadmic year. The budget developed earlier this year by the
     Control Board and the DC Government significantly underestimated the
     number of students likely to attend charter schools, providing only $12
     million of the approximately $30 million needed for full per-pupil
     allocations to support the 4,000 students projected to attend charter
     schools this year. While the original DC appropriations bills introduced
     in the House and Senate included only the $12 million recommended for
     charter schools, the House version of the bill has added $20 million from
     the federal payment, a move supported by the Administration Meanwhile, a
     manager's amendment offered to the bill on the Senate floor may include a
     provision either to fully fund charter schools out of the DC surplus or
     direct the Control Board to determine an offset within the DC budget to
     fully fund charter schools. The Administration will continue to work with
     Congress and the Control Board in the coming days to make sure there is
     full funding available to the
     schools.




                                                                                           ·


