RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-AUG-1998 19:00:39.00

SUBJECT:   Revised Riggs SAP

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
H.R. 3892 -- English Language Fluency Act
(Rep. Riggs (R) CA and 3 others)

The Administration strongly opposes H.R. 3892, which would significantly
amend the Bilingual Education Act. While there is a serious need to
strengthen programs designed to help students with limited English
proficiency learn English, meet challenging standards in academic subjects
and successfully move into mainstream classes, this bill would not
accomplish these purposes. It is a step in the wrong direction.

H.R. 3892 would force school districts to arbitrarily cut off services to
students who need them, and would deny funds to school districts if they
fail to do so.  It would eliminate professional development programs that
focus on the preparation of teachers, and would therefore seriously
exacerbate the current shortage of qualified bilingual and
English-as-a-second language teachers nationwide.   By replacing the
current competitive grants program with a State block grant, the bill
would no longer target limited Federal funds to the school districts with
the greatest need and the highest quality programs.   Further, the bill
lacks maintenance of effort or supplanting provisions to prevent states
and school districts from reducing their financial support for educating
students with limited English proficiency, as a result of receiving
Federal funds.  Finally, the bill would curtail needed efforts by the
Education Department to protect the civil rights of LEP students.    It
would generate costly and time-consuming law suits for local education
agencies and deny them the ability to resolve Title VI compliance issues
on a voluntary basis.

The President has defined (articulated?) principles to guide efforts to
strengthen education programs for limited English proficient students.
This bill does not reflect those principles, and will not improve
education programs for LEP students.  It will not help them learn English
more rapidly, nor help them meet challenging standards in academic subject
areas. Therefore, the Administration strongly opposes H.R. 3892.


