         RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

         CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

         CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-AUG-1998 17:05:46.00

         SUBJECT:   Shortened POTUS Memo

         TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TEXT:
         I have shortened this memo for the President, which provides an overview
         of the conference and of the policy initiatives.==================== ATTACHMENT    1
         ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

         TEXT:
         Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D75]MAIL46109002B.226 to ASCII,
          The following is a HEX DUMP:

         FF575043D50D0000010A02010000000205000000E0470000000200005A52B7A4695DF9600793E6
         50165A92C55509366075FE51E812A5304A74E2A9.60BE7C04068783EOF391F99CFA694FABCEEE2C
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion




                                         August 4, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                 BRUCE REED
                      MICKEY IBARRA
                      ELENA KAGAN
                      LYNN CUTLER

SUBJECT:               NATIVE AMERICAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CONFERENCE
       On Thursday, April 6, you will attend a conference at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in
Washington, D.C., sponsored by the White House (Domestic Policy Council and Office of
Intergovernmental Affairs) and 15 federal agencies, entitled "Building Economic
Self-Determination in Indian Communities." This memorandum provides some background on
the conference as well as some statistics about American Indians and Alaska Natives. At the
conference, you will make several policy announcements in the areas of education, economic
development, and health care for Native Americans. This event is the first time you have
spoken in front of Native Americans since your meeting with tribal leaders in 1994. During this
conference, you will reaffirm your commitment to protecting tribal sovereignty and reaffirm the
government-to-government relationship between the United States and tribes. Finally, you will
promote and encourage economic self-determination in Indian country.

Purpose and Structure of the Conference

        This conference grew out of your meeting with tribal leaders on April 29, 1994, and the
establishment of the Domestic Policy Council's (DPC) Working Group on American Indians and
Alaska Natives. In addition, as a result of the government-wide survey of activities in relation to
Indian country and your suggestion that initiatives be developed around economic development,
the DPC's subgroup on economic development started planning this conference several months
ago.

       This conference will take place on August 5-6 at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in
Washington, D.C. The event is sponsored by the White House (Office of
Intergovernmental Affairs and the Domestic Policy Council), the Departments of
Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Education, Energy, Health and Human Services, Housing
and Urban Development, Interior, Justice, Labor, State, Transportation, the Treasury, and
the Comptroller of the Currency and the Small Business Administration. Secretary
Babbitt, Secretary Daley, Secretary Glickman, Secretary Herman, Attorney General Reno,
and Administrator Alvarez will speak at the conference.

       The conference will have approximately 800 participants including tribal leaders

                                                1
                                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                                                    Hex텱ump Conversion

    and members, businesses, and federal agency personnel. This conference will cover topics
    such as commerce in Indian country; building infrastructure and positivc climate for
    business; tribal self-government and economic self-determination; agriculture and
    economic development; rural business; community development in Indian country;
    electronic commerce; welfare to work initiatives; and tourism.

    Background on American Indians and Alaska Natives

           Indian America is made up of more than 550 tribes, with a total population of
    approximately 2.4 million. Approximately forty percent of all American Indians and
    Alaska Natives are under the age of twenty. About twenty percent of the total American
    Indian and Alaska Native population resides on 314 reservations, Indian lands, and in
    Alaska Villages that make up Indian country.

             While economic conditions in Indian country have improved in recent years,
    American Indian and Alaska Native communities continue to lag behind the rest of the
    United States with respect to social, economic, and educational attainment levels. Income
    levels of American Indians and Alaska Natives are substantially below those of all other
    Americans, and about 34' percent continue to live below the poverty level. In comparison,
    about 14 percent of all Americans live below the poverty level. Complicating factors such
    as geographical isolation, under developed infrastructures, and demographics, add to the
    challenges confronting tribes as they work toward a better standard of living and quality of
    life for tribal peoples.

    Your Participation at the Conference

            You will make remarks in the afternoon of August 6, which is the second day of the
    conference. You will speak to approximately 800 tribal leaders and representatives, business
    leaders, and federal agency personnel. The following person will introduce you:

          Dominic Ortiz, student, 21 years old, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. As a
           member of the Prairie Band Potawatomi Nation, Mr. Ortiz attended Haskell Indian
           Nations University, one of the tribal colleges. Currently, he attends the University of
           Kansas. While at Haskell, Mr. Ortiz founded and served as president of the Haskell
           chapter of the American Indian Business Leaders (AIBL). Through the guidance and
           mentoring he received from AIBL, Mr. Ortiz started his own business, Potawatomi
           Traders, which sells Native American jewelry at the wholesale level. Potawatomi
           Traders helps to sustain 200 Native American artists whose jewelry is sold at 15 retail
           sites in 4 states. Mr. Ortiz uses profits from his business to fund his education.

           Following your remarks, you will sign at the conference a Native American education
    executive order, which is described below.

    Policy Announcements to be Made at the Conference


                                                    2
                                                                          Hex-Uump vonversion

       We recommend that you make the following policy announcements at the conference,
which focus on economic development, education, and health care. As obtaining an education
and receiving quality health care are building blocks of economic self-determination,
announcements in these areas will complement your economic development announcements.

Education

      Native American Education Executive Order. This executive order is designed to
       improve the academic performance of American Indian and Alaska Native students
       in grades K-12. The order focuses special attention on the following five goals: (1)
       improving student achievement in reading and mathematics; (2) increasing high
       school completion and post-secondary attendance rates; (3) reducing the influence
       of long-standing factors that impede educational performance, such as poverty and
       substance abuse; (4) creating strong, safe, and drug-free school environments
       conducive to learning; and (5) expanding the use of science and educational
       technology. This order is structured to address Indian educational needs through
       participation at the federal, state, and local levels. At the federal level, the order
       establishes an Interagency Task Force which will plan budget initiatives, develop an
       education resource guide, and assist in implementing a comprehensive research
       agenda on Indian education. At the regional level, the order mandates a series of
       regional forums to be convened to identify promising practices. Finally, at the local
       level, this executive order sets up pilot sites which will receive comprehensive
       technical assistance in support of the goals of the order.

Economic Development

     Executive Directive for Economic Development in American Indian and Alaska Native
      Communities. You should announce the following directive which has the following
      three components:

             Technology Infrastructure Study. This memorandum will direct the Department
              of Commerce, in collaboration with the Department of the Interior and in
              consultation with tribal governments, to issue a report within 9 months on the
              technology infrastructure needs within Indian country, including distance learning
              facilities, telecommunications capabilities, and manufacturing facilities.

             Strategic Plan to Coordinate Economic Development. This memorandum also will
              direct the Department of the Interior, the Department of Commerce, and the Small
              Business Administration to develop, within 90 days, a strategic plan that will
              coordinate efficiently economic development initiatives across agencies for Native
              American and Alaska Native communities. The plan will build upon current
              efforts as well as look toward future efforts in collaborating on such matters as
              providing technical assistance, enhancing infrastructure, and developing software.

             One-Stop Mortgage Center. Finally, this memorandum will direct the

                                               3
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

              Departments of Treasury and Housing and Urban Development, in partnership
              with local tribal governments and in cooperation with other federal agencies to
              initiate a project to help streamline the mortgage lending process in Indian country
              in order to improve access to mortgage loans on Indian reservations. The
              agencies will initiate this effort through a year-long pilot program on the Navajo
              Nation and in at least one other location.

     Providing $70 Million to Create Technology-Based Jobs in Indian Country. The U.S.
      Department of Agriculture (USDA), through its Bringing Rural America Venture
      Opportunities (BRAVO) initiative, will direct $70 million of its contracting dollars
      through Fiscal Year 2000 to assist seven American Indian and Alaska Native tribes in
      establishing small start-up technology companies that will provide software developm.ent,
      maintenance, and technical support services. Through the 8(a) program, USDA, large
      technology companies doing business with USDA, and the Tribal Colleges and other
      land-grant educational institutions will work with American Indian and Alaska Native
      tribes to mentor and assist them in setting up these businesses to bid on government
      contracts.

Health Care

     Support Elevating the Director of the Indian Health Service to an Assistant Secretary.
      You should call on Congress to pass legislation to elevate the Director of the Indian
      Health Service to an Assistant Secretary. Elevating the IHS Director to the position of
      Assistant Secretary will strengthen the government-to-government relationship; facilitate
      communication and consultation with the Tribes on matters ofIndian health; and raise
      awareness of Indian health concerns throughout HHS and the entire federal government..
      The current director, Dr. Michael Trujillo, would become only the second full-blooded
      Native American to be an Assistant Secretary.

     Correct state CHIP allotments for undercount of Native American children. You could
      announce a change in the state-by-state allocation of the $24 billion in the Children's
      Health Insurance Program (CHIP) to appropriately count Native American children.
      States receive a share of CHIP funds based on their proportion of uninsured children
      below 200 percent of poverty. When the Census Bureau produced these counts last
      September, it did not include Native American children with access to the Indian Health
      Service as "uninsured." Thus, even though such children are eligible for CHIP coverage,
      the states with a large number of Native American children did not receive a larger share
      of funds. You could announce that both the Census Bureau and Administration
      recognize that this was inequitable and are thus revising the allotments.

      Highlight actions taken for outreach to Native American children. As part of a Federal
      Interagency Task Force, both the Department of Interior's Bureau of Indian Affairs and
      HHS's Indian Health Service proposed a number of actions to increase enrollment of
      uninsured Native American and Alaska Native children. These include developing and
      distributing culturally relevant referral information (e.g., brochure, poster, supplementary

                                                4
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
      packets ofinfonnation) to Native American families through the Bureau ofIndian
      Affairs, especially focusing on tribal schools, colleges and social services agencies.

Attachments
     Conference Agenda
     The American Indian, Eskimo, and Aleut Population (U.S. Census Bureau)
     Key Facts About American Indian and Alaska Native Children and Youth (prepared by
      IHS)
     Testimony on Native American Economic Development Before the U.S. Senate
      Committee on Indian Affairs




                                               5


