       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary   T~.   Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

       CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-AUG-1998 17:43:20.00

       SUBJECT:   Directive with EK's changes

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       Elena -- I have put in your edits.  Can I send this to Phil?==================== ATT
       ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

       TEXT:
       Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D26]MAIL42443102K.226 to ASCII,
        The following is a HEX DUMP:

       FF57504372050000010A02010000000205000000FC240000000200007B689EF84A56F698F1B9E4
       242498E9A8B153A42D068806D2B22763231DEOCAD5CBOB9F12636C8A82957A60A9D989EAE16FBD
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion



MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE
                THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR
                THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY
                ADMINISTRATOR OF THE SMALL BUSINESS
          ADMINISTRATION

SUBJECT:       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AMERICAN INDIAN AND ALASKA
               NATIVE COMMUNITIES

       Across America, communities are recognizing that technology and information
technologies are key to creating economic opportunities and increasing productivity. My
Administration has made substantial gains in spurring the development of an advanced
information infrastructure in order to bring the benefits of the Information Age to all Americans.

         Looking to the future, we know that technology is a key to economic growth. We need
to stimulate the growth of modem production facilities, small business incubators, capital access
for start-up companies, and strategic planning to develop a vision for technologically competent
communities. In particular, as telecommunications and information technologies continue to
playa key role in providing new job and educational opportunities, we must ensure that all of
our communities are able to participate fully in this new information economy.

        Because of their often remote locations, American Indian and Alaska Native communities
stand to benefit the most from the Information Age, yet are in the greatest danger of being left
behind. We must act to ensure that these communities gain new tools to battle high levels of
unemployment and low per-capita income. A recent study by the Department of Commerce
on Internet and computer usage in America shows that, although many more Americans
now own computers, minorities and low-income households are still far less likely than
white or more affluent households to have personal computers or access to the Internet.
And even more alarming, this study reveals that this "digital divide" between households
of different races and income levels is growing.

        The ability to own a home and have access to capital are also very important for
economic development. Residents of Indian reservations encounter several unique issues
when seeking to obtain a mortgage. Trust land status, tribal sovereignty, and requirements to
gain clear title from the Bureau ofIndian Affairs are examples of issues that lenders and
borrowers must grapple with during the mortgage lending process. Thus, individuals seeking to
acquire a homesite lease or a residential mortgage are often required to obtain approval from
several federal, tribal, state, and local agencies as well as private providers.

        The Department of Commerce, particularly through the Economic Development
Administration (EDA), has a 30-year history of investing over $730 million in economic
development projects in American Indian and Alaska Native communities, working with its
existing network of 65 tribal planning organizations. In addition, Commerce's National
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion


Telecommunications and Infonnation Administration has funded demonstration projects that
show Native American communities how they can use tcchnologies to improve the quality of life
on reservations_

        The Commerce Department's Minority Business Development Agency has funded eight
Native American Business Development Centers (NABDCs) that provide assistance with
accounting, administration, business planning, construction, and marketing. We must continue
this focus on infrastructure technology needs and business development in American Indian and
Alaskan Native communities.

        I accordingly direct the Secretary of Commerce, in collaboration with the Department of
the Interior and tribal governments, to report back to me within 9 months on the state of
infrastructure technology needs in Indian communities, including distance learning facilities,
telecommunications capabilities, and manufacturing facilities. This report should identify the
infrastructure technology needs in Indian country and set forth proposals that would help address
these needs.

       In addition, I direct the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Commerce, and the SBA
Administrator to report back to me within 90 days with a strategic plan for coordinating
economic development initatives for Native American and Alaska Native communities,
including initiatives involving the private sector. In developing this strategic plan, the
Secretaries and Administrator should consult with all interested parties, including tribal
governments and other federal agencies and offices -- particularly, the Department of Housing
and Urban Development, the Department of Transportation, and the Department of Agriculture.
The plan should build upon current efforts in the agencies and detail future efforts such as
providing technical assistance, enhancing infrastructure, and developing software.

         Finally, I direct the Secretaries of the Treasury and the Housing and Urban Development,
in partnership with local tribal governments and in cooperation with other federal agencies --
particularly, the Department of the Interior, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the
Department of Agriculture -- to initiate a project to help streamline the mortgage lending process
in Indian country in order to improve access to mortgage loans on Indian reservations. The
Secretaries should initiate this effort through a year-long pilot program on the Navajo Nation and
in at least one other location.

      These steps, taken together, will help ensure to the fullest extent possible the continued
economic development of Indian country.
 "
                                                                             Page 1 of 4


