RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-AUG-1998 11:35:04.00

SUBJECT:   food notes

TO: Elena Kagan (CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 Elena, here are some suggested talking points and Q and As for today's
meeting, and a draft EO.  I haven't shown the EO to anyone (although Eric
confidentially helped draft it).  I'd suggest that if yo think it is ok,
you be the one to send it to Morely, and if that you and he talk before
the meeting.  I talked to his secretary who is identifying the meeting as
DPC/NPR when she calls.

If the EO looks ok, we should make copies to hand out.      ==================== ATTA
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.DO]MAIL43815702T.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750435A040000010A02010000000205000000E11300000002000042578619DCEE0504474DBC
815455211D4766E8FBDFF18390110CCODC5205A98ABE28782BF7ABE31FOC8F7E73E159A4E9597D
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

                                        EXECUTIVE ORDER

                           PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY


    By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States
    of America, and in order to strengthen efforts to improve food safety for American consumers by
    establishing a President's Council on Food Safety, it is hereby ordered as follows:

    Section 1. Establishment of President's Council on Food Safety.

    (a) There is established the President's Council on Food Safety (Council). The Council shall
    comprise the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Assistant
    to the President for Domestic Policy, the Senior Policy Advisor for the Vice President, and the
    Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. The Council shall consult with the
    Office of Management and Budget, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of
    Defense, the Commerce Department, and such other senior executive branch officials as the
    Council determines.

    (b) The Secretaries of Agriculture and Health and Human Services shall serve as Co-Chairs of
    the Council. In consultation with other Council members, the Secretaries shall jointly designate
    an Executive Director for the Council. Council members may designate senior executive branch
    officials as their representatives.

    Section 2. Purpose.

    The purpose of the Council shall be to review the National Academy of Sciences report,
    "Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption", and other reports on the effectiveness of
    the current food safety system, to review and improve ongoing efforts to develop and implement
    a science-based comprehensive strategy to improve the safety of the food supply, and work
    towards enhanced coordination among Federal agencies and with State, local governments and
    the private sector. The Council shall build upon the President's Interagency Food Safety
    Initiative and shall consult extensively with all concerned parties, including consumers,
    producers, industry, academia, and State and local governments.

    Section 3. Specific Activities and Functions.

    (a) The Council shall annually develop a unified food safety budget to eliminate duplication and
    ensure the most effective use of resources. This unified food safety budget shall include food
    safety surveillance, inspection, risk assessment, education, and research.

    (b) The Council shall work to develop a science-based, unified plan for improving food safety
    from the farm to the table. The fundamental goal of the plan should be the establishment of a
    seemless food safety system, including the steps necessary to achieve this goal, and should
    consider key public-health, resource, and management questions facing Federal food safety
·                                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

    agencies. The plan should consider both interim and long term food safety issues, including new
    and emergent threats and the needs of vulnerable populations. The plan should include
    education, inspection, research, surveillance, and should also ensure effective coordination of
    Federal, State, local, and private resources to improve food safety, including pUblic-private
    partnerships, where appropriate

    (c) The Council shall oversee the operation of the Joint Institute on Food Safety Research, and
    shall ensure that the Institute focuses on addressing the high priority research needs identified in
    the unified food safety plan. The Council shall also ensure that the Institute issues a report
    annually and holds regular public conferences and meetings regarding food safety research
    developments and findings, including research conducted by the private sector and academia.

    (d) The Council shall review the National Academy of Sciences report, "Ensuring Safe Food
    from Production to Consumption", and other reports on the effectiveness of the current food
    safety system. After providing opportunity for public comment, including public meetings, the
    Council shall report to the President with recommendations for appropriate additional actions to
    improve food safety. Any such recommendations should be in the context ofthe strategic
    planning effort of the President's Interagency Food Safety Initiatives.

    Section 4. Cooperation.

    All actions taken by the Council shall, as appropriate, further partnerships and cooperation with
    other public and private sector efforts wherever such partnerships and cooperation are possible
    and would further improve the safety of the food supply.

    Section 5. Judicial Review.

    This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a
    party against the United States, its agencies, its officers, or any person.
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

                           Talking Points for Food Safety

*   The NAS report on single food agency is due out sometime around August 17th, the
    agencies are supposed to get to review it a couple days before it is released_

*   We all have heard rumors about what is in the report. The report will obviously focus on
    structural shortcomings, it mayor may not be seen as particularly critical by the media.

*   We want to take advantage of the ideas in the report and the chance to keep looking at the
    way things are organized in the food safety area.

*   One idea is for the President, before the report is released, to designate a group chaired by
    the Secretaries of USDA and HHS and with DPC, NPR and OSTP, to be designated to
    review the NAS report and report back and what steps we should take ne~t. Perhaps he
    could do it in the radio address next week.

*   We would also ask the group to formalize the current process and present a unified food
    safety budget based upon a unified food safety plan. If the group recommends another
    process in the future, we could move on from there.

*   We've drafted something in the form of an executive order, it would be something
    weighty, but we wanted to get your reactions to this.

*   I know you have done a lot of other work, I don't think this precludes the idea of
    something on eggs, I think it would compliment it.

*   I also know you've put together a vision statement for the federal register on a seamless
    food agency and to hold public hearings, the process we're suggesting is similar -- we
    want the public hearings, we just want to take this next step now.
                                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

                                            QandA

         Q.   Won't you be preempting NAS?

         A.   No, this is setting up a process for reviewing NAS and taking an incremental step on the
              budget that makes sense.


         Q.   Don't we already do a unified budget?

         A.    Yes, this does institutionalize that. Tom notes that this year there was some discussion
              whether to even do one. We want to make sure it happens.


         Q.     We don't know what the NAS report will say, do we want to get out there prematurely?

         A.    Well, this sets the stage to review NAS without being defensive. Everything we've heard
              is NAS will go further than what we propose, that it will recommend four options;
              including a food czar, putting one agency in charge, designating a lead agency, or creating
              an EPA like new agency. Maybe none of those options will make sense, in that case,
              suggesting this interim step at a later time may make even less sense -- we will look like
              we are doing too little too late.

         Q.   Will this unified budget cover everything that possible touches food safety or just issues
              in the initiative?

         A.   (I would throw this open to discussion, the agencies have strong feelings about
              scope, and can perhaps hammer out the details of what should or should not be
              included.)


