      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-AUG-1998 22:33:23.00

      SUBJECT:   q/a's

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
      ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

      TEXT:
      Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D3]MAIL48904712U.226 to ASCII,
       The following is a HEX DUMP:

      FF575043B00400000l0A02010000000205000000482B0000000200006C5777ED1AB3CA203B3B55
      C237848F87E15F8FC2B2443816DDD4EADOF8917E249459EEAF88C837F61195997CF3BC7A3D5770
,.                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


                                            Brady Event
                                        Questions and Answers
                                           August 6, 1998


     Waiting Period on Handgun Sales

     Q.    Can you elaborate on why the President supports making permanent the Brady
           waiting period prior to the sale of a handgun?

     A.    Under the Brady Law, the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS)
           will take effect on November 30, 1998. NICS will allow access to a fuller set of records
           than is now available, and law enforcement officials will use it to conduct checks of all
           prospective gun purchases -- not just handgun purchasers. We are pleased with the
           significant progress this Administration has made over the last 5 years to assist states in
           improving the accessibility of their criminal records once the NICS takes effect. These
           improved records will go a long way in helping to stop even more ineligible purchasers
           from buying firearms.

           Once the NICS takes effect, the 5-day waiting period for handgun sales established in the
           Brady Law will sunset. And while NICS will allow access to a fuller set of records, a
           permanent waiting period will allow law enforcement officers to check additional,
           non-computerized records, as well as provide a cooling-off time for handgun purchases.
           We believe that local law enforcement officials know best who in their community can or
           can't legally own a gun, and that they are uniquely positioned to provide the last, best
           check before a handgun purchase goes through


     Q.    Can you give us more detail on the SchumerlDurbin waiting period legislation?

     A.    Representative Schumer and Senator Durbin introduced legislation applying to all states
           to which the Brady Law now applies that will:

           (1)    Require a minimum 3-day waiting period for all handgun purchases. Under
                  current law, while there is no minimum waiting period, local law enforcement
                  officials have up to 5 days to reject a handgun purchase. The SchumerlDurbin
                  legislation establishes a minimum wait time, even if NICS background check is
                  completed well beforehand. The minimum wait period will give local law
                  enforcement additional time to review other local records that may not be found in
                  the NICS, helping to ensure that prohibited gun sales are not completed.

           (2)    Add up to an additional two days to the waiting period iflaw enforcement officers
                  need more time to clarify arrest records. Under current law, when NICS takes
                  effect, the system is given up to 3 days to complete the background check and
                  determine whether an arrest resulted in a conviction that disqualifies the
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

                prospective purchaser from owning a gun. The Schumer-Durbin bill will extend
                this period to 5 days, making sure law enforcement has enough time to get the
                information they need to make a final decision.

         (3)    Require gun dealers to notify the local law enforcement official in the purchaser's
                place of residence prior to selling the gun. Under current law, after November
                30, 1998, guns dealers will no longer have to forward the names and addresses of
                prospective gun purchasers to designated local law enforcement officials -- only to
                the FBI or a NICS point of contact. The Schumer-Durbin bill requires gun
                dealers to keep notifying designated local law enforcement officials of handgun
                purchases.


    Q.   Why are certain states exempt from Brady? What states are these?

    A.   States may be exempted from the Brady Law if they have a qualifying alternative permit
         system or a state "instant check" system -- both of which require background checks.
         Currently, 27 states are exempt from Brady's requirements -- including 9 that were
         originally subject to the Brady Law, but which later enacted Brady-qualifying state
         systems.

         The states exempt from Brady are: California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida,
         Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,
         Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North
         Carolina, Oregon, Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin.


    Q.   Didn't the Supreme Court overturn Brady's requirements? Doesn't this decision
         impact your ability to impose a new waiting period?

    A.   Last year's Supreme Court decision left the majority of the Brady Handgun Control Act
         intact. The Supreme Court ruled that the Federal government cannot require local police
         departments to conduct background checks, but left intact the 5-day waiting period.
         Nothing in the decision prohibits law enforcement from voluntarily enforcing the Brady
         Law checks. As we expected, after the Supreme Court's decision, the vast majority --
         over 90% -- of the nation's law enforcement agencies continued to conduct background
         checks on handgun purchasers. They did this because it is a common sense and good
         law enforcement -- not because it was required. The Schumer-Durbin legislation is
         consistent with the Court's decision and does not require state and local law enforcement
         to do background checks.


    Q.   Isn't there a difference between the current waiting period and what you're
         proposing today? Why this change?
·                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion


    A.    Currently, Brady allows up to 5 days to conduct a background check in states without
          permit systems. When NICS is implemented, there will generally bl;: no waiting period,
          but law enforcement can take up to 3 days to clarify arrest records. Under the Brady
          extension legislation proposed by Senator Durbin and Rep. Schumer, there will be a
          minimum 3-day waiting period, and law enforcement can take as many as 5 days to
          clarify arrest records. While the NICS will allow access to a fuller set of records, this
          minimum 3-day and expanded 5-day waiting period ensures that law enforcement will
          have the time it needs to check all available records, as well as provide a cooling-offtime
          for handgun purchases.

    Q.    How many and which states currently have their own waiting periods?

    A.   According to a 1996 Justice Department survey, II states have waiting periods pursuant
         to their own laws. These waiting periods vary in duration and may apply to different types
         of firearms. The states with waiting periods are: Alabama, California, Hawaii, Indiana,
         Iowa, Kentucky, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota, and
         Washington.


    Anti-Brady Senate Amendment

    Q.   What are the Congressional efforts to "gut" Brady that the President referred to in
         his remarks?

    A.   A recent amendment to the Senate Commerce- Justice-State appropriations bill would
         undermine implementation of the NICS. The Administration strongly opposes this
         anti-Brady amendment. Specifically, the Senate amendment does the following three
         things:

          I)     Prohibits the FBI from charging gun dealers a fee for background checks even
                 though the FBI currently charges school districts, day care providers, and many
                 others for similar background checks. States and local law enforcement agencies
                 generally charge dealers for the costs of background checks they complete.
                 Without these resources, the FBI will either have to forego processing millions of
                 background checks, or transfer resources from other crime fighting efforts.

         (2)     Requires FBI to immediately destroy certain records obtained from clean
                 background checks, substantially undercutting the reliability of the background
                 check process by making it impossible to catch fraudulent submissions. The FBI
                 does intend to destroy such records, but after a reasonable period that allows them
                 to audit their records to protect against fraud.

         (3)     Establishes a federal right to sue if records are not immediately destroyed.
                 Creating a federal cause of action with punitive damages for person aggrieved by
                 the provisions of this amendment are -- pure and simple -- just another attempt to
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


undermine the operation of the NICS.


