 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: r1ary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-AUG-1998 14:57:47.00

 SUBJECT:   Briefing memo for Native American conference

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

. TEXT:
  Here is the briefing memo. Lynn Cutler's office might change on of the
  event participants --they are still going to get that to me if it changes.==========
  ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D89]MAIL45037312W.226 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043BC060000010A02010000000205000000BE3300000002000014CFC83F2967C47C764D9D
 B5272B864090DECF9B1F8C424996FE209D47A8434DC48357C7CC54E4B41B7774D761765FE870A4
 2CF04A20401F609AFBICD0805D2CODC364803B97F72F4C16526E905F23277C74293018883FF36B
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion




                                        August 5, 1998

                            NATIVE AMERICAN ECONOMIC
                            DEVELOPMENT CONFERENCE

                             DATE:          August 6, 1998
                             LOCATION:      Grand Hyatt Hotel, Washington, D.C.
                             BRIEFING TIME: 12:45 pm - 1:15 pm
                             EVENT TIME:    1:35 pm - 2:50 pm
                             FROM:          Bruce Reed
                                            Mickey Ibarra
                                            Lynn Cutler


I.    PURPOSE

      To reaffirm your commitment to protecting tribal sovereignty and the
      government-to-govemment relationship between the United States and tribes and to
      promote and encourage economic self-determination in Indian country.

II.   BACKGROUND

      On Thursday, April 6, you will speak to approximately 800 tribal leaders, businesses, and
      government personnel at a conference at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Washington, D.C.,
      sponsored by the White House (Domestic Policy Council and Office of Intergovernmental
      Affairs) and 15 federal agencies, entitled "Building Economic Self-Determination in
      Indian Communities." This event is the first time you have spoken in front of Native
      Americans since your meeting with tribal leaders in 1994.

Purpose and Structure of the Conference

      This conference grew out of your meeting with tribal leaders on April 29, 1994, and the
      establishment of the Domestic Policy Council's (DPC) Working Group on American
      Indians and Alaska Natives. In addition, as a result of the government-wide survey of
      activities in relation to Indian country and your suggestion that initiatives be developed
      around economic development, the DPC's subgroup on economic development started
      planning this conference several months ago.

      This conference will cover topics such as commerce in Indian country; building
      infrastructure and a positive climate for business; tribal self-government and
      economic self-determination; agriculture and economic development; rural
      business; community development in Indian country; electronic commerce; welfare
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

      to work initiatives; and tourism_
Background on American Indians and Alaska Natives

      Indian America is made up of more than 550 tribes, with a total population of
      approximately 2.4 million. Approximately forty percent of all American Indians
      and Alaska Natives are under the age of twenty. Nearly half of the American
      Indian and Alaska Native population resides on 314 reservations, Indian lands, and
      in Alaska Villages that make up Indian country.

      While economic conditions in Indian country have improved in recent years,
      American Indian and Alaska Native communities continue to lag behind the rest of
      the United States with respect to social, economic, and educational attainment levels.
       Income levels of American Indians and Alaska Natives are substantially below
      those of all other Americans, and about 34 percent continue to live below the
      poverty level. In comparison, the national poverty level is about 14 percent.
      Complicating factors such as geographical isolation, under-developed
      infrastructures, and demographics add to the challenges confronting tribes as they
      work toward a better standard of living and quality of life for tribal peoples.


      In your remarks, you will be make the following announcements:

            The signing of an executive order at the conference which is designed to
             improve the academic performance of American Indian and Alaska Native
             students in grades K-12. The order focuses special attention on improving
             student achievement in reading and mathematics.

            The issuance of a directive to federal agencies to work in collaboration with
             tribal governments to: (1) prepare a report on the technology infrastructure
             needs in Indian country; (2) develop a strategic plan that will coordinate
             existing economic development initiatives across agencies; and (3) initiate a
             project to help streamline the mortgage lending process in Indian country in order
             to improve access to mortgage loans on Indian reservations. The agencies will
             initiate this mortgage lending effort through a year-long pilot program on the
             Navajo Nation and in at least one other location.

            The intention of the Department of Agriculture (USDA), through its Bringing
             Rural America Venture Opportunities (BRAVO) initiative, to direct $70 million
             of its contracting dollars through Fiscal Year 2000 to assist seven American
             Indian and Alaska Native tribes establish small start-up technology companies in
             order to obtain government contracts.

            A call to Congress to pass legislation to elevate the Director of the Indian Health
             Service to an Assistant Secretary. Elevating the IHS Director to the position of
             Assistant Secretary will strengthen the government-to-government relationship;
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


              facilitate communication and consultation with the Tribes on matters ofIndian
              health; and raise awareness ofIndian health concerns throughout HHS and thc
              entire federal government.

             A change in the state-by-state allocation of the $24 billion in the Children's
              Health Insurance Program (CHIP) to' appropriately count Native American
              children. States receive a share of CHIP funds based on their proportion of
              uninsured children below 200 percent of poverty. When the Census Bureau
              produced these counts last September, it did not include Native American children
              with access to the Indian Health Service as "uninsured." Thus, even though such
              children are eligible for CHIP coverage, the states with a large number of Native
              American children did not receive a larger share of funds. These revised
              allotments will be published in October with the preliminary 1999 allotments.

III.   PARTICIPANTS

       Briefing Participants:
       Bruce Reed
       Mickey Ibarra
       Elena Kagan
       Lynn Cutler
       Julie Fernandes
       Mary Smith

       Event Participants:
       Dominic Ortiz, Lawrence, KS, is 'college student who owns and operates a wholesale
       Native American jewelry business

       Standing on stage, but not speaking:
       -Marge Anderson, CEO, Mille Lacs Band ofOjibwe (MN)
       -Walter Dasheno, Governor, Santa Clara Pueblo
       -Frank Ettewagechik, Chainnan, Little Traverse Bay Bands ofOdawa Indians (MI)
       -Roland Harris, Chainnan, Mohegan Tribe (CT)
       -Kathryn Harrison, Chair, Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde (OR)
       -Henry Kostzuta, Chainnan, Apache Tribe of Oklahoma (OK)
       -Ivan Makil, President, Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community (AZ)
       -Mary Thomas, Governor, Gila River Indian Community (AZ)
       -A. Brian Wallace, Chainnan, Washoe Tribe of Nevada (NV)
       -John Yellow Bird Steele, President, Oglala Lakota Nation (SD)

       Persons Standing on Stage for Signing of Executive Order
       -Michael Anderson, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, Dept. of Interior
       -Dr. David Beaulieu, Director, Office of Indian Education, Dept. of Education
       -Michael Cohen, Domestic Policy Council
       -Lorraine Edmo, Executive Director, National Indian Education Association
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

       -James Kohlmoos, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of Elementary and Secondary
       Education, Dept. of Education
       -Melodee McCoy, Native American Rights Fund
       -Joann Sebastian Morris, Director, Office ofIndian Education, Dept. ofInterior
       -Yvonne Novack, President, National Indian Education Association
       -Sherry Dawn Red Owl, Rosebud Sioux
       -Ernie Stevens, Jr., National Congress of American Indians
       -Mary Smith, Domestic Policy Council

IV.    PRESS PLAN

       Open Press.

V.     SEQUENCE OF EVENTS

       - Dominic Ortiz will make remarks and introduce YOU.
       - YOU will make remarks.
       - YOU then proceed to the desk on stage and sign the Native American education
       executive order.
       -YOU then work a ropeline and depart.

       *Before you enter the stage, YOU will take a photo with approximately 30 persons who
       worked on the Native American education executive order.

VI.    REMARKS

       Remarks Provided by Speech writing.

VII.   ATTACHMENTS

       -Conference Agenda
       -Participants List
       -Background on American Indians and Alaska Natives


