RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: !·lary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-AUG-1998 17:20:12.00

SUBJECT:   New announcement and Q&A with Jeanne's changes

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D68]MAIL49710612K.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504364050000010A02010000000205000000E5240000000200008A1C93BC79A9A30ACEFC14
                                                                       Hex·Dump Conversion



Draft                   QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
          NATIVE AMERICAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CONFERENCE
                              August 6, 1998

Q:      What did the President announce at the Native American economic development
        conference?

A:      The President announced several initiatives aimed at improving economic
        self-sufficiency, increasing educational opportunities, and providing health care to Native
        Americans. The President issued a directive which: (I) called for the Department of
        Commerce, in collaboration with the Department of the Interior and tribal governments,
        to issue a report within 9 months on the infrastructure technology needs in Indian country;
        (2) required the Departments of the Interior and Commerce and the Small Business
        Administration to develop, within 90 days, a strategic plan, in consultation with all
        interested parties, including tribal governments, to coordinate existing federal economic
        development programs for Native Americans; and (3) called for the Department of
        Treasury and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), in partnership
        with local tribal governments and in cooperation with other federal agencies, to create a
        one-stop mortgage center in Indian country to streamline the mortgage process. The
        President also announced that the U.S. Department of Agriculture will provide $70
        million to create technology-based jobs in Indian country.

        Because the building blocks of economic opportunity lie in obtaining a good education,
        the President signed an executive order at the conference which seeks to improve
        achievement in reading and math for American Indian and Alaska Native students in
        grades K-12. In order to improve the provision of health care to Native Americans, the
        President announced that the state funding for the Children's Health Insurance Program
        (CHIP) would be adjusted to accurately reflect states' populations of Native American
        children. Finally, the President called on Congress to pass legislation to elevate the
        Director of the Indian Health Service to an Assistant Secretary.

Native American Education Executive Order

Q:      What is the Native American education executive order?

A:      This executive order is designed to improve the academic performance of American
        Indian and Alaska Native students in grades K-12. The order focuses special
        attention on the following five goals: (1) improving student achievement in reading
        and mathematics; (2) increasing high school completion and post-secondary
        attendance rates; (3) reducing the influence of long-standing factors that impede
        educational performance, such as poverty and substance abuse; (4) creating strong,
        safe, and drug-free school environments conducive to learning; and (5) expanding
        the use of science and educational technology. This order is structured to address
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

      Indian education a! needs through participation at the federal, state, and local levels.
       At the federal level, the order establishes an Interagency Task Force which .will
      plan initiatives, develop an education resource guide, and assist in implementing a
      comprehensive research agenda on Indian education. At the regional level, the
      order mandates a series of regional forums to be convened to identify promising
      practices. Finally, at the local level, this executive order sets up pilot sites which
      will receive comprehensive technical assistance in support of the goals of the order.


Economic Development Initiatives

Q:    What did the President direct several federal agencies to do with respect to
      economic development in American Indian and Alaska Native communities?

A:    The President announced a directive with the following three components:

      ·      Technology Infrastructure Study. The President directed the Department of
             Commerce, in collaboration with the Department of the Interior and tribal
             governments, t6 issue a report within 9 months on the technology infrastructure
             needs within Indian country, including distance learning facilities,
             telecommunications capabilities, and manufacturing facilities.

      ·      Strategic Plan to Coordinate Economic Development. The President also directed
             the Department of the Interior, the Department of Commerce, and the Small
             Business Administration to develop, within 90 days, a strategic plan that will
             coordinate existing economic development initiatives across agencies for Native
             American and Alaska Native communities. In developing this strategic plan, the
             agencies should consult with all interested parties, including tribal governments.
             The plan will build upon current efforts in the agencies and detail future efforts on
             such matters as providing technical assistance, enhancing infrastructure, and
             developing software.

      ·      One-Stop Mortgage Center. The President also directed the Departments of
             Treasury and Housing and Urban Development, in partnership with local tribal
             governments and in cooperation with other federal agencies, to initiate a project to
             help streamline the mortgage lending process in Indian country in order to
             improve access to mortgage loans on Indian reservations. The agencies will
             i!litiate this effort through a year-long pilot program on the Navajo Nation and in
             at least one other location.

Q:    What did the President announce with respect to creating technology-based jobs in
      Indian country?



                                               2
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

A:    Thc President announced that the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), through its
      Bringing Rural America Venture Opportunities (BRAVO) initiative, will direct $70
      million of its contracting dollars through Fiscal Year 2000 to assist seven American
      Indian and Alaska Native tribes in establishing small start-up technology companies.
      Through the 8(a) program, USDA, large technology companies doing business with
      USDA, and the Tribal Colleges and other land-grant educational institutions will work
      with these newly-established companies to assist them in obtaining government contracts.

Q:    What is the status of technology infrastructure in Indian country?

A:    A recent report, prepared by the Department of Commerce, shows that although many
      more Americans now own computers, minorities and low-income households are still far
      less likely to have personal computers or access to the Internet than white or more
      affluent households. Even more alarming, this study reveals that this "digital divide"
      between households of different races and income levels is growing. The report
      concluded that significant segments of the population, particularly in rural areas, remain
      unconnected by telephone or computer. Because reservations are often in remote areas
      and the income levels are low, this report supports the conclusion that more must be done
      to build a technology infrastructure in Indian country.

Q:    What difficulties does a resident of an Indian reservation face in obtaining a
      mortgage?

A:    There are unique issues facing prospective home buyers in Indian country such as trust
      land status (where the United States holds the land in trust for a tribe or an individual),
      tribal sovereignty issues, and limited availability of services such as appraisals and title
      insurance. Because of these issues, obtaining a mortgage in Indian country is often much
      more time consuming and complicc.tted than a comparable transaction off the reservation.

Q:    How long does the mortgage lending process in Indian country take?

A:    The length of time to obtain a mortgage varies by Indian reservation and Bureau of
      Indian Affairs (BIA) area office_ In most parts of Indian country, the process can
      take anywhere from several months to several years. Unfortunately, these delays
      sometimes result in problems for lenders who cannot hold open an extension of
      credit over such a long time period without closing the loan.

Q:    When will the mortgage pilot programs be operational?

A:'   Treasury and HUD have already identified a local partner for the first pilot on the
      Navajo Nation called the Navajo Partnership for Housing (NPH). This
      organization currently provides home buyer education services, which include
      hosting home buyer orientation and home ownership counseling programs. Despite


                                               3
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


      its success at preparing residents of the reservation for home ownership, NPH has
      not reached its projected number of mortgage closings because of the systemic
      problems in the residential mortgage approval process. This pilot wiD
      demonstrate, over the course of the year, ways to streamline and consolidate the
      process to shorten significantly the approval time.

      Over the year of the pilot, as the federal and tribal governments streamline and
      consolidate their processes, the length of the mortgage process should shorten
      significantly.

Health Care Initiatives for Native Americans

Q:    What did the President say with respect to the Director of the Indian Health Service
      at HHS?

A:    The President called on Congress to pass legislation to elevate the Director of the Indian
      Health Service to an Assistant Secretary. Elevating the IHS Director to the position of
      Assistant Secretary will strengthen the government-to-govemment relationship; facilitate
      communication and consultation with the Tribes on matters of Indian health; and raise
      awareness of Indian health concerns throughout HHS and the entire federal government.

Q:    What did the President announce with respect to the CHIP program?

A:    The President announced a change in the state-by-state allocation of the $24 billion in the
      Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) to appropriately count Native American
      children. Under this new program, states receive a share of CHIP funds based on their
      proportion of uninsured children below 200 percent of poverty. When the Census
      Bureau produced these counts last September, it did not count vulnerable Native
      American children as "uninsured." Thus, even though such children are eligible for
      CHIP coverage, the states with a large number of Native American children did not
      receive a larger share of funds. The President announced that both the Census Bureau
      and Administration recognize that this was inequitable and thus will revise the allotments.
       These revised allotments will be published in October. This effort will build upon the
      Administration's commitment to improve health care coverage for Native American
      children. Both the Department of Interior's Bureau of Indian Affairs and HHS's Indian
      Health Service are committed to increase enrollment of uninsured Native American and
      Alaska Native children which include developing and distributing culturally relevant
      referral information (e.g.; brochure, poster, supplementary packets of information) to
      Native American families through the Bureau of Indian Affairs, especially focusing on
      tribal schools, colleges and social services agencies.

Q:    What are the new state allotments with this adjustment?



                                               4
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

A.    This adjustment to states' 1998 allotments will be published in October. Future year
      allotments will accurately count Native American children. We believe that this change
      will result in an increase in funding to states with a large number of Native American
      children of about $15 million.
Background on the Conference and American Indians and Alaska Natives

Q:     What is the Native American economic development conference?

A:     This conference is sponsored by the White House (Office of Intergovernmental
       Affairs and the Domestic Policy Council), the Departments of Agriculture,
       Commerce, Defense, Education, Energy, Health and Human Services, Housing and
       Urban Development, Interior, Justice, Labor, State, Transportation, the Treasury,
       and the Comptroller of the Currency and the Small Business Administration.
       Secretary Babbitt, Secretary Daley, Secretary Glickman, Secretary Herman,
       Attorney General Reno, and Administrator Alvarez were speakers at the
       conference.

       The conference had approximately 800 participants including tribal leaders and
       members, businesses, and federal agency personnel. This conference was attended
       by over 100 tribes from over 20 states and by over 150 businesses, both
       Native-owned and non-Native-owned. This conference covered topics such as
       commerce in Indian country; building infrastructure and positive climate for
       business; tribal self-government and economic self-determination; agriculture and
       economic development; rural business; community development in Indian country;
       electronic commerce; welfare to work initiatives; and tourism.

Q:     What are some demographics on American Indians and Alaska Natives?

A:     Indian America is made up of more than 550 tribes, with a total population of
       approximately 2.4 million. Nearly half of the American Indian and Alaska Native
       population resides on 314 reservations, Indian lands, and in Alaska Villages that
       make up Indian country.

Q:     What are the economic conditions in Indian country?

A:     While economic conditions in Indian country have improved in recent years,
       American Indian and Alaska Native communities continue to lag behind the rest of
       the United States with respect to social, economic, and educational attainment levels.
        Income levels of American Indians and Alaska Natives are substantially below
       those of all other Americans, and about 34 percent continue to live below the
       poverty level. In comparison, the national poverty level is about 14 percent.
       Complicating factors such as geographical isolation, under-developed
       infrastructures, and demographics add to the challenges confronting tribes as they


                                             5
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
     work toward a better standard of living and quality of life for tribal peoples.


Q:   What are the educational attainment levels for Native Americans?

A:   In 1990, approximately 66 percent of Native Americans 25 years or older were high
     school graduates compared with approximately 75 percent of the total population. About
     9 percent of Native Americans completed a bachelor's degree or higher compared with 20
     percent of the total population.

Q:   Is this conference part of the Race Initiative?

A:   This conference addresses many of the same issues that have been addressed by the Race
     Initiative. However, this conference also addresses issues unique to American Indian
     and Alaska Native communities such as tribal self-government and economic
     self-determination. Members of the President's Initiative on Race are actively
     participating in this conference.




                                            6
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

Draft              THE PRESIDENT ANNOUNCES INITIATIVES FOR
                   NATIVE AMERICANS RELATED TO ECONOMIC
                  DEVELOPMENT, HEALTH CARE, AND EDUCATION
                                 August 6, 1998

Today, the President will attend a conference, sponsored by the White House and fifteen federal
agencies, entitled "Building Economic Self-Determination in Indian Communities," and will
announce several initiatives aimed at improving economic self-sufficiency, increasing
educational opportunities, and providing health care to Native Americans. The initiatives focus
on: improving student achievement in reading and math for grades K-12; assessing the
technology infrastructure needs of Indian country; coordinating existing federal economic
development programs for Native Americans; creating a one-stop mortgage center in Indian
country to streamline the mortgage process; creating technology-based jobs in Indian country;
and adjusting the state funding from the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) to
accurately reflect states' populations of Native American children. In addition, the President
called on Congress to pass legislation to elevate the Director of the Indian Health Service to an
Assistant Secretary.

Creating Educational Opportunities for Native American Students

Native American Education Executive Order. The President signed an executive order at
the conference which is designed to improve the academic performance of American Indian
and Alaska Native students in grades K-12. The order focuses special attention on the
following five goals: (1) improving student achievement in reading and mathematics; (2)
increasing high school completion and post-secondary attendance rates; (3) reducing the
influence of long-standing factors that impede educational performance, such as poverty
and substance abuse; (4) creating strong, safe, and drug-free school environments
conducive to learning; and (5) expanding the use of science and educational technology.
This order is structured to address Indian educational needs through participation at the
federal, regional, and local levels. At the federal level, the order establishes an
Interagency Task Force which will plan initiatives, develop an education resource guide,
and assist in implementing a comprehensive research agenda on Indian education. At the
regional level, the order mandates a series of regional forums to be convened to identify
promising practices. Finally, at the local level, this executive order sets up pilot sites which
will receive comprehensive technical assistance in support of the goals of the order.

Expanding Economic Development in Indian Country

Executive Directive for Economic Development in American Indian and Alaska Native
Communities. The President announced the following directive which has the following three
components:

        ·     Technology Infrastructure Study. The President directed the Department of
              Commerce, in collaboration with the Department of the Interior and tribal
              governments, to issue a report within 9 months on the technology infrastructure
              needs within Indian country, including distance learning facilities,
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


               telecommunications capabilities, and manufacturing facilities.

       ·       Strategic Plan to Coordinate Economic Development. The President also directed
               the Department of the Interior, the Department of Commerce, and the Small
               Business Administration to develop, within 90 days, a strategic plan that will
               coordinate existing economic development initiatives across agencies for Native
               American and Alaska Native communities. The plan will build upon current
               efforts in the agencies and detail future efforts on matters such as providing
               technical assistance, enhancing infrastructure, and developing software.

       ·       One-Stop Mortgage Center. The President also directed the Departments of
               Treasury and Housing and Urban Development, in partnership with local tribal
               governments and in cooperation with other federal agencies, to initiate a project to
               help streamline the mortgage lending process in Indian country in order to
               improve access to mortgage loans on Indian reservations. The agencies will
               initiate this effort through a year-long pilot program on the Navajo Nation and in
               at least one other location.

Providing $70 Million to Create Technology-Based Jobs in Indian Country. The President
announced that the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), through its Bringing Rural America
Venture Opportunities (BRAVO) initiative, will direct $70 million of its contracting dollars
through Fiscal Year 2000 to assist seven American Indian and Alaska Native tribes in
establishing small start-up technology companies in order to obtain government contracts.

Improving Health Care for Native Americans

Legislation to Elevate the Director of the Indian Health Service to an Assistant Secretary.
The President called on Congress to pass legislation to elevate the Director of the Indian'Health
Service to an Assistant Secretary. Elevating the IHS Director to the position of Assistant
Secretary will strengthen the government-to-government relationship; facilitate communication
and consultation with the Tribes on matters oflndian health; and raise awareness oflndian health
concerns throughout HHS and the entire federal government.

Increase Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) funding in states with large
numbers of Native American children by about $15 million. The President announced a
change in the state-by-state allocation of the $24 billion in the Children's Health Insurance
Program (CHIP) to appropriately count Native American children. Under this new program,
states receive a share of CHIP funds based on their proportion of uninsured children below 200
percent of poverty. When the Census Bureau produced these counts last September, it did not
count vulnerable Native American children as "uninsured." Thus, even though such children are
eligible for CHIP coverage, the states with a large number of Native American children did not
receive a larger share of funds. The President announced that both the Census Bureau and
Administration recognize that this was inequitable and thus will revise the allotments. These
revised allotments will be published in October. This effort will build upon the
Administration's commitment to improve health care coverage for Native American
children. Both the Department of Interior's Bureau of Indian Affairs and HHS's Indian Health
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion



Service are committed to increase enrollment of uninsured Native American and Alaska Native
children including developing and distributing culturally relevant referral information to schools
and social services.


