RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-AUG-1998 20:44:40.00

SUBJECT:   Food Safety Talking Points

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett   ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:

What the EO is
I've attached the draft of the EO that we gave out to the agencies.
Briefly put, it establishes a food safety council co-chaired by
secretaries of USDA, HHS, and either DPC or VP. It is charged with
reviewing and making recommendations on the NAS report, presenting a
unified food safety budget, and formulating a food safety plan.

What Glickman/Frazier may say and some Answers.

USDA:   We should wait for the NAS report to come out, review it, and
respond with what is right.

A.      Three part answer (not artfully constructed but you will weave
it together somehow)

1. Yes we agree. We should review the NAS in a thoughtful way and only do
what makes sense from a food safety perspective.   One of the most
important things the EO does is set up a   process to review NAS in a
coherent way and report back to the President.   It provides a structure to
think long-term about what is the right thing to do on food safety.

2.   But this is a good step even w/o the NAS report. We don't need the
NAS report to know that we should have better coordination on food
safety. We should be working off a unified food safety plan each year,
and we should have a food safety budget that helps fulfill that plan.
This year, HHS came to us and said they were thinking of not participating
in a unified budget with USDA at all. That should not be up in the air
each year.  This is an interim step, but a useful one.

3.  It also doesn't make sense to wait.  For one thing, we have always
been working ahead on food safety doing what we think should be done, not
waiting for criticism that we know will come and then responding.  Like
the GAO report on nursing homes, it is better to be welcoming reform and
instituting it rather than responding to a NYT story.

 By waiting we will be inevitably in the position of having outside folks
say whether we have gone far enough or not. The NAS is expected to
recommend four options:  a food czar, a new agency, designating one agency


as lead, or making one agency totally responsible for food safety. USDA
would probably dislike each of their recommendations more than the
Council, but if we wait we will be faced with the argument that whatever
we do, we haven't done what they asked.   The consumer groups that asked
for this study want a single food agency with a food czar. Once the
report is out, you give them that as the measuring rod.

It is also very likely that NAS will ask for more money to do a second
report finishing up its recommendations on what to do. The same argument
could be made that we should then wait for their second report.


USDA:   This report is coming out on August 17th and will get lost.

A. Well, we should do what is right on the merits and the Council is the
right thing to do even if the NAS does get no press.  In addition, the
report is now moved back to August 20th for release so the chance for
press is increased. And any decent reporter will know how to play this
there is a good chance it will get play.

USDA:   This is a FDA power grab.

A.   We don't see this as a way for FDA to get its hands on USDA money.
We don't want that and don't want to go along with it.

{ You could note we have three co-chairs (DPC is one). We could argue we
favor putting in an executive director who we thought should be Eric Olsen
or someone who gets that this is about moving forward, not about
reallocating resources.}

USDA:   We don't think it will be that critical.

A.   It mayor may not get played as critical.   But there will be plenty
there. We've heard the NAS report right now says we need: a national food
safety plan; a new budgeting system; a universally adopted food code; and
there is not enough research; not enough standards (like milk); our
epidemiological system is insufficient; statutory changes need to be made
to harmonize regulations; USDA should involve more science; there should
not be a mixing of food promotion and regulation within agencies; and a
concern about dietary supplements.  It will suggest potentially four
options: including a food czar, an EPA like organization; letting either
HHS or USDA be the lead agency or sole agency. It is the fodder for
something critical.  ==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D21]MAIL48533722Z.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750435A040000010A02010000000205000000Cl170000000200001796C199EC7B65E782B782
OB989C4CBCB689FF43DE65F54D0976A4698BFIA83AEB6E5024630A128F2DB007158E4476C404AE
                                                                      Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                        EXECUTIVE ORDER

                           PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY


    By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States
    of America, and in order to strengthen efforts to improve food safety for American consumers by
    establishing a President's Council on Food Safety, it is hereby ordered as follows:

    Section 1. Establishment of President's Council on Food Safety.

    (a) There is established the President's Council on Food Safety (Council). The Council shall
    comprise the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Assistant
    to the President for Domestic Policy, the Senior Policy Advisor for the Vice President, and the
    Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. The Council shall consult with the
    Office of Management and Budget, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of
    Defense, the Commerce Department, and such other senior executive branch officials as the
    Council determines.

    (b) The Secretaries of Agriculture and Health and Human Services shall serve as Co-Chairs of
    the Council. In consultation with other Council members, the Secretaries shaH jointly designate
    an Executive Director for the Council. Council members may designate senior executive branch
    officials as their representatives.

    Section 2. Purpose.

    The purpose of the Council shall be to review the National Academy of Sciences report,
    "Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption", and other reports on the effectiveness of
    the current food safety system, to review and improve ongoing efforts to develop and implement
    a science-based comprehensive strategy to improve the safety of the food supply, and work
    towards enhanced coordination amorig Federal agencies and with State, local governments and
    the private sector. The Council shall build upon the President's Interagency Food Safety
    Initiative and shall consult extensively with all concerned parties, including consumers,
    producers; industry, academia, and State and local governments.

    Section 3. Specific Activities and Functions.

    (a) The Council shall annually develop a unified food safety budget to eliminate duplication and
    ensure the most effective use of resources. This unified food safety budget shall include food
    safety surveillance, inspection, risk assessment, education, and research.

    (b) The Council shall work to develop a science-based, unified plan for improving food safety
    from the farm to the table. The fundamental goal of the plan should be the establishment of a
    seemless food safety system, including the steps necessary to achieve this goal, and should
    consider key public-health, resource, and management questions facing Federal food safety
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

agencies. The plan should consider both interim and long term food safety issues, including new
and emergent threats and the needs of vulnerable populations. The plan should include
education, inspection, research, surveillance, and should also ensure effective coordination of
Federal, State, local, and private resources to improve food safety, including public-private
partnerships, where appropriate

(c) The Council shall oversee the operation of the Joint Institute on Food Safety Research, and
shall ensure that the Institute focuses on addressing the high priority research needs identified in
the unified food safety plan. The Council shall also ensure that the Institute issues a report
annually and holds regular public conferences and meetings regarding food safety research
developments and findings, including research conducted by the private sector and academia.

(d) The Council shall review the National Academy of Sciences report, "Ensuring Safe Food
from Production to Consumption", and other reports on the effectiveness of the current food
safety system. After providing opportunity for public comment, including public meetings, the
Council shall report to the President with recommendations for appropriate additional actions to
improve food safety. Any such recommendations should be in the context of the strategic
planning effort of the President's Interagency Food Safety Initiatives.

Section 4. Cooperation.

All actions taken by the Council shall, as appropriate, further partnerships and cooperation with
other public and private sector efforts wherever such partnerships and cooperation are possible
and would further improve the safety of the food supply.

Section 5. Judicial Review.

This order does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a
party against the United States;its agencies, its officers, or any person.


