RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-MAY-1997 17:55:35.00

SUBJECT:   weekly report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is my contribution to the weekly report.

Weekly Report


1. Education Town Hall Meeting: We are working to arrange an D&Education
Town Hall MeetingD8 focused on your national testing initiative, and
designed to provide you with an opportunity to explain what high standards
are really all about -- perhaps by literally working through a couple of
sample test items from NAEP. You would then take questions from an
audience of educators, parents and students. We are exploring a number of
possible locations for this event, with Kentucky the leading contender at
the moment.

2. National Testing Initiative: Last week Mike Cohen met separately with
Rep. Frank Riggs, who chairs the House subcommittee on Early Childhood,
Youth and Families, and with Rep. Dale Kildee.   Both are strong supporters
of your testing initiative. In addition, Secretary Riley testified before
Mr. RiggsD, subcommittee on this issue.   These were mainly positive
developments, though they also helped to define the nature of the
opposition we will face on Capitol Hill.   There is strong support among
House Democrats on this committee for your initiative, including from
George Miller, Tim Romer, and Patsy Mink, in addition to Dale Kildee.    On
the Republican side, Frank Riggs and Mike Castle are strong supporters.
However,  Mr. Goodling has apparently reversed his previous position of
support, and has now expressed serious concerns over this initiative, on
the grounds that the tests would lead to the ranking of individual
schools.  In addition, both Mr. Goodling and Mr. Riggs argued that a move
to national testing ought to involve Congressional authorization (though
Mr. Riggs concedes that we already have general statutory authority to
undertake the development of the tests) .

These developments do not suggest any change in our basic strategy to
developing the tests and signing up states.. However, we will work closely
with Congressional supporters on both sides of the aisle to determine how
best to move this initiative forward, including through the appropriations
process, with the broadest base of support.
