    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TlME:13-AUG-1998 14:34:40.00

    SUBJECT:   Child Welfare Update

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. Klein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    I wanted to update you both on a few things related to child welfare:

    (1)  The House Ways and Means Committee is planning a hearing on September
    15th on MEPA oversight and implementation, at which HHS has agreed to
    testify.  Mary advises that the Republicans want to use this as a
    political opportunity to criticize us, as they have in the past, for not
    being aggressive enough in our monitoring of this law.  Mary is thinking
    of issuing a letter from Shalala to the States prior to the hearing to
    re-emphasize our commitment to full and aggressive implementation.

    However, the prospect of this hearing has raised another issue, which is a
    Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that HHS sent to OMB last month, and which
    we are in the early process of reviewing. The NPRM covers huge territory,
    including the revised monitoring and penalty structure for MEPA.   It also
    includes:
    Pieces of the implementation of the Adoption and Safe Families Act,
    including provisions covering (1) reasonable efforts, (2) permanency
    planning hearings, (3) termination of parental rights, and (4) background
    checks on prospective adoptive and foster care parents.   (HHS intends to
    include other pieces of the Act -- family preservation and Medicaid
    eligibility provisions -- in a separate NPRM.)
    A revamping of federal child welfare reviews, both IV-E eligibility
    reviews and state plan compliance reviews.
    We sent the first staff-level passback to HHS, which included dozens of
    questions and requests for additional information, but HHS is now eager to
    put out the NPRM before the upcoming hearing on MEPA. While this is going
    to be very hard to do (OMB advises that this is one of the meatiest NPRM
    they have worked on, and are worried about hurrying a process that covers
    such important issues, particularly with vacations, etc.), we will do our
    best to work with HHS on this draft NPRM, and have scheduled a conference
    call for the first week in September to hear HHS' response to our first
    round of significant comments. We're also going to explore whether we can
    clear just the MEPA provisions of the NPRM (and possibly publish just that
    piece) so that HHS can talk about it at the hearing.    We'll keep you
    posted as this moves forward in early September.

    (2)  I'm beginning conversations with HHS and others to explore
    administrative and legislative actions we might take to address the issue
    of children "aging out" of the foster care system, i.e. becoming 18 with
    no permanent or adoptive placement. This group of young adults have high
    rates of chronic depression and other mental health problems,
    homelessness, juvenile crime, school drop-out, etc., and the services that


support them are surprisingly minimal. An announcement in this area might
make a good message event in November tied to National Adoption Month and
scheduled around Thanksgiving (this population has no where to go for
Thanksgiving). This is an issue that the First Lady is particularly
interested in.

(3)  Bruce, you had sent an article to Jen and me asking about the status
of a proposal by Sen. Carl Levin to establish a voluntary national
registry of parents and children seeking their biological
children/parents. This bill has been extremely controversial for many
years.  You'll remember that Levin attached this bill to the
Senate-version of the Adoption and Safe Families Act last year and in so
doing nearly stalled to death action on the bill.  (The First Lady spoke
to Levin to persuade him to remove the provision in conference so that the
bill could pass; in so doing, she agreed to be helpful to him on this
issue and met with Levin earlier this year with HHS present.)

There is a small but extremely vocal (and influential with certain
conservative Members) group of advocates that oppose this registry on
privacy grounds, arguing that it could be used to "out" parents who have
given up their children for adoption (i.e. child and birth mom find one
another by each signing onto the voluntary registry, but them mom "outs"
dad).  This vocal group of opponents (led by Bill Pierce of the National
Council on Adoption) has prevented Levin from even having a hearing on
this bill, until recently (the article you clipped was from the hearing) .

We did not testify at the hearing nor have we taken a recent position on
this bill (generally we "do not oppose"), and HHS has been reluctantly
looking at ways in which they can administratively address this issue, by
expanding its web site, etc. Because of the controversy that surrounds
it, I don't imagine that the bill has any prospect of moving in the near
future.


