RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=MClXY L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TlME:24-AUG-1998 11:00:52.00

SUBJECT:   Food safety paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is the updated announcement and Q&A for a leak today. Let me know if
you need anything else. Thanks, Mary ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ==========
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D39]MAIL41505853B.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750430405DDOOD1DA02DID0000002D5DOOODDOD2AODDOD002000066D2556BDFB959993DEBF5
6A3714C4A1B164348CEAF45AABD957836BD71D78D48CEC8C772780DC15BE35B4E17755A646C5A1
                                                                                 Hex·Dump Conversion



Draft 8-24-98
   QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY
                          August 24, 1998

Q:    What did the Clinton Administration announce?

A:    The Clinton Administration announced: (1) an executive order creating a President's
      Council on Food Safety, which will develop a comprehensive strategic plan for federal
      food safety activities and ensure that federal agencies annually develop coordinated food
      safety budgets; (2) a Presidential directive to the Council, as one of its first orders of
      business, to review the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) report, "Ensuring Safe
      Food from Production to Consumption," and to report back with its response to the
      report, including appropriate additional actions to improve food safety; and (3) the first
      public meeting to discuss the development ofthe comprehensive strategic plan for federal
      food safety activities.

President's Council on Food Safety

Q:    What will the President's Council on Food Safety do?

A:    The Council will have three primary functions, including: (1) developing a
      comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan; (2) advising agencies of priority areas
      for investment in food safety and ensuring that federal agencies annually develop
      coordinated food safety budgets; and (3) ensuring that the Joint Institute for Food Safety
      Research (JIFSR), which the President recently created to coordinate all federal food
      safety research, establishes mechanisms to guide federal research efforts toward the
      highest priority food safety needs.

      In addition, the Council, as one of its first orders of business, will review the National
      Academy of Sciences (NAS) report, "Ensuring Safe Food from Production to
      Consumption." After providing opportunity for public comment, including public
      meetings, the Council will report back to the President within 180 days with its response
      to the NAS report. The Council's report will consider appropriate additional actions to
      improve food safety and will take into account the comprehensive strategic Federal food
      safety plan which the Council will be developing.

Q:    Did the President create this Council because it is recommended by the NAS report?
       If so, why did he provide three co-chairs rather than a single chair as
      recommended by the NAS?

A:    The President created the Council as the next logical step in his efforts to further
      coordinate federal food safety efforts and not as a response to the NAS report. The
      Administration response to the NAS report is for the Council to review the NAS report,


                                               1
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion



     including its recommendation to create a central framework, through legislative action, to
     manage federal food safety activities.

Q:   Who are the members of the Council?

A:   The members of the Council are the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and
     Human Services, the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy, the Director of the
     National Partnership for Reinventing Government, the Assistant to the President for
     Science and Technology, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Administrator of the
     Environmental Protection Agency, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Director of the
     Office of Management and Budget. The Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of
     Health and Human Services, and the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy will
     serve as Joint Chairs of the Council.

NAS Report

Q:   What Doesthe NAS report say?

A:   The National Academy of Sciences report, "Ensuring Safe Food From Production to
     Consumption," makes three basic conclusions: (1) an effective and efficient food safety
     system must be based on science; (2) the current statutes governing food safety should be
     revised in order to achieve a food safety system based on science; and (3) Congress
     should enact legislation to establish a unified and central framework for managing federal
     food safety programs, which should be headed by a single official with responsibility for
     all federal food safety activities.

Q:   Does the Administration agree with the NAS report?

A:   The Administration welcomes the opportunity to review the NAS report and believes that
     the report will play an important role in leading to further improvements. The
     Administration is encouraged that the NAS report supports many current Administration
     initiatives such as:
     ·        new science-based systems to prevent contamination, including the Hazard
              Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) system for inspections of meat,
              poultry, and seafood;
     ·        a new science-based early warning system to help detect and respond to outbreaks
              of foodborne illness; and
     ·        proposed legislation to ensure that the FDA halts imports of fruits, vegetables, and
              other food products that do not meet U.S. food safety requirements or come from
              countries that do not provide the same level of protection as is required for U.S.
              products.

     The NAS report also highlights the vital role of Congress in ensuring food safety. The


                                              2
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion


     report makes clear that Congress and the executive branch must work together to improve
     food safety. In fact, many of the recommendations contained in the NAS report can
     occur only with Congressional action, including creating a unified and central framework
     for managing federal food safety programs, which is headed by a single official.

     The Administration has taken many steps for improving the safety of the nation's food
     supply, including proposing legislation. The Administration urges Congress to pass its
     FDA import legislation, to pass additional legislation to give USDA more effective
     enforcement authority to mandate to mandate recalls of meat and poultry, and to provide
     full funding for the Administration's Food Safety Initiative.

Q:   Does the Administration agree with the NAS recommendation that there be a single
     official who has responsibility and control of resources for all federal food safety
     activities?

A:   The Administration certainly agrees that there should be greater coordination of federal
     food safety activities, and has made several significant steps toward this coordination.
     While continuing these efforts at greater coordination consistent with the current statutory
     scheme, the Administration will ensure full consideration of the NAS's proposal for
     legislation to give a single official responsibility for all food safety activities.

Q:   Despite the fact that the NAS report recommends that there be a single person in
     charge of food safety, why did the President establish a Council that has three
     co-chairs?

A:   The President established the Council as part of his overall strategy to better coordinate
     federal food safety efforts, and he believes that the Council is a logical next step in this
     coordinated effort. This Council builds upon the President's food safety initiative and
     his recent establishment of the Joint Institute for Food Safety Research (JIFSR) which
     will develop a coordinated strategy for conducting food safety research activities. In
     terms of the specific recommendations contained in the NAS study, the Clinton
     Administration today announced a process by which the Council will review and respond
     to the NAS report within 180 days. However, the concept of a Food Safety Council is
     only an example in the NAS report of a possible organizational structure to create a single
     federal voice for food safety.

Q:   The NAS report focuses on the coordination of food safety activities. How does the
     federal government already coordinate its food safety activities?

A:   In less than two years, the Clinton Administration has taken significant strides toward
     building a coordinated food safety system. Most recently, the President announced the
     creation of the Joint Institute for Food Safety Research that will develop a strategic plan
     for coordinating government and private food safety research activities. In addition, the


                                              3
                                                                                 Hex-Dump COnVe(~,O~' . ~.-


       Administration announced the Foodbome Outbreak Response Coordinating Group
       (FORC-G) which brings together federal, state, and local agencies to develop a
       comprehensive, coordinated, national foodborne illness response system.

       The Administration also has provided for increased and targeted surveillance of
       foodborne illness through PulseNet and FoodNet. PulseNet is a national network of
       public health laboratories that perform DNA "fingerprinting" on foodbome pathogens and
       compares these patterns through an electronic database at the Centers for Disease Control
       and Prevention. FoodNet is a collaborative effort between USDA, FDA, CDC and seven
       selected sites throughout the United States to track major pathogens that cause sporadic
       illness, and to explore what associations may exist between cases and the types of food
       products consumed .

. Q:   What about the NAS report's recommendation regarding a National Food Safety
       Plan?

 A:    The Administration already has efforts underway to develop a comprehensive strategic
       Federal food safety plan with the cooperation of consumers, producers, industry, food
       service providers, retailers, health professionals, state and local governments, tribes,
       academia, and the public. In fact, today the Clinton Administration announced the first
       public meeting to be held on October 2 in Arlington, Virginia, to begin to develop a
       comprehensive strategic plan for federal food safety activities. The strategic plan will
       focus not only on microbial contamination, but on the full range of issues and actions
       necessary to ensure the safety of the food Americans eat. The plan will be used to set
       priorities, improve coordination and efficiency, identify gaps in the current system, and
       enhance and strengthen prevention strategies.

 Food Safety Budget

 Q:    What did the President ask for in the FY 1999 Budget request with respect to food
       safety?

 A:    The FY 1999 Budget included a $101 million increase over the FY 1998 level for the
       Administration's inter-agency food safety initiative. Of this total amount, $25 million
       would finance FDA's improved capability to ensure the safety of imported foods and $5
       million would permit the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to assist state health
       departments to detect foodborne diseases and to improve foodborne disease surveillance.
       Another $24 million of the Initiative would go towards: developing rapid tests for the
       detection of pathogens; improving slaughter and processing systems to avoid
       contamination of food products; and establishing baseline data to better assess the risk of
       contamination in the US food supply. In addition, $7.8 million would be used to expand
       consumer education initiatives, especially for high risk populations (the elderly and
       children).


                                                4
                                                                            Hex·Dump COMW3/01

Q:     What is the status of the Food Safety Initiative in the FY 1999 Appropriation bills?

A:     So far, Congress has failed to provide full funding of the Administration's food
       safety initiative. The Senate Appropriations Committee provided only about $3
       million for these efforts, but the full Senate voted by a large bipartisan majority for
       an amendment offered by Senator Harkin to provide an additional $66 million.
       Senator Harkin's amendment required USDA's tobacco program administrative
       costs to be partially funded by the tobacco industry, and used the savings as the
       major offset for the cost of expanded food safety programs for both USDA and
       FDA. The House-passed Agriculture Appropriations bill would provide only $16.8
       million of the requested increase: $7 million for FDA imported food safety and $9.8
       million for USDA activities. The Administration will continue to work with the
       conference committee members to urge them to provide full funding for the food safety
       initiative. The House Labor-HHS Appropriations Committee has approved the $5
       million food safety request for CDC.

Q:     Is all of the $101 million that the President asked for necessary for food safety?

A:     Without additional funding for the Food Safety Initiative, the federal food safety agencies
       will not be able fully to develop appropriate response, prevention, and control strategies
       for reducing the level offood-bome illness in the United States.

       In addition to the funding requested to strengthen FDA's import inspection and expand
       USDA's and FDA's research and education activities, funding is requested to continue to
       improve FDA's food safety infrastructure, as started in the FY 1998 Food Safety
       Initiative. Also, significant resources are targeted to strengthening both USDA's and
       FDA's risk assessment capabilities. Risk assessment is important in helping to identifY
       foods and processes that are most likely to lead to food-borne illness. Finally, funding is
       requested to expand the USDA's and HHS's ability to identifY and track food-borne
       illnesses.


Legislative Proposals

Q:     What is Clinton Administration's FDA import legislation?

A:    The Administration called on Congress to pass food safety legislation, introduced by
      Senators Milkulski and Kennedy and Reps. Eshoo and Pallone, that gives the FDA
      greater authority over imported foods. This legislation will ensure that the FDA halts
      imports of fruits, vegetables, and other food products that do not meet U.S. food safety
      requirements or that come from countries that do not provide the same level of protection
      as is required for U.S. products. The legislation also enables the FDA to halt imports
      from a country or facility that refuses to allow FDA inspections. This legislation gives


                                                5
                                                                        . Hex-Dump Conversion


     FDA authority that is similar to USDA's existing authority to prevent the importation of
     unsafe meat and poultry.

Q:   What is the Clinton Administration's USDA mandatory recall/civil penalties
     legislation?

A:   The Clinton Administration called on Congress to pass the Food Safety
     Enforcement Enhancement Act, sponsored by Senators Harkin, Daschle, Johnson,
     and Leahy, which gives USDA the ability to assess civil fines and to order
     mandatory recalls of unsafe meat and poultry products. Currently, the USDA can
     respond to food safety violations only by bringing criminal actions or withdrawing
     inspections; all recalls are done on a voluntary basis and no civil penalties are
     available. This new legislation will give USDA additional enforcement tools to
     enhance food safety.

Q:   Aren't these legislative proposals essentially dead? Has Congress moved on them
     at all?

A:   These proposals are not dead. The Administration is working with members to try to get
     these vital pieces oflegislation passed and expects the Congressional sponsors of these
     measures to raise the bills on the House and Senate floors. We hope that the NAS report
     provides an additional spur to Congressional action.




                                             6
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion .

Draft 8-24-98
                    THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCES
                      PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY
                                  August 24, 1998

The Clinton Administration will announce a plan to create a President's Council on Food Safety,
which will develop a comprehensive strategic plan for federal food safety activities and ensure
that federal agencies annually develop coordinated food safety budgets. This Council builds
upon the President's food safety initiative and his recent establishment of the Joint Institute for
Food Safety Research (JIFSR) which will develop a coordinated strategy for conducting food
safety research activities. The Clinton Administration also announced a directive to the Council,
as one of its first orders of business, to review the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) report,
"Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption," and to report back with its response to
the report, including appropriate additional actions to improve food safety. Finally, the Clinton
Administration announced the first public meeting to discuss the development of the
comprehensive strategic plan for federal food safety activities.

President's Council on Food Safety. The President will sign an executive order which
establishes a President's Council on Food Safety (Council). The Council will have three
primary functions, including: (1) developing a comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan;
(2) advising agencies of priority areas for investment in food safety and ensuring that federal
agencies annually develop coordinated food safety budgets; and (3) ensuring that the JIFSR
establishes mechanisms to .guide federal research efforts toward the highest priority of food
safety needs.

·      Comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan. The Council will develop a
       comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan that contains specific recommendations
       on needed changes including measurable outcome goals. The fundamental goal of the
       plan will be the establishment of a seamless, science-based food safety system. The plan
       will address the steps necessary to achieve this goal, including the key public health,
       resource, and management issues regarding food safety. The planning process will
       consider both short and long-term issues including new and emerging threats and the
       special needs of vulnerable populations such as children and the elderly. In developing
       this plan, the Council will consult with all interested parties, including state and local
       agencies, tribes, consumers, producers, industry, and academia.

·      Coordinated Federal Food Safety Budgets. Consistent with the comprehensive
       strategic Federal food safety plan. the Council will advise agencies of priority areas for
       investment in food safety and ensure that federal agencies annually develop coordinated
       food safety budgets for submission to OMB that sustain and strengthen existing
       capacities, eliminate duplication, and ensure the most effective use of resources for
       improving food safety. The Council will also develop a unified budget for
       submission to OMB for the President's Food Safety Initiative and such other food
       safety issues as the Council determines appropriate.

·      Guiding Federal Food Safety Research Efforts.        The Council will ensure that the
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conve:slo,


       JIFSR, in consultation with the National Science and Technology Council, establishes
       mechanisms to guide Federal research efforts toward the highest priority food safety
       needs. The JIFSR will report, on a regular basis, to the Council on its efforts to develop
       a strategic plan for conducting food safety research activities consistent with the
       President's Food Safety Initiative and such other food safety activities as the JIFSR
       determines appropriate and to coordinate efficiently all federal food safety research,
       including with the private sector and academia.

Review of NAS Report. The President will directed the Council, as one of its first orders of
business, to review the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) report, "Ensuring Safe Food from
Production to Consumption." After providing opportunity for public comment, including public
meetings, the Council will report back to the President within 180 days with its response to the
NAS report. The Council's report will consider appropriate additional actions to improve food
safety and will take into account the comprehensive strategic Federal food safety plan which the
Council will be developing.

Public Meeting to Develop Comprehensive Strategic Plan for Federal Food Safety
Activities. The Clinton Administration will announce publication of a notice of the first public
meeting to be held on October 2 in Arlington, Virginia, to begin development of a
comprehensive strategic plan for federal food safety activities. The meeting will engage
consumers, producers, industry, food service providers, retailers, health professionals, State and
local governments, Tribes, academia, and the public in the strategic planning process. The
meeting will focus on how to structure a strategic planning process that involves all interested
parties and best addresses the important food safety challenges of the future.
                                                                         Hex-Dump Convefslol
            Clinton Administration Accomplishments In Improving Food Safety

The President's announcement builds on a strong record of food safety initiatives, ensuring that
Americans eat the safest possible food. The Administration has put into place improved safety
standards for meat, poultry, and seafood products, and has begun the process of developing
enhanced standards for fruit and vegetable juices. The Administration also has expanded
research, education, and surveillance activities throughout the food safety system.

*July 1998. Created a Joint Institute of Food Safety Research which will develop a strategic
plan for conducting food safety research activities and to coordinate efficiently all federal food
safety research, including with the private sector and academia.

*February 1998. Administration announces its proposed food safety budget, which requests an
approximate $101 million increase for food safety initiatives.

*May 1997. Administration announces comprehensive new initiative to improve the safety of
nation's food supply --"Food Safety from Farm to Table" -- detailing a $43 million food safety
program, including measures to improve surveillance, outbreak response, education, and
research.

*January 1997. President announces new Early-Warning System to gather critical scientific data
to help stop foodborne disease outbreaks quickly and to improve prevention systems.

*August 1996. President signs Safe Drinking Water Act of 1996. The law requires drinking
water systems to protect against dangerous contaminants like Cryptosporidium, and gives people
the right to know about contaminants in their tap water.

*August 1996. President signs Food Quality Protection Act of 1996, which streamlines
regulation of pesticides by FDA and EPA and puts important new public-health protections in
place, especially for children.

*July 1996. President Clinton announces new regulations that modernize the nation's meat and
poultry inspection system for the first time in 90 years. New standards help prevent E.coli
bacteria contamination in meat.

*December 1995. Administration issues new rules to ensure seafood safety, utilizing HACCP
regulatory programs to require food industries to design and implement preventive measures and
increase the industries' responsibility for and control oftheir safety assurance actions.

* 1994. CDC embarks on strategic program to detect, prevent, and control emerging infectious
disease threats, some of which are food borne, making significant progress toward this goal in
each successive year.

*1993. Vice-President's National Performance Review issues report recommending
government and industry move toward a system of preventive controls.


