     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:25-AUG-1998 17:42:16.00

     SUBJECT:   Kay Bailey Hutchinson single sex schools amendment

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     I had a meeting with ED and Justice staff (Rob Weiner was also there for
     part of it) to consider how to respond to the Hutchinson amendment that
     would permit school districts to use ESEA Title VI funds for the purpose
     of establishing single sex schools, by "clarifying" that title IX does not
     prohibit the use of these funds for single sex schools or classes, as long
     as comparable opportunities are provided to students of both genders.

     Hutchinson's office has asked for ED's views on her amendment by this
     Thursday.

     Here is where we ended up:   .
     1. We will indicate to Hutchinson that we support the goal of permitting
     single sex schools and classrooms, but do not support her amendment,
     because:
     It's unnecessary.  ED's Title IX regs already recognize that single sex
     schools are permissible, as long as there are comparable opportunities.
     ED is working on new regs, to be issued in the Fall, that will also
     indicate that single sex classrooms are also acceptable under Title IX (ED
     previously believed that they were not).  Since all Hutchinson's amendment
     does is say that single sex is permissible if there are comparable
     opportunities, ED is taking care of this administratively.
     It will create confusion rather than clarity at the local level. Because
     the amendment centers on the use of Title VI funds, in its current form it
     would create confusion about whether single sex schools funded from other
     sources are also subject to the same interpretation of Title IX.

     2. Art Coleman is drafting some talking points on this, which could also
     form the basis of a SAP if needed. These will be worded carefully enough
     to leave us room to propose or support legislation down the road if we
     decide we want to.   ED and Justice understand that you and Chuck Ruff
     must have a shot at this before anything is finalized.

     Here is why we ended up with this position:
     There are significant downsides to proposing real improvements in the
     Hutchinson bill. The Hutchinson language is quite vague--it leaves the
     definition of "comparable opportuity" up to the Secretary, and therefore
     doesn't really create any greater clarity than current law and (soon to be
     revised) regulations.  If we really want to provide greater clarity and
     reassurance to local communities on this issue through legislation, the
     most effective way would be to amend Title IX itself.  ED had proposed
     language to do this, but nobody, including ED, thinks it is a good idea to
     propose amending Title IX, certainly not now. And we do not want to say
     anything to Hutchinson that will lead her in this direction.
     We don't want to support riders to the approptions bill in any event--and
     neither does Spector.  Even if we liked the bill as drafted, we would
"
    argue that this is not the right time or bill to which a single-sex
    schools amendment should be attached.  But we don't want to see it on any
    other bill either.
    While our policy position is in favor of single sex schools, this is not
    the position that a number of our friends support. This doesn't seem to
    be the time to start a battle on this issue.


