     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:26-AUG-1998 18:29:53.00

     SUBJECT:   revised education paper for Monday's event

     TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Attached is a revised 1-pager, based on our conversation this afternoon
     about how to better focus Monday's message document.  Does this look like
     its in the right ballpark from your perspective?

     Note that the text itself needs significant editing still, but there is
     still time for that.  I'll turn to that tomorrow, once we've got a sense
     that the basic format is on track.

     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D12)MAIL4l301083S.226 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF575043EAOD0000010A020100000002050000006249000000020000157C5EBF2049FA849F980B
     8B4E87C1A613C1ACD1E5D3B28646BF0210ECC1ED743CD45DFDFF9EB6DD96F2D932065AC655065A
     11795F8FBD61BB7E66B91C3FC1E8CF023B6700489670AE2FA7BB5DBE3345592C285BAC10BA3285
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

Draft 2
8/26

PRESIDENT CLINTON'S EDUCATION AND TRAINING
          PRIORITIES FOR THE FALL
          President Clinton challenged Congress to take the steps necessary to prepare our students
          and our country for the 21st Century, by enacting his proposals to strengthen and invest in
          public education, expand access to higher education, and provide those who need it with
          the training needed to suceed in the workplace.

1.        SCHOOL MODERNIZATION. President Clinton is commited to ensuring that we
          help prepare all students for the future, by providing them with safe, modem school
          buildings, small classess and access to up-to-date technology.

                 School Modernization Tax Credits. To help rebuild, modernize and build over
                 5,000 public schools, President Clinton will work with the Congress to pass Federal
                 tax credits to pay interest on nearly $22 billion in bonds at a cost of $5 billion over
                 five years.

                 Reducing Class Size. President Clinton is committed to helping local schools
                 provide smaller classes with well-prepared teachers in the early grades.. The
                 initiative would provide $12.4 billion over seven years to reduce class size in grades
                 1-3 to a nationwide average of 18 and help make sure that every child receives
                 personal attention, gets a solid foundation for further learning, and learns to read
                 independently and well by the end of third grade.

                 Education Technology: Preparing for the 21st Century. The Clinton
                 Administration has made an unprecedented commitment to bringing technology into
                 the classroom. President Clinton and Vice President Gore are committed to
                 ensuring that all children are technologically literate by the dawn of the 21 st century,
                 equipped with the communication, math, science, reading, and critical thinking skills
                 essential for enhancing learning and improving productivity and performance. The
                 House-passed appropriations bill eliminates $75 million for technology Teacher
                 Training and would deny specialized training to a large number of new teachers
                 entering the profession, to help them learn to most effectively use technology to
                 strengthen instruction and enhance student learning. The House-passed
                 appropriations bill cuts $75 million from the President's request, and would deny
                 funding to 400 school districts to provide students and teachers with access to
                 classroom computers, training and the latest educational software and
                 telecommunications technology to improve teaching and learning in the core
                 subjects.


                                                   1
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

2.   PASSING HIGHER EDUCATION REAUTHORIZATION ACT. Congress must pass
     the reauthorization of the Higher Education Act. Passed in different forms by both Houses,
     this bill would reduce interest rates on student loans, consistent with the Administration's
     proposal announced by the Vice President earlier this year. It will also extent the Pell Grant
     program, which provides billions of dollars in college aid for low income students, and the
     Federal Work-Study program, which helps students work their way through college.
     President Clinton will also work to ensure that the Higher Education Act includes his High
     Hopes mentoring initiative, to inspire more of our young people to have high expectations,
     to stay in school, and to go to college, as well as his proposal to strengthen teacher training
     programs and provide scholarships to 35,000 well-prepared teachers who commit to teaching
     in underserved urban or rural schools. He will also work with Congress to include new
     proposals to strengthen accountability for teacher education programs.

3.   PASSING AUTHORIZATION AND FUNDING FOR EARLY LITERACY. More
     than two years ago President Clinton proposed the America Reads program, to mobilize an
     army of volunteer tutors to help all children read independently and well by the end of the
     third grade. In the Balanced Budget Agreement, the Congress pledged to fund an early
     literacy initiative based on this proposal. It is time that Congress keeps its commitment.
     The literacy bill, now pending in Congress, would ensure that children receive quality
     instruction from well-trained teachers and have opportunities to practice and further
     develop their reading skills after school and on weekends with trained tutors. It would
     also ensure that families receive the support they need to help our youngest children
     develop necessary language and literacy skills from infancy so that when they get to school
     they are ready to learn to read.


4.   STRENGTHENING AND EXPANDING CHARTER SCHOOLS. The President will
     work with Congress this fall to complete work on bipartisan legislation to strengthen federal
     support for the growing charter schools movement, to help meet his goal of establishing
     3,000 high-qwility charter schools by early in the next century. Last year, the House of
     Representatives passed a bill with bipartisan support to direct federal resources for charter
     schools to states that increase the number of charter schools, provide them with maximum
     flexibility, and periodically review their performance. The Administration has worked with
     Senators of both parties to strengthen the bill to increase accountability for academic
     performance in charter schools and ensure that charter schools receive their fair share of
     other federal education funds. The President will call on Congress to send him legislation
     that meets these goals before the end of the session.


S.   MAKING NEEDED INVESTMENTS IN EDUCATION AND TRAINING. President
     Clinton will work to restore more than $2 billion in Congressional cuts to his proposed
     investments to strengthen public schools, expand access to higher education, and invest in

                                              2
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

preparing our youth to enter the workforce:

        Title I (Education for the Disadvantaged). The President will fight the
        Republican efforts to cut $392 million in grants to high-poverty school districts,
        which would mean that 520,000 students in high-poverty communities would not get
        extra help to master the basics and meet high-academic standards.
       Goals 2000. The President will fight Republican efforts to cut by $255 million
        (51 %) Goals 2000, reversing support for efforts to raise academic standards,
        affecting 6,000 schools serving over 3 million students.
       Education Opportunity Zones. The President will fight for his Education
        Opportunity Zones initiative, which would help high-poverty urban and rural
        communities increase student achievement by raising standards, improving teaching,
        ending social promotions, and turning around failing schools.
        Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities. The President will fight
        Republican efforts to cut Safe and Drug-Free Schools by $50 million, eliminating
        funding for School Coordinators to help fight drug and alcohol abuse and increase
        school safety.
       After-School Programs. The President will work to ensure that Congress fully
        funds his efforts to strengthen after-school programs. The House Republicans
        provide $140 million less than the President's request, which would deny about
        425,000 children access to safe learning centers.
        Expanding Head Start. President Clinton is committed to ensuring that children
        enter school readying to learn -- that is why he will continue to press Congress to
        fully fund his request for Head Start. The President will work to restore the $160
        million House Republicans underinvest in Head Start -- which would deny slots to
        25,000 low-income children.
       School-to-Work. The President will work to ensure that House Republicans do not
        cut School-to-Work by $100 million, seriously hampering efforts in all States to help
        young people move from high school to careers or postsecondary training and
        education.
        Summer Jobs. Up to 530,000 disadvantaged young people would be denied the
        opportunity to gain skills and valuable work experience over the summer months, if
        the House Republican budget plan passes. The President is absolutely committed to
        ensuring that all of the money for the summer jobs program is restored because
        studies show that the Summer Jobs initiative works: a 1995 report concluded that
        more than three out of four young people enrolled in the program would have been
        jobless without it.
       Hispanic Education Action Plan! Because the education of Hispanic Americans
        requires special attention -- their high school drop-out rate, for example, is
        unacceptably high -- President Clinton is committed to ensuring that his $xxx million
        Hispanic Education Action Plan is fully funded. This action plan provides for the
      . increased investments necessary to help students master the basic skills (Title 1), and
        become proficient in English (Bilingual ed), help schools implement research-proven

                                         3
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
refonns to reduce drop-out rates (Comprehensive School Refonn), help adults
receive basic skills training and participate in English-as-a-second-language
programs (Adult Ed), and provide assistance to colleges and universities that serve
large numbers of Hispanic students.




                                 4


