,RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-AUG-1998 12:03:40.00

SUBJECT:   Updated Welfare Reform Accomplishments

TO: susan.valaskovic    susan.valaskovic @ npr.gsa.gov@inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: mkharfen ( mkharfen @ acf.dhhs.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robin J. Bachman ( CN=Robin J. Bachman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: edahl ( edahl @ os.dhhs.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joseph C. Fanaroff ( CN=Joseph C. Fanaroff/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Chandler G. Spaulding ( CN=Chandler G. Spaulding/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Anil Kakani   ( CN=Anil Kakani/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached document includes most recent welfare caseload numbers (thru
6/98), federal welfare to work hiring numbers (thru 8/98), and updated
number of businesses involved in Welfare to Work Partnership (over
6,000) .


Chandler, I sent it to Kelly Skoleda yesterday to update WH web site.===============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00


TEXT:
unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D70]MAIL42294573Y.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504309110000010A02010000000205000000836E0000000200OOl127F8F5DD5E61CC72D5F8
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                CLINTON-GORE ACCOMPLISHMENTS
                     REFORMING WELFARE

    On August 22, 1996, President Clinton signed the Personal Responsibility and
    Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, fulfilling his longtime commitment to 'end
    welfare as we know it. ' As the President said upon signing, "... this legislation
    provides an historic opportunity to end welfare as we know it and transform our
    broken welfare system by promoting the fundamental values of work,
    responsibility, and family. "


              TRANSFORMING THE BROKEN WELFARE SYSTEM

    Overhauling the Welfare System with the Personal Responsibility Act: In 1996, the
    President signed a bipartisan welfare plan that is dramatically changing the nation's
    welfare system into one that requires work in exchange for time-limited assistance. The
    law contains strong work requirements, performance bonuses to reward states for moving
    welfare recipients into jobs and reducing illegitimacy, state maintenance of effort
    requirements, comprehensive child support enforcement, and supports for families
    moving from welfare to work -- including increased funding for child care. State
    strategies are making a real difference in the success of welfare reform, specifically in
    job placement, child care and transportation.

    Law Builds on the Administration's Welfare Reform Strategy: Even before the
    Personal Responsibility Act became law, many states were well on their way to changing
    their welfare programs to jobs programs. By granting Federal waivers, the Clinton
    Administration allowed 43 states -- more than all previous Administrations combined --
    to require work, time-limit assistance, make work pay, improve child support
    enforcement, and encourage parental responsibility. The vast majority of states have
    chosen to continue or build on their welfare demonstration projects approved by the
    Clinton Administration.

   Largest Decline in the Welfare Rolls in History: The President has announced that
    we've met -- two years ahead of schedule -- the challenge he made in last year's State
    of the Union to move two million more Americans off of welfare by the year 2000.
    The latest caseload numbers, released in August, show that welfare caseloads fell
    by 5.7 million since President Clinton took office and 3.8 million since he signed the
    welfare reform law. The new figures, from June 1998, show 8.4 million people on
    welfare, a drop of more than 41 percent from January 1993. This historic decline
    occurred in response to the Administration's grants of Federal waivers to 43 states, the
    provisions of the new welfare reform law, and the strong economy.




                                           - 1-
                                                                         Hex-Dump ConversIon
                 MOVING PEOPLE FROM WELFARE TO WORK

   Two Years Later, Millions of Welfare Recipients are Working: In August 1998, the
    President released the First Annual Report to Congress on the Temporary
    Assistance for Needy Families program showing a dramatic increase in the number
    of welfare recipients who have gone to work since he signed the welfare law in
    August 1996. Data from the Census Bureau's Current Population Survey show
    that the rate of employment of individuals on welfare in one year who were working
    in the following year increased by nearly 30 percent between 1996 and 1997. As a
    result, 1.7 million adults on welfare in 1996 were working in March 1997.

    Mobilizing the Business Community: At the President's urging, the Welfare to Work
    Partnership was launched in May 1997 to lead the national business effort to hire people
    from the welfare rolls. Founded with 105 participating businesses, the Partnership grew
    to 5,000 within one year, and now includes over 6,000 businesses. In 1997 these
    businesses hired 135,000 welfare recipients and the President has challenged them to
    double their efforts to 270,000 in 1998. The Partnership provides technic!ll assistance and
    support to businesses around the country, including: a toll-free number, a web site, a
    "Blueprint for Business" manual, and a new report called The Road to Retention on
    businesses whose retention rates for former welfare recipients are higher than the
    retention rates for other new hires.

    Connecting Small Businesses with New Workers: The Small Business Administration
    is reaching out to small businesses throughout the country to help them connect with
    job-ready welfare recipients. In addition, SBA assists welfare recipients who wish to
    start their own businesses.

   Mobilizing Civic, Religious and Non-profit Groups: The Vice President created the
    Welfare to Work Coalition to Sustain Success, a coalition of civic groups committed to
    helping former welfare recipients stay in the workforce and succeed. Tailoring their
    services to meet welfare recipients needs and the organizations' strengths, the Coalition
    focuses on providing mentoring and other support services. Charter members of the
    Coalition include: the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, the Baptist Joint Committee, the
    United Way, the YMCA, and other civic and faith-based groups.

   Doing Our Fair Share with the Federal Government's Hiring Initiative: Under the
    Clinton Administration, the Federal workforce is the smallest it has been in thirty years.
    Yet, this Administration also believes that the Federal government, as the nation's largest
    employer, must lead by example. The President asked the Vice President to oversee the
    Federal government's hiring initiative in which Federal agencies have committed to
    directly hire at least 10,000 welfare recipients in the next four years. Already, the
    federal government has hired nearly 6,200 welfare recipients, 58 percent of its
    planned hires. As a part of this effort, the White House pledged to hire six welfare
    recipients and has already exceeded this goal.

   $3 Billion to Help Move More People from Welfare to Work: Because of the


                                           -2-
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
    President's leadership, the 1997 Balanced Budget Act included the total funding
    requested by the President for the creation of his $3 billion welfare to work fund. This
    program will help states and local communities move long-term welfare recipients, and
    certain non-custodial parents, into lasting, unsubsidized jobs. These funds can be used for
    job creation, job placement and job retention efforts, including wage subsidies to private
    employers and other critical post-employment support services. The Department of
    Labor provides oversight but most of the dollars will be placed, through the Private
    Industry Councils, in the hands of the localities who are on the front lines of the welfare
    reform effort. In addition, 25 percent of the funds will be awarded by the Department of
    Labor on a competitive basis to support innovative welfare to work projects. The
    President announced the first round of 49 innovative competitive grants on May 27th.

   Tax Credits for Employers: The Welfare to Work Tax Credit, enacted in the 1997
    Balanced Budget Act, provides a credit equal to 35 percent of the first $10,000 in wages
    in the first year of employment, and 50 percent of the first $10,000 in wages in the second
    year, to encourage the hiring and retention ofiong term welfare recipients. This credit
    complements the Work Opportunity Tax Credit, which provides a credit of up to $2,400
    for the first year of wages for eight groups of job seekers. The President's FY 1999
    budget extends these two important tax credits through April 2000.

   Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers: In his FY 1999 budget, the President proposes
    $283 million for 50,000 new housing vouchers for welfare recipients who need housing
    assistance to get or keep ajob. Families could use these housing vouchers to move
    closer to a new job, to reduce a long commute, or to secure more stable housing to
    eliminate emergencies that keep them from getting to work every day on time. These
    vouchers, awarded to communities on a competitive basis, will give people on welfare a
    new tool to make the transition to a job and succeed in the work place.

   Welfare-to-Work Transportation: One of the biggest barriers facing people who
    move from welfare to work -- in cities and in rural areas -- is finding transportation to get
    to jobs, training programs and child care centers. Few welfare recipients own cars.
    Existing mass transit does not provide adequate links to many suburban jobs at all,
    or within a reasonable commute time. In addition, many entry level jobs require
    evening or weekend hours that are poorly served by existing transit routes. To help
    those on welfare get to work, President Clinton proposed a $100 million a year welfare to
    work transportation plan as part of his ISTEA reauthorization bill. The Transportation
    Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA-21), which the President signed on June 9th,
    authorizes $750 million over five years for the President's initiative and reverse commute
    grants. Of this amount, $50 million is guaranteed funding in FY 1999, rising to $150
    million in 2003. The Job Access_competitive grants will assist states and localities in
    developing flexible transportation alternatives, such as van services, for welfare recipients
    and other low income workers.

   Eliminating Anti-Work and Anti-Family Rules that Denied Families Health
    Coverage: In August 1998, the President eliminated a vestige of the old welfare system
    by announcing that the Department of Health and Human Services will revise its


                                              -3-
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
    regulations to allow all states to provide Medicaid coverage to working, two-parent
    families who meet State income eligibility. Under the old welfare regulations, adults in
    two-parent families who worked more than 100 hours per month could not receive
    Medicaid regardless of income level, while there were no such restrictions on
    single-parent families. Because these regulations provided disincentives to marriage and
    full-time work, the Administration allowed a number of states to waive this rule. The
    new regulation eliminates this rule for all States, providing health coverage for more than
    130,000 working families to help them stay employed and off welfare.


                   PROMOTING PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

   Enforcing Child Support -- 68% Increase in Collections: The Clinton Administration
    collected a record $13.4 billion in child support in 1997 through tougher enforcement, an
    increase of $5.4 billion, or 68% since 1992. Not only are collections up, but the number
    of families that are actually receiving child support has also increased. In 1997, the
    number of child support cases with collections rose to 4.2 million, an increase of 48%
    from 2.8 million in 1992. In addition, a new collection system proposed by the President
    in 1994 and enacted as part of the 1996 welfare refonn law located one million
    delinquent parents in its first nine months of operation. This National Directory of New
    Hires helps track parents across state lines by enabling child support officials to match
    records of delinquent parents with wage records from throughout the nation.
    Approximately one-third of all child support cases involve parents living in different
    states. In June 1998, the President signed the Deadbeat Parents Punishment Act, a law
    based on his 1996 proposal for tougher penalties for parents who repeatedly fail to
    support children living in another state or who flee across state lines to avoid supporting
    them. This new law creates two new felonies, with penalties of up to two years in
    prison, for egregious child support evaders who travel across state or country lines to
    evade child support obligations, or who have an unpaid obligation to a child living in
    another state that is more than $10,000 or has remained unpaid for more than two years.

    Increasing Parental Responsibility: The President's unprecedented and sustained
    campaign to ensure parents financially support their children is working. Paternity
    establishment, often the crucial first step in child support cases, has dramatically
    increased, due in large part to the in-hospital voluntary paternity establishment program
    begun in 1994 by the Clinton Administration. In 1997, the number of paternities
    established or acknowledged rose to a record 1.3 million, two and a half times the 1992
    figure of 512,000. In addition to tougher enforcement including a strong partnership
    with states, President Clinton has taken executive action including: directing the Treasury
    Department to collect past-due child support from Federal payments including Federal
    income tax refunds and employee salaries, and taking steps to deny Federal loans to any
    delinquent parents. The welfare refonn law contains tough child support measures that
    President Clinton has long supported including: the national new hire reporting system;
    streamlined paternity establishment; unifonn interstate child support laws; computerized
    state-wide collections; and tough new penalties. These five measures are projected to
    increase child support collections by an additional $24 billion over the next ten years.


                                           -4-
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conv2rsion

   Breaking the Cycle of Dependency -- Preventing Teen Pregnancy: Significant
    components of the President's comprehensive effort to reduce teen pregnancy became law
    when the President signed the 1996 Personal Responsibility Act. The law requires
    unmarried minor parents to stay in school and live at home or in a supervised setting;
    encourages "second chance homes" to provide teen parents with the skills and support
    they need; and provides $50 million a year in new funding for state abstinence education
    activities_ Since 1993, the Clinton Administration has supported innovative and
    promising teen pregnancy prevention strategies, including working with boys and young
    men on pregnancy prevention strategies_ In 1997, the President announced the National
    Strategy to Prevent Teen Pregnancy, mandated in the welfare reform law. It reported that_
    HHS-supported programs already reach about 30 percent or 1,410 communities in the
    United States. As part of this effort, the National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy,
    a private nonprofit organization, was formed in response to the President's 1995 State of
    the Union. Notably, data shows we are making progress in reducing teen pregnancy --
    teen births have fallen five years in a row, by 12 percent from 1991 to 1996. And, teen
    pregnancy rates have decreased significantly from 1992-1995 in each of the 42 states that
    report data to Centers for Disease Control.




                                          -5-
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
       RESTORING FAIRNESS AND PROTECTING THE MOST VULNERABLE

The President made a commitment to fix several provisions in the welfare reform law that had
nothing to do with moving people from welfare to work. In 1997, the President fought for and
ultimately was successful in ensuring that the Balanced Budget Act protects the most vulnerable_
 In 1998, the President continues to reverse unfair cuts in benefits to legal immigrants.

      Restoring Food Stamp Benefits for Legal Immigrants: In June 1998, the President
       signed the Agricultural Research Act into law, which restores food stamp benefits to
       250,000 elderly, disabled, and other needy legal immigrants, including 75,000 children,
       who lawfully resided in the U.S. as of August 22, 1996 and lost assistance as a result of
       cuts in the 1996 welfare law that had nothing to do with welfare reform. It restores
       benefits to Hmong immigrants from Laos who aided our country during the Vietnam War
       and extends the period during which refugees and asylees may qualify for Food Stamps
       while they await citizenship. This law funds a significant part of the President's 1999
       budget proposal to restore food stamp benefits to 730,000 legal immigrants, but the
       President's budget proposal would go further by covering families with children
       regardless of the date they entered the U.S. This restoration builds on the President's
       success last year in restoring SSI and Medicaid to 420,000 legal immigrants whose
       benefits were also terminated in welfare reform (see below).

      Protects Legal Immigrants Who Become Disabled and Those Currently Receiving
       Benefits: The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 restored $11.5 billion in SSI and Medicaid
       benefits for legal immigrants whose benefits were also terminated in welfare reform.
       This law protects those immigrants now receiving assistance, ensuring that they will not
       be turned out of their apartments or nursing homes or otherwise left destitute. And for
       immigrants already here but not receiving benefits, the BBA does not change the rules
       retroactively. Immigrants in the country as of August 22, 1996 but not receiving benefits
       at that time who subsequently become disabled will also be fully eligible for SSI and
       Medicaid benefits.

      Protects Children by Keeping the Medicaid Guarantee: The BBA preserved the
       Federal guarantee of Medicaid coverage for the vulnerable populations who depend on it,
       and contains additional investments to extend coverage to uninsured children. It also
       ensures that 30,000 disabled children losing SSI because of the new tighter eligibility
       criteria keep their Medicaid coverage.

      Helps People Who Want to Work but Can't Find a Job: The Balanced Budget Act
       (BBA), as amended by the Agricultural Research Act, also restored $1.3 billion in food
       stamp cuts. The welfare reform law restricted food stamps for able-bodied childless
       adults to only 3 out of every 36 months, unless they were working. This move ignored
       the fact that finding a job often takes time. The BBA provided funds for work slots and
       food stamp benefits to help those who are willing to work but, through no fault of their
       own, have not yet found employment. In addition, the BBA allows states to exempt up to
       15 percent of the food stamp recipients (70,000 individuals monthly) who would
       otherwise be denied benefits as a result of the "3 in 36" limit.


                                              -6-
              Hex-Dump Conversion           8/25/98




-7-


