RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 27-AUG-1998 18:50:24.00

SUBJECT:   Education Paper for Monday

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is an NEC-edited version of the paper for Monday. They prefered
the same version you liked yesterday, without the Education Department
budget chart.  I actually prefer the other-mainly because it is shorter
and more coherent--but I can live with either one. And this version
accomodates NEC's interest in including the Hispanic Education Initiative,
which the ED chart just won't do very easily.

A couple of other things:

1. This paper does not mention national tests--principaly because it is a
list of things we want Congress to do, rather than a list of things we
want them to stop doing (prohibiting the test).  However, I think it is
important that in his speech the President mention national standards and
tests as one of his priorities (as he did in today's remarks).  I've asked
Jordan to be sure to include this in the speech text.

2. The Senate approps subcommittee will mark up on Tuesday.   I understand
that they will fund most of the programs at the 98 levels (thereby
restoring many of the House cuts). After-school programs should be at
about $100 million (up from $40 in 98 and $60 in the House bill). Goals
2000 will still be cut significantly (which is why we need to keep
fighting for it--the R's think it is the President's priority, the press
thinks it is; and the both know it is our centerpiece effort to raise
standards.  If we don't keep fighting for it, we give up an awful lot.)

3. The Senate bill will fund continued development of the national tests,
but wi~l prohibit pilot testing, field testing and implementation. The
language is sufficiently different from the House so that the issue will
be conferenceable. Spector's folks think that if we hang tough on this we
should be able to get a compromise at the end that allows us to pilot test
in March, as is currently scheduled. The national test rider coupled with
the Goals 2000 cut should enable us to hammer the R's as being against
higher standards for kids. ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D79]MAIL45757093A.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043F20D0000010A02010000000205000000B946000000020000946CEADE8DOB941BDB5835
CDE3C7E31124952AD787890F2D3CCFD8931E15919143ABODDE7DEABBCC655EBB76EDE4732B6280
8126

PRESIDENT CLINTON'S EDUCATION AND TRAINING
          PRIORITIES FOR THE FALL
President Clinton is committed to helping prepare our students and our country for the 21 st
Century by enacting proposals to strengthen and invest in public education, expand access to
higher education, and provide those who need it with the training needed to succeed in the
workplace. The following list outlines President Clinton's education and training key priorities
for the remainder of this Congressional session:

1.     MODERNIZING OUR SCHOOLS. President Clinton is committed to ensuring that
       we help prepare all students for the future, by providing them with safe, modem school
       buildings, small classes and access to up-to-date technology.

             School Modernization Tax Credits. To help rebuild, modernize and build over
              5,000 public schools, President Clinton will work with the Congress to pass Federal
              tax credits to pay interest on nearly $22 billion in bonds at a cost of $5 billion over
              five years.

              Reducing Class Size. President Clinton is committed to helping local schools
              provide smaller classes with well-prepared teachers in the early grades. The
              initiative would provide $12.4 billion over seven years to reduce class size in grades
              1-3 to a nationwide average of 18 and help make sure that every child receives
              personal attention, gets a solid foundation for further learning, and learns to read
              independently and well by the end of third grade.

              Education Technology: Preparing for the 21st Century. The Clinton
              Administration has made an unprecedented commitment to bringing technology
              into the classroom and to ensuring that all children are technologically literate by
              the dawn of the 21 st century. The House-passed appropriations bill eliminates
              $75 million for technology Teacher Training and would deny specialized training
              to a large number of new teachers entering the profession, to help them learn to
              most effectively use technology to .strengthen instruction and enhance student
              learning. The House-passed appropriations bill cuts $75 million from the
              President's request, and would deny funding to 400 school districts to provide
              students and teachers with access to classroom computers, training and the latest
              educational software and telecommunications technology to improve teaching and
              learning in the core subjects.

2.     PASSING THE HIGHER EDUCATION ACT: PROVIDING STUDENT FINANCIAL


                                                1
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


     AID, RECRUITING AND PREPARING GOOD TEACHERS, AND MENTORING
     MIDDLE-SCHOOL STUDENTS. Congress must pass the reauthorization of the Higher
     Education Act. Passed in different fonus by both Houses, this bill would reduce interest
     rates on student loans, consistent with the Administration's proposal announced by the Vice
     President earlier this year. It will also extend the Pell Grant program, which provides
     billions of dollars in college aid for low income students, and the Federal Work-Study
     program, which helps students work their way through college. President Clinton will also
     work to ensure that the Higher Education Act includes his High Hopes mentoring initiative,
     to inspire more of our young people to have high expectations, to stay in school, and to go to
     college, as well as his proposal to strengthen teacher training programs and provide
     scholarships to 35,000 well-prepared teachers who commit to teaching in underserved urban
     or rural schools. He will also work with Congress to include new proposals to strengthen
     accountability for teacher education programs.

3.   HELPING EVERY EIGHT-YEAR OLD LEARN TO READ. More than two years ago
     President Clinton proposed the America Reads program, to mobilize an anuy of volunteer
     tutors to help all children read independently and well by the end of the third grade. In the
     Balanced Budget Agreement, the Congress pledged to fund an early literacy initiative based
     on this proposal. It is time that Congress keeps its commitment. The literacy bill, now
     pending in Congress, would ensure that children receive quality instruction from
     well-trained teachers and have opportunities to practice and further develop their reading
     skills after school and on weekends with trained tutors. It would also ensure that families
     receive the support they need to help our youngest children develop necessary language and
     literacy skills from infancy so that when they get to school they are ready to learn to read.

4.   STRENGTHENING AND EXPANDING CHARTER SCHOOLS. President Clinton
     will work with Congress this fall to complete work on bipartisan legislation to strengthen
     federal support for the growing charter schools movement, to help meet his goal of
     establishing 3,000 high-quality charter schools by early in the next century. Last year, the
     House of Representatives passed a bill with bipartisan support to direct federal resources for
     charter schools to states that increase the number of charter schools, provide them with
     maximum flexibility, and periodically review their perfonuance. The Administration has
     worked with Senators of both parties to strengthen the bill to increase accountability for
     academic perfonuance in charter schools and ensure that charter schools receive their fair
     share of other federal education funds. The President will call on Congress to send him
     legislation that meets these goals before the end of the session.

5.   MAKING NEEDED INVESTMENTS IN EDUCATION AND TRAINING. President
     Clinton will work to restore $3.3 billion in Congressional cuts to his proposed investments
     to strengthen public schools, expand access to higher education, and invest in preparing our
     youth to enter the workforce:

           Title I (Education for the Disadvantaged). The President will fight the

                                              2
                                                         Hex-Dump Converslor

    Republican efforts to cut $392 million in grants to high-poverty school districts,
    which would mean that 520,000 students in high-poverty communities would not get
    extra help to master the basics and meet high-academic standards.
   Goals 2000. The President will fight Republican efforts to cut by $255 million
    (51 %) Goals 2000, reversing support for efforts to raise academic standards,
    affecting 6,000 schools serving over 3 million students.
    After-School Programs. The President will work to ensure that Congress fully
    funds his efforts to strengthen after-school programs. The House Republicans
    provide $140 million less than the President's request, which would deny about
    425,000 children access to safe learning centers.
    Expanding Head Start. President Clinton is committed to ensuring that children
    enter school readying to learn -- that is why he will continue to press Congress to
    fully fund his request for Head Start. The President will work to restore the $160
    million House Republicans underinvest in Head Start -- which would deny slots to
    25,000 low-income children.
   School-to-Work. The President will work to ensure that House Republicans do
    not cut School-to-Work by $100 million, seriously hampering efforts in all States
    to help young people move from high school to careers or postsecondary training
    and education.
    Summer Jobs. Up to 530,000 disadvantaged young people would be denied the
    opportunity to gain skills and valuable work experience over the summer months, if
    the House Republican budget plan passes. The President is absolutely committed to
    ensuring that all of the money for the summer jobs program is restored because
    studies show that the Summer Jobs initiative works: a 1995 report concluded that
    more than three out of four young people enrolled in the program would have been
    jobless without it.
    Youth Opportunity Areas. The House Republican budget provides no funding for
    the new Youth Opportunity Areas initiative. The President will fight for the needed
    $250 million in funding for this initiative because it will help provide permanent job
    opportunities for up to 50,000 youth in the poorest communities.
   Hispanic Education Action Plan: Because the education of Hispanic Americans
    requires special attention -- their high school drop-out rate, for example, is
    unacceptably high -- President Clinton is committed to ensuring that his $xxx million
    Hispanic Education Action Plan is fully funded. This action plan provides for the
    increased investments necessary to help students master the basic skills (Title 1), and
    become proficient in English (Bilingual ed), help schools implement research-proven
    reforms to reduce drop-out rates (Comprehensive School Reform), help adults receive
    basic skills training and participate in English-as-a-second-Ianguage programs (Adult
    Ed), and provide assistance to colleges and universities that serve large numbers of
    Hispanic students.
   Education Opportunity Zones. The President will fight for his Education Opportunity
    Zones initiative, which would help high-poverty urban and rural communities increase
    student achievement by raising standards, improving teaching, ending social

                                     3
                                                         Hex-Dump ConversloP


promotions, and turning around failing schools.
Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities. The President will fight
Republican efforts to cut Safe and Drug-Free Schools by $50 million, eliminating
funding for School Coordinators to help fight drug and alcohol abuse and increase
school safety.




                                4


