RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]      )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 27-AUG-1998 08:25:19.00

SUBJECT:   Redraft

TO: Laura Emmett      CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Revised Draft 8/26/98 8:15am
Jordan Tamagni

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR SCHOOL SAFETY EVENT
MECHANICS HALL
WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS
August 26, 1998

        Acknowledgments: Mayor Raymond Mariano; Sen. Kennedy; Rep. McGovern [for
leadership crime-fighting and safe schools]; State A.G. Scott Harshbarger;
Police Chief Edward Gardella; Kathleen Bisson [Burncoat Middle School
teacher]; Officer Michael Jones [Police Corps graduate].

         It is an honor to be here today in the city of Worcester [wuh-ster],
[J&the heartbeat of Massachusetts08for 150 years...  an honor to speak in
this great hall where so many great Americans have spoken, from Frederick
Douglas, to Susan B. Anthony, to Henry David Thoreau.   I am also honored
to share this stage with Kathleen Bisson and Officer Michael Jones, and to
hear what they are doing to make their communities stronger and safer.

        Before I begin my remarks, I want to say a few words about the
havoc Hurricane Bonnie has wreaked in North Carolina over the last 24
hours.  Many of the communities hit by this storm had only just rebuilt
homes and businesses destroyed by Hurricanes Bertha and Fran. Like all
Americans, my heart goes out to families affected by this powerful storm.
Thankfully, there has been no loss of life, but the full extent of the
damage remains to be seen, as the storm moves along the coast. Under the
leadership of Director James Lee witt, FEMA is working with state and
local emergency agencies to assess that damage.  Hundreds of people and
reserves of equipment stand at the ready to bring relief as soon as the
hurricane is over. And we will be there every step of the way, for as
long as it takes, to help communities rebuild.

        Now, IO,d like to talk to you about what has brought all of us
here today -- and what Vice President and Mrs. Gore, and Secretary Riley,
are in California to talk about today: our common commitment to make our
streets and our schools safe for our families and our children.

        For five and a half years now, I have had the great honor of
serving you and working with you to strengthen America for a new century
and a new millennium. We have tried to look ahead with new ideas relevant
to the times, but based on our oldest values: to deepen the meaning of our
freedom; to widen the circle of opportunity; to strengthen the bonds of
our union; to give our children and our grandchildren the chance to live


out their dreams.

        Thanks to the hard work, ingenuity, and civic spirit of the
American people, this is a time of great prosperity and promise. We have
16 million new jobs, the lowest unemployment in 28 years, the smallest
percentage of our people on welfare in 29 years, the smallest federal
government in 35 years, and the highest home ownership rate in history.

         But as I have said many times before, this is not a time to rest.
There is critical business ahead of us -- work that we must do together --
to prepare our nation and all of our people for the challenges of the 21st
Century.

        Protecting our families and making our communities safe is one of
the most is one of the most important challenges we face.  When I was
first running for President in 1992, a man came up to me at a rally.  He
told me that he was an immigrant, working hard to make a better life for
his family.  He said, o&Where I come from, we were poor, but we were
free.  Here, I have more money, but we're not free.08 He told me that his
young son couldno,t walk two blocks to school without fear of being
attacked or hit by a stray bullet. 0&So,08 he said to me, o&if I vote for
you, I want you to make my boy free.08

        I have never forgotten his words.   Since that day,  I have tried
to live up to them
   to make his boy, and all children, ,free from the fear of violence, free
to play in parks and go to school in safety, free to live up to their
God-given potential, everyone of them.

        Working together with state and local leaders, we put in place a
bold new anti-crime strategy, grounded in the principles and practices law
enforcement officers and local leaders told us were working to make their
communities safer: community policing; anti-gang initiatives; targeted
deterrence; tougher penalties; smarter, more comprehensive prevention.

        I am proud to say that this comprehensive strategy is producing
remarkable results. Crime rates are at 25-year low, juvenile crime has
begun to decrease, and all across America, families are beginning to feel
safe again -- free again -- in their homes and on their streets.

         To make our schools places of learning, order, and safety, we have
expanded the Safe and Drug Free schools program, and promoted
anti-truancy, curfew and school uniform policies. We have strictly
enforced zero tolerance for guns in schools.   Last year alone, over 6,000
students with guns were disarmed and sent home, doubtless preventing many
acts of violence.    This year, a new report showed that the overwhelming
majority of Americao,s schools are safe. This Fall, we will hold the
first-ever White House Conference on School Safety to continue our
progress.

         But when children in inner city schools must walk through metal
detectors to protect them from the threat of violence ... when high
schools in small towns like Springfield, Oregon and Jonesboro, Arkansas
are torn apart by disturbed teenagers armed with deadly weapons '" when
gang violence still ravages communities large and small, we know we must
do more.

        I want to talk to you now about two new steps we are taking to
make our schools safe and protect our families: first, by offering a guide
to help prevent school violence before it starts, and second, by expanding


the remarkable Police Corps program.

        Early Warning Guide:   Earlier this year, in the aftermath of the tragedy
in Springfiel$i, I directed SecretaIY Riley and .~.ttorney General Reno to
develop a safe schools guide to help educators and parents recognize and
respond to the early warning signs of violence. Today, I am pleased to
announce that the guide is ready -- and over the next few weeks, every
school in America will receive a copy, just in time for the start of the
new school year.

        This guide gives schools the help they need to recognize a
troubled or potentially violent young person early on, and it outlines the
steps they must take to intervene before it is too late. As Secretary
Riley and Attorney General Reno say in their introduction, the guide
should never be used to stigmatize or label young people in distress.
Rather, it should be used by schools as vital part of their overall
violence prevention efforts -- efforts that must include teachers,
parents, and young people themselves.  Because we will only meet the
challenge of making our schools and our communities safe if every teacher,
every parent, and every young person makes a commitment to get involved
and stay involved-- sharing resources, listening to one another, and
learning from one another.

        Police Corps: The Police Corps program we heard about earlier embodies
these same principles.  I  first heard about the Police Corps nearly ten
years ago, when I was Governor of Arkansas.   I was so impressed by this
program -- and by Adam WalinskYG,s commitment to it -- that I became a
charter member of the National Committee for the Police Corps on the
spot. And I was proud to sign into law state legislation to create a
Police Corps scholarship program in Arkansas.

        What impressed me about the Police Corps was the way it embodies
the vision of President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy, who understood that
citizenship meant giving something back to the community, and that law
enforcement meant more than policing a community; it meant being part of
it.

        When I became President, I was determined to help carry this
vision forward.  Thanks to the efforts of Senator Ted Kennedy, of Adam
Walinsky, and of Lieutenant Governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, we are
doing exactly that. The Police Corps program was a fundamental part of my
1994 Crime Bill. As we have already heard, much in the way of the ROTC,
this remarkable program gives talented young people college scholarships
in return for their service as police officers in our communities.   In 17
states around the country, the Police Corps is helping to create a new
generation of police officers -- young men and women, trained to stand on
the front lines and to listen on front porches ... to work in distressed
communities and be role models for troubled young people ... and to take
their place alongside our nationD,s dedicated police officers.

        As you know, we are joined here today by several young members of
the Police Corps. They embody everything we hope for in our law
enforcement officers: honor, courage, commitment to community and
country. We need more police officers like these fine young men and
women. That is why today, I am pleased to announce that we are expanding
the Police Corps program to help 6 more states, including Massachusetts,
award college scholarships to more than 300 dedicated young people who
will go on to serve on our nationD,s police forces.

        The Police Corps is a wonderful example of what we can do when we


put progress ahead of partisanship, when we put people ahead of politics,
and when we put our childrenD,s future above all else.

        Bobby Kennedy once said, O&The fight against crime is, in the last
analysis ... a fight to preserve that quality of community which is at the
root of our greatness; a fight to preserve confidence in ourselves and our
fellow citizens; a battle for the quality of our lives.D8

         with these actions, we are moving one step closer to winning that
battle for all Americans, and to building a stronger America for the 21st
Century.


