 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:26-AUG-1998 20:22:16.00

 SUBJECT:   Revised Draft

 TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Leslie Bernstein ( CN=Leslie Bernstein/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Sara M. Latham ( CN=Sara M. Latham/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)    )
 READ: UNKNOWN
             .
 TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)    )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: John Podesta ( CN=John Podesta/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Revised Draft 8/25/98 8:00pm
 Jordan Tamagni

 PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
 REMARKS FOR SCHOOL SAFETY EVENT
 MECHANICS HALL
 WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS
 August 26, 1998

         Acknowledgments: Mayor Raymond Mariano; Sen. Kennedy; Rep. McGovern [for
 leadership crime-fighting and safe schools); State A.G. Scott Harshbarger;
 Police Chief Edward Gardella; Kathleen Bisson [Burncoat Middle School
 teacher); Officer Michael Jones [Police Corps graduate).

         It is an honor to be here today in the city of Worcester [wuh-ster),
 O&the heartbeat of Massachusetts08for 150 years ... an honor to speak in
 this great hall where so many great Americans have spoken, from Frederick
 Douglas, to Susan B. Anthony, to Henry David Thoreau.  I am also honored
 to share this stage with Kathleen Bisson and Officer Michael Jones, and to
 hear what they are doing to make their communities stronger and safer.

         Before I begin my remarks, I want to say a few words about the
 hurricane that is battering the North Carolina coast.  Since Hurricane
 Bonnie made landfall yesterday afternoon, it has torn houses and lives


 apart. Many of the communities affected by this storm had only just
 rebuilt homes and businesses destroyed last year by Hurricane Fran. We
 know that anot~er powerful storm -- Hurricane Danielle -- is traveling in
 the wake of Hurricane Bonnie, threatening to strike.

         Like all Americans, my heart goes out to the people who are
 struggling to survive this terrible storm. Under the leadership of
 Director James Lee Witt, FEMA is working with state and local emergency
 agencies to assess the damage.  Hundreds of people and reserves of
 equipment stand at the ready to bring relief as soon as the hurricane is
 over. And we will be there every step of the way, for as long as it
 takes, to help communities overcome this ordeal.

         Now, IO,d like to talk to you about what has brought all of us
 here today -- and what Vice President and Mrs. Gore, and Secretary Riley,
 are in California to talk about: our common commitment to make our streets
 and our schools safe for our families and our children.

         When I was running for President in 1992, a man came up to me at a
 rally.  He told me that he was an immigrant, working hard to make a better
 life for his family.  He said, O&Where I come from, we were poor, but we
 were free.  Here, I have more money, but we're not free.DB He told me
 that his young son couldnO,t walk two blocks to school without fear of
 being attacked or hit by a stray bullet.  O&So,OB he said to me, O&if I
 vote for you, I want you to make my boy free.OB

         I have never forgotten his words.  Since I first took office, I
 have tried to live up to them -- to make his boy, and all children, free.
 Free from the fear of violence, free to play in parks and go to school in
 safety, free to live up to their God-given potential, everyone of them.
         For five and a half years,  protecting families and making our
 streets and schools safe has been one of my top priorities. Working
 together with state and local leaders, we put in place a bold new
 strategy, grounded in the principles and practices law enforcement
 officers and local leaders told us were working to make their communities
 safer: community policing; anti-gang initiatives; targeted deterrence;
 tougher penalties; smarter, more comprehensive prevention.

         I am proud to say that this comprehensive strategy is producing
 remarkable results.  Crime rates are at 25-year low, juvenile crime has
 begun to decrease, and all across America, families are beginning to feel
 safe again -- free again -- in their homes and on their streets.

          To make our schools places of learning, order, and safety, we have
 expanded the Safe and Drug Free schools program, and promoted
 anti-truancy, curfew and school uniform policies. We have strictly
 enforced zero tolerance for guns in schools. Last year alone, over 6,000
 students with guns were disarmed and sent home, doubtless preventing many
 acts of violence.    This year, a new report showed that the overwhelming
 majority of AmericaO,s schools are safe. This Fall, we will hold the
 first-ever White House Conference on School Safety to continue our
 progress.

          But when children in inner city schools must walk through metal
 detectors to protect them from the threat of violence ... when high
 schools in small towns like Springfield, Oregon and Jonesboro, Arkansas
 are torn apart by disturbed teenagers armed with deadly weapons '" when
 gang violence still ravages communities large and small, we know we must
 do more.


        I want to talk to you now about two new steps we are taking to
make our schools safe and protect our families: first, by offering a guide
to help prevent school violence before it starts, and second, by expanding
the remarkable Police Corps program.

        Early Warning Guide: Earlier this year, in the aftermath of the tragedy
in Springfield, I directed Secretary Riley and Attorney General Reno to
develop a safe schools guide to help educators and parents recognize and
respond to the early warning signs of violence. Today, I am pleased to
announce that the guide is ready -- and over the next few weeks, every
school in America will receive a copy, just in time for the start of the
new school year.

        This guide gives schools the help they need to recognize a
troubled or potentially violent young person early on, and it outlines the
steps they must take to intervene before it is too late. As Secretary
Riley and Attorney General Reno say in their introduction, the guide
should never be used to stigmatize or label young people in distress.
Rather, it should be used by schools as vital part of their overall
violence prevention efforts -- efforts that must include teachers,
parents, and young people themselves.  Because we will only meet the
challenge of making our schools and our communities safe if every teacher,
every parent, and every young person makes a commitment to get involved
and stay involved-- sharing resources, listening to one another, and
learning from one another.

        Police Corps: The Police Corps program we heard about earlier embodies
these same principles.  I  first heard about the Police Corps nearly ten
years ago, when I was Governor of Arkansas.   I was so impressed by this
program -- and by Adam WalinskyD,s commitment to it -- that I became a
charter member of the National Committee for the Police Corps on the
spot. And I was proud to sign into law state legislation to create a
Police Corps sCholarship program in Arkansas.

        What impressed me about the Police Corps was the way it embodies
the vision of President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy, who understood that
citizenship meant giving something back to the community, and that law
enforcement meant more than policing a community; it meant being part of
it.

        When I became President, I was determined to help carry this
vision forward.   Thanks to the efforts of Senator Ted Kennedy, of Adam
Walinsky, and of Lieutenant Governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, we are
doing exactly that.   The Police Corps program was a fundamental part of my
1994 Crime Bill. As we have already heard, much in the way of the ROTC,
this remarkable program gives talented young people college scholarships
in return for their service as police officers in our communities.   In 17
states around .the country, the Police Corps is helping to create a new
generation of police officers -- young men and women, trained to stand on
the front lines and to listen on front porches ... to work in distressed
communities and be role models for troubled young people ... and to take
their place alongside our nationD,s dedicated police officers.

        As you know, we are joined here today by several young members of
the Police Corps. They embody everything we hope for in our law
enforcement officers: honor, courage, commitment to community and
country. We need more police officers like these fine young men and
women. That is why today, I am pleased to announce that we are expanding
the Police Corps program to help 6 more states, including Massachusetts,
award college scholarships to more than 300 dedicated young people who


will go on to serve on our nationD,s police forces.

        Bobby Kennedy once said, D&The fight against crime is, in the last
analysis ... a fight to preserve that quality of community which is at the
root of our greatness; a fight to preserve confidence in ourselves and our
fellow citizens; a battle for the quality of our lives.DB

         with these actions, we are moving one step closer to winning that
battle for all Americans, and to building a stronger America for the 21st
Century.


