RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-AUG-1998 08:57:02.00

SUBJECT:   Draft radio address paper

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D48]MAIL416904930.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750431F070000010A0201000000020500000074330000000200000DE0298BCD239E9DF2C6Bl
4A03E2CD5A4DD41B368133D9C3DOAD2EOIBFEC9E9D3DC9C563A85E8170C65CD194AIFB9A8A985F
OVER 120 MILLION AMERICANS AND REITERATES NEED FOR CONGRESS TO MAKE
         A STRONG PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS THE LAW OF THE LAND
                              August 29, 1998

Today, in his weekly radio address, President Clinton announced a new regulation that requires all
insured health plans, covering over 120 million Americans, to implement an internal appeals process
for enrollees who have grievances with their health plans. This new proposed regulation, released by
the Department of Labor, is part of the President's ongoing efforts to institute the patients' bill of rights
for all health plans under Federal oversight.

The President emphasized, however, that the Administration does not have the statutory authority to
assure other critical protections for patients in employer-based health plans, such as access to
specialists, emergency care protections, and an independent external appeals. Only Congress can
provide the necessary authority by passing a strong, enforceable patients' bill of rights. The President
urged the Senate to take up the patients' bill of rights as their first order of business when they return
next week, but warned that he could not sign the Republican Leadership proposals as currently drafted
and highlighted the reasons why. Today, the President:

ANNOUNCED A NEW INTERNAL APPEALS REGULATION FOR THE 50 MILLION
AMERICANS IN SELF-INSURED HEALTH PLANS. While the Republican Leadership has
delayed passing strong enforceable patients' bill of rights, the President has directed Federal agencies
to implement these patient protections where possible. The Department of Labor is releasing a new
proposed regulation that would assure, for the first time, that patients are assured a timely, fair internal
review when they have a grievance with their health plan, including an expedited appeals for urgent
claims. The proposed regulation includes:
              Requiring plans to notify enrollees of their appeal rights under the plan;
              Drastically reducing the time health plans have to respond to non-emergency appeals
              (from 90 days to 15 days), and require plans to respond to emergency appeals within 72
              hours; and
              Giving enrollees greater access to documents used in reviewing their claims.

HIGHLIGHTED NEED FOR STRONG LEGISLATION AND URGED CONGRESS TO
MAKE IT THE FIRST ORDER OF BUSINESS. The Labor Department regulation the President
unveiled today also underscores the limitation of what the Administration can do without additional
legislative authority. Without Congressional action, Americans in private health plans cannot be
assured most of the consumer protections outlined in the patients' bill of rights, such as access to .
specialists, emergency care protections, or an external appeals mechanism. Recognizing this, the
President urged the Republican Leadership to make passing a strong patients' bill of rights the first
order of business when they return next week.

REITERATED WHY THE ADMINISTRATION CANNOT SUPPORT THE REPUBLICAN
LEADERSHIP PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS. He also reiterated his serious concerns about the
shortcomings of the current Republican Leadership bills which:




      Let HMOs, not informed health professionals, define medical necessity. The Republican
                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
     meaningless by allowing HMOs themselves, rather than informed health professionals, to
     define what services are medically necessary. This loophole will make it very difficult for
     patients to prevail on an appeal to get the treatment doctors bclieve they need.

    Fail to guarantee direct access to specialists. The Republican Leadership proposals fail
     to ensure that patients with serious health problems have direct access to the specialists
     they need. We believe that patients with cancer or heart disease should not be denied
     access to the doctors they need to treat their conditions.

    Reverse course on emergency room protections. The Republican Leadership proposals
     back away from the emergency room protections that Congress implemented in a
     bipartisan manner for Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries in the Balanced Budget Act
     of 1997. The bills include a watered-down provision that does not require health plans to
     cover patients who go to an emergency room outside their network and does not ensure
     coverage for any treatment beyond an initial screening. These provisions put patients at
     risk for the huge costs associated with critical emergency treatment.

    Fail to protect patients from abrupt health care changes. The Republican Leadership bills
     fail to assure continuity of care when an employer changes health plans. This deficiency
     means that pregnant women or individuals undergoing care for a chronic illness may have their
     care suddenly altered mid course, potentially causing adverse health consequences.

    Allow financial incentives to threaten critical patient care. The Republican Leadership
     proposal fails to prohibit financial incentives to providers. This would leave patients vulnerable
     to financial incentives that limit patient care.

    Undermine existing medical privacy protections. The House Republican Leadership bill
     would preempt some existing medical privacy protections guaranteed by state law, without
     putting any protections in their place. As a result, it would increase the number of individuals
     who can review and give out health records without a patient's knowledge or consent.

    Fail to compensate patients who have suffered harm as a result of a wrongful health plan
     action. The proposed per day penalties in the Republican Leadership plans fail to hold health
     plans accountable when patients suffer serious harm or even death because of a health plans'
     wrongful action. For example, if a health plan improperly denies a lifesaving cancer treatment to
     a child, it will incur a penalty only for the number of days it takes to reverse its decision but will
     not have to pay the family for all the damages they will suffer as the result of having a child
     with a now untreatable disease. And because the plan will not have to pay for all the harm it
     causes, it will have insufficient incentives to change its health care practices in the future.

    Do not cover all health plans. Both Republican Leadership bills leave millions of Americans
     unprotected. The Lott proposal, for example, covers only self-insured plans, thus leaving out
     100 million Americans, including millions of Americans in small businesses. These
     Americans are held hostage to the hope that states will provide them with every patient
     protections that the Republicans in Congress will not.
LABOR DEPARTMENT REGULATION BUILDS ON THE ADMINISTRATION'S EFFORTS TO
EXTEND THE PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS TO ALL HEALTH PLANS UNDER FEDERAL
                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
to come into compliance with the patients' bill of rights. In June, the Department of Health and
Human Services extended the patients' bill of rights to the 40 million Americans who receive Medicare.
  Last month, the Department of Veterans' Mfairs began to put in place a new, rapid appeals process
for its 3 million beneficiaries. This month, the Department of Defense issued a directive to all military
bases throughout the world, extending patient protections to 8 million servicemen and women and
their families, and the Office of Personnel Management released a new anti-gag regulation as part of
their efforts to implement the patients' bill of rights for the nine million Federal employees and their
dependents in Federal Employees Health Benefits Program.




                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion


