RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-SEP-1998 11:27:34.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly Report 9/11

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  Chris may still do an assisted suicide piece by the end of the day================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D69]MAIL46366045C.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BAOEDOOOD10A020100000002050000003D3EOOD0000200D0858B93238E6EFD949CAFFE
B5860D464B7A518667AFD4E50E7FC5D93A011A5D5FC651C8BAB6DOF28853C13FB434BA5A9F5CF6


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report

         Health Care -- Medicaid and the Patients' Bill of Rights: Next Thursday, you are
currently scheduled to participate in a event in which you will announce the application of the
patients' bill of rights to the Medicaid program. This action will underscore that you are doing
all you can to extend patient protections to Federal health plans but will also highlight the need
for Federal legislation to extend these protections to all Americans. Although we have not
finalized plans for this event, it may be done in conjunction with Members of Congress who also
support strong enforceable legislation. As of this writing, it appears that in the absence of
significant pressure Senator Lott will not bring the patients' bill of rights up for a vote. Senator
Daschle, however, is challenging Majority Leader on a nightly basis to schedule votes on this
legislation.

        Health Care -- Vice President's Health Care Event in New Hampshire: Next Friday,
the Vice President is scheduled to join Governor Shaheen in a health care event to discuss a
number of Administration health care priorities that have received great support in New
Hampshire. At this event, the Vice President will highlight the approval of New Hampshire's
new Children's Health Insurance Program, the application of the patients' bill of rights to Federal
Employees Health Benefit plans, a new grant to New Hampshire for support services for disabled
individuals going to work, and perhaps an initiative related to programs for older Americans.
This series of multi-generationa1 initiatives will be extremely well received by the Governor and
the state.

         Education -- Charter Schools Legislation: The Administration is continuing
discussions with Senate staff to reach agreement to bring a charter school bill to the Senate floor.
 The bill was approved by full committee with bipartisan support last month, and is generally
similar -- with a few important differences that would need to be resolved in conference -- to a
bipartisan charter school bill approved by the House last year. The final obstacle to approval by
the full Senate appears to be a demand from Senator Harkin permitting a small portion of the
funds to support "innovative" non-charter schools, in states where charter schools are not
permitted. Senate Republicans (and Senator Kennedy'S office) oppose this provision because it
undermines one purpose ofthe bill -- to provide incentives to states to enact charter schools
legislation. We are attempting to broker a compromise, either by helping Senator Harkin find
ways of directing funds to innovative schools outside the framework of charter schools
legislation, or by including in the charter schools bill a small demonstration program to support

                                            Automated Records Management System
                                            Hex-Dwnp Conversion
flexibility and a performance contract) but are located in a state without a charter school law. It
is unclear whether either Harkin or the Republicans will accept this compromise.

       Immigration ~-H-2A guestworkers: Last July the Senate passed an amendment to
the CJS appropriations bill, sponsored by Senators Wyden and Graham, that would create
a new agricultural guestworker (H-2A) program. Secretary Herman sent a letter to
Senator Wyden strongly opposing his amendment because it would severely weaken the
labor protections for migrant farmworkers. However, in an attempt to address the
concerns raised by growers but also protect the interests of farmworkers, we have
committed to engaging in a bi-partisan working group with members of Congress on the
issue of H-2A reform. Despite our expressed desire to approach this reform in a careful,
bi-partisan fashion, Senator Wyden has continued to press us to work with him directly to
improve his bill. We are meeting with Senator Wyden this week to discuss our substantive
and procedural concerns with his approach (including trying to do this reform as a
last-minute amendment to an appropriations bill). However, our goal is to get his
amendment stripped from the CJS bill and to do the real work of forging a consensus
reform solution in the context of the bi-partisan group. This group will likely include
Senators Wyden, Graham, Kennedy, Feinstein, Abraham and Coverdell and
Representatives Lamar Smith, Bishop, Becerra, Watt and Berman.

        Welfare Reform -- Caseloads Continue to Decline: Last week, USA Today published
a misleading story saying the decline in welfare rolls is slowing. In fact, the rate of decline is
continuing to hold steady nationally, at about 2% per month and about 20% per year. The actual
number of people leaving the rolls is smaller but -- because the rolls are smaller -- the rate of
decline has stayed the same. For example, the rolls declined by 6 percent between March-June
of 1997 and by 6 percent between March-June of 1998 (the article compared the two periods and
claimed the national decline had slowed by 20%). However, the article correctly pointed out
that caseloads in selected states such as Wisconsin, Idaho and Wyoming, which have experienced
declines of more than 80% since 1993, are leveling off.

         Welfare Reform -- GAO Report on TANF Surplus: At Congressman Shaw's request,
GAO did a report on how states are using their federal and state welfare reform funds. The
study confirms the general trend that HHS described in their recent report to Congress on TANF
-- that with major caseload declines, many states are spending more per person and investing in
services to help people get and keep jobs. Because of caseload declines, the fixed level of
federal funding for TANF block grants, and the required level of state maintenance of effort,
GAO estimates that there was $4.7 billion more in combined federal and state resources available
for 1997 than there would have been under the old welfare system for the same period. On
average, this equates to a 25 percent increase in funding although there is significant state
variation. Funding was higher for 46 states, ranging from one percent in Alaska and
Connecticut to 102 percent in Wyoming.



                                                 2
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


            GAO found that a number of states significantly reduced state funding on welfare
    programs, but at least 22 states must still invest more per recipient than they did in 1996 in order
    to meet the law's maintenance of effort. For example, Michigan reduced its welfare spending by
    $42 million, but must increase spending per recipient by about 22 percent just to meet the
    maintenance of effort requirement. GAO found many encouraging examples of states investing
    in work-related supports including child care, training, and transportation. While many state
    officials have adopted the strategy of invest now in helping move the maximum number of
    people in to the workforce, others have set up rainy day funds to prepare for future changes in the
    economy. These federal TANF funds remain in the U.S. treasury until they are expended. In
    the news articles commenting on the GAO report, governors expressed concerns that Congress
    may be tempted to raid these unspent balances.

            Tobacco -- Study on Smokers' Quitting Rates: A study published in the September
    3rd New England Journal of Medicine found that smokers were four times more likely to quit if
    their health insurance plan paid the full cost of smoking cessation services, rather than paying
    just half. The researchers found that with full coverage, 10 percent of smokers per year use
    cessation services and 2.8 percent successfully quit smoking, compared to 2.4 percent usage and
    0.7 percent quit rates if insurance paid only half the cost. The study involved 90,000 enrollees
    in the Puget Sound health maintenance organization. In preparation for your FY 2000 budget,
    we are examining ways to make cessation services more affordable within the Defense, Veterans,
    Medicaid, Medicare, and federal employees health systems. We believe the proposals to help
    current smokers quit could be coupled with your continued call for comprehensive legislation to
    stop children from smoking before they start.

            Children and Families -- Child Care Appropriations: The Senate Labor-HHS
    Education Committee appropriated $182 million in new funding for the Child Care and
    Dependent Block Grant. This is the amount that we requested in new discretionary funding as
    part of your child care proposal. In your proposal, this appropriation paid for a fund for states to
    enforce quality standards, a research and evaluation fund, and scholarships for child care
    providers. The Committee, however, did not specifically fund those programs.




                                                     3                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


