RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Tania I. Lopez ( CN=Tania I. Lopez/OU=WHOIO=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-SEP-1998 16:44:48.00

SUBJECT:   White House response to the Starr report

TO: Francess Page ( Francess Page @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Victoria Sneed ( Victoria Sneed @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Andrea Johnston ( Andrea Johnston @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas Kring ( Thomas Kring @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cindy Brown ( Cindy Brown @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Yeni Wong ( Yeni Wong @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paula Kagan ( Paula Kagan @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Henry Gabelnick ( Henry Gabelnick @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Hedy Ratner ( Hedy Ratner @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Dee Riley ( Dee Riley @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Marie Wilson ( Marie Wilson @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Suzanne Stokes ( Suzanne Stokes @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Vicki Saporta ( Vicki Saporta @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Irene Natividad ( Irene Natividad @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Amy Langer ( Amy Langer @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Terri Dickerson ( Terri Dickerson @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ellen Bravo ( Ellen Bravo @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Pat Reuss ( Pat Reuss @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )


READ: UNKNOWN

TO: &~ita Perez Ferguson ( Anita Perez Ferguson @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Gloria Johnson ( Gloria Johnson @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Lisa Kaeser ( Lisa Kaeser @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Janet Benshoof ( Janet Benshoof @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Susan Cohen ( Susan Cohen @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Alysia Snell ( Alysia Snell @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Stephanie Reed ( Stephanie Reed @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rod Lew ( Rod Lew @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Amanda Sullivan ( Amanda Sullivan @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kate Michelman ( Kate Michelman @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Linda Gordon ( Linda Gordon @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Adrienne Germain ( Adrienne Germain @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: J. Benjamin Younger ( J. Benjamin Younger @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Darryl Figueroa ( Darryl Figueroa @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Maureen Britell ( Maureen Britell @inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christopher Turman ( Christopher Turman @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ellie Smeal   ( Ellie Smeal @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Susan Bianchi-Sands    Susan Bianchi-Sands @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lina Fresca Dobbs ( Lina Fresca Dobbs @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia Gady ( Cynthia Gady @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )


READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rubie Coles     Rubie Coles   @   inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: The Rev. Carleton Veazey ( The Rev. Carleton Veazey @ inet [ UNKNOWN
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Martha Davis ( Martha Davis @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Gloria Feldt ( Gloria Feldt @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Frances Kissling ( Frances Kissling @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rachel Gold ( Rachel Gold @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cindy Cooper ( Cindy Cooper @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laurie Robinson ( Laurie Robinson @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below is the Executive Summary of the      White House Rebuttal Statement. The
complete response is available on our      website: www.whitehouse.gov. The
document is 77 pages, therefore I did      not want to e-mail it to you.  If
you are unable to access it and would      like a copy e-mailed, just let me
know.




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


Summary of Key Points of the President's Case in Anticipation of the Starr
Report


1.      The President has acknowledged a serious mistake - an inappropriate
relationship with Monica Lewinsky. He has taken responsibility for his
actions, and he has apologized to the country, to his friends, leaders of
his party, the cabinet and most importantly, his family.

1.      This private mistake does not amount to an impeachable action.   A
relationship outside oneO,s marriage is wrong - and the President admits
that.  It is not a high crime or misdemeanor. The Constitution
specifically states that Congress shall impeach only for "treason, bribery
or other high crimes and misdemeanors." These words in the Constitution
were chosen with great care, and after extensive deliberations.

2.      "High crimes and misdemeanors" had a fixed meaning to the Framers of
our Constitution 0) it meant wrongs committed against our system of
government. The impeachment clause was designed to protect our country
against a President who was using his official powers against the nation,
against the American people, against our society.  It was never designed


to allow a political body to force a President from office for a very
personal mistake.

3.      Remember - this report is based entirely on allegations obtained by a
grand jury - reams and reams of allegations and purported "evidence" that
would never be admitted in court, that has never been seen by the
President or his lawyers, and that was not subject to cross-examination or
any other traditional safeguards to ensure its credibility.

4.      Grand juries are not designed to search for truth. They do not and are
not intended to ensure credibility, reliability, or simple fairness. They
only exist to accuse. Yet this is the process that the Independent
Counsel has chosen to provide the "evidence" to write his report.

5.      The law defines perjury very clearly.  Perjury requires proof that an
individual knowingly made a false statement while under oath. Answers to
questions that are literally true are not perjury. Even if an answer
doesnD,t directly answer the question asked, it is not perjury if it is
true - no accused has an obligation to help his accuser. Answers to
fundamentally ambiguous questions also can never be perjury. And nobody
can be convicted of perjury based on only one other personD,s testimony.

6.      The President did not commit perjury. Most of the illegal leaks
suggesting his testimony was perjurious falsely describe his testimony.
First of all, the President never testified in the Jones deposition that
he was not alone with Ms. Lewinsky. The President never testified that
his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky was the same as with any other intern.
To the contrary, he admitted exchanging gifts with her, knowing about her
job search, receiving cards and notes from her, and knowing other details
of her personal life that made it plain he had a special relationship with
her.

7.      The President has admitted he had an improper sexual relationship with
Ms. Lewinsky.  In a civil deposition, he gave narrow answers to ambiguous
questions. As a matter of law, those answers could not give rise to a
criminal charge of perjury.  In the face of the President's admission of
his relationship, the disclosure of lurid and salacious allegations can
only be intended to humiliate the President and force him from office.

8.      There was no obstruction of justice. We believe Betty Currie testified
that Ms. Lewinsky asked her to hold the gifts and that the President never
talked to her about the gifts. The President admitted giving and
receiving gifts from Ms. Lewinsky when he was asked about it. The
President never asked Ms. Lewinsky to get rid of the gifts and he never
asked Ms. Currie to get them. We believe that Ms. CurrieD,s testimony
supports the PresidentD,s.

9.      The President never tried to get Ms. Lewinsky a job after she left the
White House in order to influence her testimony in the Paula Jones case.
The President knew Ms. Lewinsky was unhappy in her Pentagon job after she
left the White House and did ask the White House personnel office to treat
her fairly in her job search. He never instructed anyone to hire her, or
even indicated that he very much wanted it to happen. Ms. Lewinsky was
never offered a job at the White House after she left - and it's pretty
apparent that if the President had ordered it, she would have been.

10.     The President did not facilitate Ms. LewinskyD,s interview with Bill
Richardson, or her discussions with Vernon Jordan.  Betty Currie asked
John Podesta if he could help her with her New York job search which led
to an interview with Bill Richardson, and Ms. Currie also put her in touch


with her longtime friend, Mr. Jordan. Mr. Jordan has made it clear that
this is the case, and, as a private individual, he is free to offer job
advice wherever he sees fit.

11.     There was no witness tampering. Betty Currie was not supposed to be a
witness in the Paula Jones case. If she was not called or going to be
called, it was impossible for any conversations the President had with her
to be witness tampering. The President testified that he did not in any
way attempt to influence her recollection.

12.     There is no "talking points" smoking gun. Numerous illegal leaks
painted the mysterious talking points as the proof that the President or
his staff attempted to suborn the perjury of Monica Lewinsky or Linda
Tripp. The OIC's spokesman said that the "talking points" were the "key"
to Starr even being granted authority to investigate the President's
private life. Yet in the end, Ms. Lewinsky has apparently admitted the
talking points were written by her alone [or with MS. Tripp's assistancel,
and the President was not asked one single question about them in his
grand jury appearance.

13.     Invocation of privileges was not an abuse of power.  The President's
lawful assertion of privileges in a court of law was only made on the
advice of his Counsel, and was in significant measure validated by the
courts. The legal claims were advanced sparingly and as a last resort
after all attempts at compromise by the White House Counsel's office were
rejected to protect the core constitutional and institutional interests of
this and future presidencies.

14.     Neither the President nor the White House played a role in the Secret
Service's lawful efforts to prevent agents from testifying to preserve its
protective function. The President never asked, directed or participated
in any decision regarding the protective function privilege. Neither did
any White House official. The Treasury and Justice Departments
independently decided to respond to the historically unprecedented
subpoenas of Secret Service personnel and to pursue the privilege to
ensure the protection of this and future presidents.

15.     The President did not abuse his power by permitting White House staff
to comment on the investigation. The President has acknowledged
misleading his family, staff and the country about the nature of his
relationship with MS. Lewinsky, and he has apologized and asked for
forgiveness.  However, this personal failing does not constitute a
criminal abuse of power.  If allowing aides to repeat misleading
statements is a crime, then any number of public officials are guilty of
misusing their office for as long as they fail to admit wrong doing in
response to any allegation about their activities.

16.     The actions of White House attorneys were completely lawful. The
White House Counsel attorneys provided the President and White House
officials with informed, candid advice on issues raised during this
investigation that affected the President's official duties. This was
especially necessary given the fact that impeachment proceedings against
the President were a possible result of the OIC's investigation from Day
One.  In fact, throughout the investigation, the OIC relied on the White
House Counsel's office for assistance in.gathering information and
arranging interviews and grand jury appearances. The Counsel's office's
actions were well known to the OIC throughout the investigation and no
objection was ever voiced.


This means that the OIC report is left with nothing but the details of a
private sexual relationship, told in graphic details with the intent to
embaLTass. Given the flimsy and unsubstantiated basis for the
accusations, there is a complete lack of any credible evidence to initiate
an impeachment inquiry concerning the President. And the principal
purpose of this investigation, and the OICO,s report, is to embarrass the
President and titillate the public by producing a document that is little
more than an unreliable, one-sided account of sexual behavior.

where's Whitewater? The OIC's allegations reportedly include no
suggestion of wrongdoing by the President in any of the areas which Mr.
Starr spend four years investigating: Whitewater, the FBI files and the
White House travel office. What began as an inquiry into a 24 year old
land deal in Arkansas has ended as an inquest into brief, improper
personal encounters between the President and Monica Lewinsky. Despite
the exhaustive nature of the OIC's investigation into the Whitewater, FBI
files and travel office matters; and a constant stream of suggestions of
misconduct in the media over a period of years, to this day the OIC has
never exonerated the President or the First Lady of wrongdoing.


