RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:14-SEP-1998 09:16:45.00

SUBJECT:   H-2A -- background paper for Deputy's meeting

TO: Sally Katzen ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Shannon Mason ( CN=Shannon Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cecilia E. Rouse ( CN=Cecilia E. Rouse/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena/Sally,
Attached is a background memo for the H-2A Deputy's meeting this
afternoon.   It outlines the six main issues re: H-2A reform. We would
also like to send a abridged version of this document (without the
recommended administration positions) to those who are attending the
meeting this afternoon.   Please advise. Thanks.

julie & ceci

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D41)MAIL44366465T.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504345080000010A0201000000020500000047510000000200009CBE986A89A443C086A3E3


FROM:          JULIE FERNANDES
               CECILIA ROUSE

RE:         WYDEN-GRAHAM AGRICULTURAL GUESTWORKERS BILL
     [AvtoflelJ]
DATE:Mareh 10,2019-


Background

        Agricultural "guestworkers" are admitted on H-2A visas for temporary jobs. Under the
current program, in order hire H-2A workers, an employer must demonstrate to the DOL that (a)
there are not sufficient U.S. workers able, willing, qualified and available to perform the
services; and (b) there will be no adverse effect on the wages and working conditions of
similarly-employed U.S. workers. Employers also are required to pay workers an "adverse
effect wage rate" (AEWR), determined by the average wage paid to non-managerial agricultural
workers in the state; provide free housing to workers outside the commuting area; reimburse
workers' inbound transportation if they complete half the contract, outbound also if they
complete the contract; guarantee 3/4 of the hours of the contract; and hire any qualified U.S.
worker who applies during the first half of the work contract. There is no cap on the number of
H-2A visas granted. Out of the 1.6 million farmworkers in the United States, approximately
600,000 are unauthorized to work, and approximately 20,000 are in the H-2A program.

        In June 1995, in response to efforts in Congress to pass legislation that would create a
new guestworker program (without the worker protections present in the existing program) and
agreeing with the recommendation of the Commission on Immigration Reform, the President
stated his opposition to a "new guestworker program." However, he also stated that if the
crackdown on illegal immigration contributes to labor shortages, he would direct the
Departments of Labor and Agriculture to work cooperatively to improve and enhance the existing
H-2A program.

        Grower advocates argue that they continue to experience difficulties in finding domestic
farmworkers and that the H-2A program is slow, cumbersome, and expensive. However, a
recent (December 1997) GAO study concluded that agribusiness does not now and will not soon
face an agricultural labor shortage. The GAO's finding of a labor surplus echoes the
conclusions of the U.S. Commission on Agricultural Workers (1992), and the U.S. Commission
on Immigration Reform reports (1995 and 1997). While the GAO report suggested that there
could develop localized labor shortages, it noted the widespread belief that employers should
respond to the market place by increasing wages, improving recruitment and modernizing their
labor practices. Further, the GAO report cited a study which concluded that substantial wage


                                                1           Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
Many growers blame the INS's recent crackdown on undocumentcd farmworkers for the
shortages of domestic farmworkers and their need to rely on a dysfunctional H-2A program.

         On March 12th ofthis year, the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration approved
legislation, sponsored by Rep. Robert Smith (R-OR), that provides for a new pilot guestworker
program that erodes existing worker protections. In a letter to Chairman Lamar Smith, Secretary
Herman stated that if this legislation were presented to the President, she would recommend a
veto. This bill was voted out of the subcommittee on a voice vote, but has not been taken to the
full House judiciary Committee.

        Soon after this bill was introduced, we initiated a process with the Departments of Labor
and Agriculture to determine what kinds of regulatory and/or administrative reforms we could
put into place before the next growing season. We developed a set of regulatory reforms that
respond to the growers' concern that the program needs to be streamlined (i.e., improved
processes; reduced paperwork and delay). The Department of Labor and the Justice Department
(which handles the immigration aspects of the program) have developed a package of proposed
rulemaking changes that we hope will go in effect by the end of January. However, though
some grower advocates were pleased with the set of administrative reforms, they continue to
press for a legislative package that would fundamentally alter the way the program is operated.

        On July 22, 1998, Senators Ron Wyden, Bob Graham and Gordon Smith (R-OR)
introduced an amendment to the CJS appropriations bill that would make significant changes to
the current H-2A program. On that same day, the Secretary of Labor sent a letter to Senator
Wyden stating her strong opposition to his amendment which creates a new guestworker program
that erodes labor protections for migrant farmworkers. The overall concern with the
Wyden-Graham bill is that it shifts costs and risks from employers to workers and/or the
government.

Issues Regarding H-2A Reform

Issue #1
Use of the Adverse Effect Wage Rate
Whether we would consider eliminating the adverse effect wage rate and replacing it with an
enhanced prevailing wage rate.

Current Law:

Under the current program, growers who employ H-2A workers are required to pay their workers
the higher of the prevailing wage (determined by the average wage for the crop in the local area),
the federal, state or local minimum wage or an "adverse effect wage rate" (AEWR) (equal to the
average statewide agricultural wage rate). Because foreign workers can sometimes dominate a
local labor market, this wage depression is often reflected in the local prevailing wage. The


                                                2                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                   R~Dump Conversion
statewide basis -- thus dissipating the impact of foreign workers on the wage.

Wyden-Graham Bill:

Under the Wyden-Graham bill, the worker is required to be paid either the prevailing wage or the
AEWR (capped at 105% of the prevailing wage).

Recommended Administration Position:

The Departments of Labor and Agriculture agree that our goal is to find a way to calculate the
wage that both takes into account the depression of wages in areas where there is heavy reliance
on illegal and H-2A workers and that isn't so high as to drive employers to hire undocumented
workers. Thus, we have agreed to explore proposals to replace the AEWR with some form of an
enhanced prevailing wage, so long as the enhancement is adequate. Our preliminary assessment
is that 105% of prevailing wage would be an inadequate enhancement.

Though we may conclude that a move away from the AEWR could more accurately reflect
proper wages in certain sectors, we will likely face significant backlash from the Hispanic and
farmworker communities if the new formula results in lower wages in any sector.'

Issue #2
Employer Recruitment -- Use of Proposed Registry
Whether we support the creation of a registry system for matching growers to farmworkers that
totally replaces an employer's obligation to conduct positive recruitment.

Current Law:

Under current law, if the grower is seeking to employ H-2A workers, he must affirmatively
recruit in the private marketplace (know as "positive recruitment") and use the federal-state Job
Service to circulate job offers to areas where migrant workers may be located. Thus, the
responsibility for farmworker recruitment is shared between the prospective employer and the
U.S. Employment Service.

Wyden-Graham Bill:

Under the Wyden-Graham bill, growers seeking to employ H-2A workers would have no
obligation to attempt to recruit legal U.S. farmworkers except through a newly-created "job
registry." Thus, all responsibility for the recruitment of domestic farmworkers would shift to a
new, untried, process for which the government and low-wage workers are entirely responsible.
This registry would take years to create, but H-2A workers could be hired within 6 months of the
enactment of the bill. Further, because growers would no longer have an obligation to recruit
domestically, they would be free to concentrate their worker recruitment efforts abroad.


                                                3                Automated Records Management System
                                                                 .~Cct\vmion

There is general agreement between USDA and DOL that total reliance on a registry
(undeveloped; untested) would be unacceptable -- growers must retain some of the responsibility
for finding U.S. workers. However, despite these concerns, it may be worthwhile to develop a
pilot program to test whether a registry of the kind described in the bill could be an effective tool
to assist growers in locating U.S. farmworkers. We could also consider the development ofa
method of ensuring that those domestic workers whose names are included in the registry are
authorized to work (as in the Wyden bill).

Issue #3
Housing
Whether H-2A employers should continue to have an obligation to provide housing to their
workers. Also, whether this obligation is met by the issuance of housing vouchers.

Current Law:

Current law requires growers who employ H-2A workers to provide them with free housing.

Wyden-Graham Bill:

The Wyden-Graham bill allows growers to provide a payment voucher (equal to 1/4 ofthe Fair
Market Rate in the applicable county for a two bedroom apartment) in lieu of housing, unless the
State certifies that adequate housing is not available in the area. Under this approach, the
grower employing H-2A workers would have no obligation to assure that housing is actually
available and could be obtained with the voucher.

Recommended Administration Position:

The DOL's chief concern is that the cost of housing not be transferred from the grower to the
worker. They also believe that it should remain the grower's responsibility to ensure that
housing is available for the workers. USDA remains ofthe view that the provision of a housing
voucher or an increased wage (to reflect the cost of housing) should satisfy the grower's
obligation, even ifthere is no housing available for these workers.

First, there are many areas (particularly in the West) where there simply is not an adequate supply
of rural housing to meet the needs of these workers. Second, even if there is some housing
available in the area, it is unrealistic to expect low-wage foreign migrant farrnworkers to be able
to secure housing on their own using a federal voucher. Thus, reliance on a voucher system will
leave many workers either without housing or overcrowding any available rental housing.

We recommend not eroding the existing requirement that growers who use the H-2A program
provide their workers with housing. However, we may want to consider whether the federal


                                                 4
                                                                Automated R.ecords Management System
                                                                Hek-Dump Ob'nv~ion
Currently, the Department of Agriculture administers a migrant farmworker housing program
that we could scale up. Also, it may be possible to find ways to encourage states to use their
CDBG or HOME funds to target the creation of farmworker housing. FinaIly, it may be possible
to waive some housing regulations if the H-2A worker were housed in established housing (i.e., a
hotel, government housing, etc.). These options would be designed to assist the growers with
fulfiJIing their obligation to provide adequate housing for their workers -- not as a shift in
responsibility from the growers to the government.

Issue #4
The 3/4 Guarantee
Whetherwe support the continued use of the 3/4 guarantee.

Current Law:

Under current law, workers must be paid for at least 75% of the work contract period for which
they were recruited, except when there is an "act of God." This "three-fourths guarantee" gives
migrant workers some indication of their potential earnings and discourages employers from
over-recruiting to secure a labor surplus and drive down wages. Under the MSP A (which
applies to U.S. migrant farrnworkers, but not H-2A workers), workers enjoy a 100% guarantee.

Wyden-Graham Bill:

The Wyden-Graham biII would eliminate this work guarantee for H-2A workers. This change
will encourage growers to lure workers from hundreds or thousands of miles away with the
promise of potentially high earnings without any obligation to fulfiIl any part of that promise.
This may also encourage growers to recruit more workers than they actually need to hedge
against uncertainties.

Recommended Administration Position:

There is agreement within the Administration that the H-2A program should generaIly track the
worker protections included in the Migrant and Seasonal Worker Protection Act (MSPA). As
noted, under the MSP A, migrant farm workers are guaranteed 100% of the work contract period
for which they were recruited. Thus, the 3/4 guarantee for H-2A workers is more flexible (and
thus better for growers) than the 100% guarantee mandated for those who employ only U.S.
workers.

It would seem inconsistent for us to endorse a standard substantially less for the H-2A program
than that required under the MSP A. When asked why the growers could live with the 100%
guarantee under MSPA, but not the 75% guarantee under the H-2A program, we were told by
USDA that it is because the MSPA guarantee is never enforced, and the H-2A guarantee is.
Issue #5


                                                5              Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex"UIIDiP Conwl'lIion
Whether we support wage-withholding as an incentive for H-2A workers to repatriate.

Current Law:

Under current law, there is no mechanism for ensuring that H-2A workers return to their home
country.

Wyden-Graham Bill:

Permits employers to withhold 20% of a worker's wages, to be reclaimed upon the worker's
return to his home country.

Recommended Administration Position:

In general, there is agreement within the Administration that we should try to develop an
effective way to ensure that guestworkers return to their home country after the termination of the
contract. However, this wage deduction is a bad idea that would likely prove ineffective.

First, this would be the first time that the federal government authorized the withholding of
worker wages as an incentive toward future behavior. Second, it is unclear whether many of
these workers would be able to recover this money from the accounts in their home countries.
In addition, there is no evidence that these amounts would serve as a disincentive for employees
who intend to stay in the U.S.

According to Sen. Wyden, this provision is not important to the growers, but is key to the
viability of his legislation in the Congress. Some members of Congress are concerned that a
new guestworker program wiIllead to an increase in foreign workers in the U.S. and thus an
increase in those that do not return to their home country. Ho.wever, as noted, there is very little
reason to believe that a worker who wants to overstay his visa will be deterred by this
withholding. Thus, it only would serve to inconvenience (and possibly, disadvantage) those
workers who want to work here and return home.

Issue #6
Transportation Reimbursement
Whether employers should continue to be required to provide reimbursement to workers for
inbound transportation if they complete 50% of the contract, and for outbound transportation if
they complete 100% of the contract.




                                                 6               A~mated Records Management System.
                                                                 HeX.~_ Cfmwl1ion

Under current law, the employer must reimburse the H-2A worker for inbound transportation
costs if the worker completes 50% of the contract and for outbound transportation costs if the
worker completes 100% of the contract.

Wyden-Graham Bill:

Under the Wyden-Graham proposal, workers may receive such reimbursement from their
employer, but the employer is under no obligation to pay. This change would simply shift the
cost of transportation to and from the job from the grower to the worker.

Recommended Administration Position:

There is general agreement within the Administration that growers should be responsible for the
transportation costs of their H-2A workers. Therefore, we strongly oppose allowing growers to
have discretion in reimbursement. However, we could consider giving the grower options on
how to reimburse the worker for transportation costs. For example, the grower could have a
choice between providing the transportation outright, advancing the cost of transportation to the
worker, reimbursing the worker for the transportation, or paying the worker a much higher wage
(such as 120% of the prevailing wage) with the intent that the wage "bonus" would be sufficient
to cover transportation costs. In addition, there is likely agreement that DOL could develop a
pilot program to provide transportation advances for U.S. farmworkers.




                                                7                Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hell.Dump Conversion


