RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-SEP-1998 17:54:50.00

SUBJECT:   H2A memo for Erskine

TO: Sally Katzen    CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Shannon Mason ( CN=Shannon Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cecilia E. Rouse ( CN=Cecilia E. Rouse/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
attached is the draft.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D66]MAIL44969275U.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504315090000010A02010000000205000000A137000000020000B0486AD37BAOOA856961F3

FROM:          ELENA KAGAN
               SALLY KATZEN

RE:            WYDEN-GRAHAM AGRICULTURAL GUESTWORKERS BILL

DATE:March 10, 2Q.l-e
              iD
     ['-'litafi

       You are meeting with Senators Ron Wyden (D-OR) and Bob Graham (D-FL) on Tuesday
afternoon to discuss their amendment to the Commerce, Justice, State (CJS) Appropriations bill
that would make significant changes to the current H-2A agricultural guestworker program.
Sens. Wyden and Graham will ask you to either support their legislation or work with them to
improve it.

Background

        Agricultural "guestworkers" are admitted on H-2A visas for temporary jobs. Under the
current program, in order to hire H-2A workers, an employer must demonstrate to the
Department of Labor (DOL) that (a) there are not sufficient U.S. workers able, willing, qualified
and available to perform the services; and (b) there will be no adverse effect on the wages and
working conditions of similarly-employed U.S. workers. Employers also are required to pay
workers an "adverse effect wage rate" (AEWR), determined by the average wage paid to
non-managerial agricultural workers in the state; provide free housing to workers outside the
commuting area; reimburse workers' inbound transportation if they complete half the contract,
outbound also if they complete the contract; guarantee 3/4 of the hours of the contract; and hire
any qualified U.S. worker who applies during the first half of the work contract. There is no cap
on the number ofH-2A visas granted. Out of the 1.6 million farmworkers in the United States,
approximately 600,000 are unauthorized to work, and approximately 20,000 are in the H-2A
program.

        In response to concerns expressed by growers that the H-2A program needs to be
streamlined, the Department of Labor and the Justice Department (which handles the
immigration aspects of the program) developed a set of regulatory reforms that we hope will go
in effect by the end of January. However, though some grower advocates were pleased with
these reforms, they continue to press for a legislative package that would fundamentally alter the
way the program is operated.

The Wyden-Graham Bill

         On July 22, 1998, Senators Wyden, Graham and Gordon Smith (R-OR) introduced their
bill to overhaul the H-2A guestworker program as an amendment to the Senate CJS


                                                 1           Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
strongly oppose the Wyden-Graham bill because it erodes protections for U.S. workers and shifts
costs and risks from employers to workers and/or the government. For example, the bill:

      Eliminates the requirement that growers must conduct private market recruitment for
       workers, except through the proposed registry.                                               "   .
       At the core of the Wyden-Graham bill is the creation of a new "job registry." Under
       their bill, growers seeking to employ H-2A workers would have no obligation to attempt
       to recruit U.S. farmworkers except through this registry. Thus, all responsibility for the
       recruitment of domestic farmworkers would shift to a new, untried, process for which the
       government and low-wage workers are entirely responsible. This registry would take
       years to create, but H-2A workers could be hired within 6 months of the enactment of the
       bill. Further, because growers would no longer have an obligation to recruit
       domestically, they would be free to concentrate their worker recruitment efforts abroad.


      Erodes U.S. worker wages

       Under the current program, growers who employ H-2A workers are required to pay their
       workers the higher of the prevailing wage (equal to the average wage for the crop in the
       local area), the federal, state or local minimum wage or an "adverse effect wage rate"
       (AEWR) (equal to the average statewide agricultural wage rate). Because foreign workers
       (both undocumented and H-2A guestworkers) can sometimes dominate a local labor
       market, this wage depression is often reflected in the local prevailing wage. The AEWR
       is intended to correct for this depressive effect by measuring farmworker wages on a
       statewide basis -- thus dissipating the impact of foreign workers on the wage.

       Under the Wyden-Graham bill, the worker is required to be paid either the prevailing
       wage or the AEWR (capped at 105% of the prevailing wage). Our preliminary
       assessment is that 105% of the prevailing wage is not high enough to compensate for
       depression of wages where there is a heavy reliance on foreign workers.

      Does not provide an adequate mechanism for housing foreign guestworkers

       Current law requires growers who employ H-2A workers to provide them with free
       housing. The Wyden-Graham bill allows growers to provide a payment voucher in lieu
       of housing, unless the State certifies that adequate housing is not available in the area.
       Under this approach, the grower employing H-2A workers would have no obligation to
       assure that housing is actually available and could be obtained with the voucher.

       We have two concerns with this provision. First, there are many areas (particularly in
       the West) where there simply is not an adequate supply of rural housing to meet the needs


                                                2           Automated Records Management System.
                                                            Hex-D1!lllP (;9nvllrslon.
       unrealistic to expect low-wage foreign migrant fannworkers to be able to secure housing
       on their own using a federal voucher. Thus, many workers will likely end up without
       housing or be encouraged to overcrowd any available rental housing.

      Eliminates the requirement that growers guarantee any part of the work offered to recruit
       U.S. and foreign workers.

       Under current law, H-2A workers must be paid for at least 75% ofthe work contract
       period for which they were recruited, except when there is an "act of God." This
       "three-fourths guarantee" gives migrant workers some indication of their potential
       earnings and discourages employers from over-recruiting to secure a labor surplus and
       drive down wages. The Wyden-Graham bill would eliminate this work guarantee. This
       change will encourage growers to lure workers from hundreds or thousands of miles away
       with the promise of potentially high earnings without any obligation to fulfill any part of
       that promise. This may also encourage growers to recruit more workers than they
       actually need to hedge against uncertainties.

      Permits growers to withhold worker wages as an incentive to repatriate

       The Wyden-Graham bill permits employers to withhold 20% of the worker's wages until
       the worker returns to his home country. According to the Department of Labor, the
       federal government does not, in any other circumstance, sanction the withholding of
       wages as an incentive toward future behavior. In addition, it is unclear whether many of
       these workers would be able to recover this money from the accounts in their home
       countries. Finally, there is little evidence that these amounts would serve as a
       disincentive for workers who intend to stay in the U.S.

        Though the bill passed the Senate by a vote of 68 to 31, it has strong opposition from the
Hispanic Caucus, Hispanic advocacy groups, labor unions, liberal Democrats in the House and
many House Republicans. Because no one expected this bill to be offered as an attachment to
the CJS Appropriations bill, many Members were unaware of precisely what the bill would do.
Since the bill's passage, both labor unions and Hispanic advocacy groups have been working to
persuade Members that this bill is bad for farmworkers (who are overwhelmingly Hispanic). The
National Council of La Raza (NCLR) and the Mexican-American Legal Defense and Education
Fund (MALDEF) have cited preventing the enactment of this bill as one of their chief civil rights
objectives during this session of Congress. Paul Yzaguirre, the President ofNCLR, sent a letter
to the President thanking him for his opposition to this bill. The United Farm Workers of
America, AFL-CIO, also sent a letter to Secretary Herman strongly opposing the Wyden-Graham
bill. Perhaps more importantly, House Republicans, led by House Judiciary Immigration
Subcommittee Chairman Lamar Smith, strongly oppose adding the measure to the CJS
Appropriations bill and have put the House Judiciary Committee on record in opposition.



                                                3                Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
that change of this magnitude should be the result of a thorough and careful process (including
congressional hearings), rather than a last minute amendment to an appropriations bill. To that
end, we have initiated (along with the Departments of Labor and Agriculture) a bi-partisan
process with members of Congress to examine various policy proposals for H-2A reform and
determine whether and where consensus can be reached. We believe that there is room for
flexibility on several issues, including wages, housing, and repatriation. The first meeting of this
group is scheduled for the afternoon of Tuesday, September 15. The objective of this process is
to develop and present a reform package to the Congress next year.

Recommendation

        Because of our serious substantive and procedural concerns regarding the Wyden-Graham
bill, we recommend that we continue our strong opposition to their bill, including making it clear
that we are prepared to veto it. In addition, in light of our committment to address H-2A reform
through a bi-partisan process on the Hill, we do not recommend any direct negotiation with Sens.
Wyden and Graham about the specifics of their bill.

        However, because Sens. Wyden and Graham have invested a lot of time and personal
prestige in their efforts to reform the H-2A program, we believe that they will only be satisfied if
they do not walk away empty-handed. Therefore, we recommend that you offer, in exchange for
their dropping their support for the amendment, that we would agree to report language directing
the Department of Labor to develop a pilot registry program. This pilot would be much more
narrow than that proposed in their bill. Significantly, rather than replacing the growers'
obligation to recruit U.S. workers, the goal of the pilot would be to determine how effective such
a registry could be at matching growers to farmworkers. You should also urge Sens. Wyden and
Graham to work with us in the bi-partisan process to develop a real reform package during the
next Congress.




                                                 4                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex.-Dump Conversion


