RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:14-SEP-1998 19:49:29.00

SUBJECT:   education issues

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHOIO=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
A couple of developments since this morning:

1. Dollars to the Classroom Block Grant in the House
House Dems are trying to craft a class size amendment to offer when this
bill comes to the floor, as a substitute
It is not at all clear that the R's have enough votes to pass this; a
number of moderate R's, especially those endorsed by NEA or AFt, do not
want to vote for it.
With regard to a letter or some other communication from the
Administration (in addition to the SAP with a senior advisors veto
threat), Riley has already sent one when the bill was marked up. I will
draft an Erskine letter, though our WH and ED leg affairs types think we
should be careful about raising our opposition to this in a way that will
keep the R's united in support of it.
I also looked into the VP doing some kind of event; he is in NH on Friday
announcing some unrelated grants, and is speaking to the Nat. Assoc. of
Black Broadcaster on Thrusday.  We can probably get him to include some
critical comments about the bill in his remarks, but probably no one would
notice.

2. Appropriations Issues
Today's speculation is that this bill is not very likely to come to the
floor as a stand-alone bill; instead it will be folded into a omnibus
appropriations bill.   If this turns out to be the case, its not clear what
impact this will have on any amendments discussed below, especially the
more objectionable riders.
Class Size--Spector is now apparantly opposed to putting additional $ the
subcommittee may get into a class size initiative; he'd rather use the
funds to reduce the extent to which programs are advanced funded for next
year.   Harkin, Murray and other Dems are strongly opposed to this approach
and are pushing to use the funds for class size and for other education
initiatives (apparantly Harkin's list is class size, after-school, IDEA
(even more $!!!) and $100 million for school construction).    We're doing
ok with half of Harkin's list, but don't know if we can move him off the
other two, or get Am. Rds added to the list.
Single Sex Schools--Kay Bailey Hutchinson'is still pushing forward with
her amendment; when ED met with her they told her (1) we like single sex
schools (2) we don't like her amendment because it is unneeded and because
it will cause confusion in the field.    In the meantime, Kennedy and
Harkin -- responding in part to pressure from the women's groups -- are
separately looking for possible amendments that would permit single sex
schools only if there is an equal opportunity for the other gender. This
·

    is moving in the wrong direction from our point of vi~w.   I don't see any
    simple ways to balance our policy position, the legal constraints, and the
    political pressures here. I think we need another meeting with ED, Justice
    and WH Counsel to figure out our next move.  Elena, I think it would be
    good if you could come to this meeting.
    Merit Pay and Teacher Testing We expect the Mack/D'Amato amendment that
    would provide incentives (additional funding under the Eisenhower
    professional development program) to states that have statewide merit pay
    and subject matter tests for current (not just propsective) teachers will
    come up again.  Kennedy and other Oems are looking for something they can
    support in this area, and have begun talking to NEA and AFT.   ED will end
    up in the wrong place on this--opposing the amendment on narrow technical
    grounds without finding something to be for.  I will stay in touch with
    Kennedy, and pull a meeting together to figure out how to be for something
    sensible here.  I'll keep you posted as this develops.
    Gorton Block Grant/Ed-Flex We are anticipating a block grant and (bad)
    ed-flex amendement from Gorton.  A similar one passed when attached to
    Coverdell.  Our strategy here is to convince Kennedy that the Wyden/Frist
    Ed-Flex bill that the committee passed (our bill) should be offered as a
    second degree, and that Kennedy should convince the dems and the ed groups
    that this is a good idea.  If this shows promise, we will try to enlist
    the govs to support this as well, on the grounds that it stands a better
    chance of being enacted than a rider which has already drawn a veto threat.

    3. Higher Education Act Reauthorization
    There are still a number of issues to be resolved here. On Tuesday the
    conferees are meeting for the first time, and will talk about TANF.  No
    one from the education world knows what anyone is going to say on this
    topic.

    With respect to our teacher preparation and recruitment proposal, it
    appears that we will get our teacher preparation approach ("lighthouse
    partnerships") and a scaled down version of our teacher recruitment
    proposal. We will not be able to claim victory for 35,000 teachers; we
    are still fighting to make sure that we get as much money as possible for
    this piece.  I'll get back to you with some better estimate of what we
    will be able to claim.


