RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-SEP-1998 16:10:41.00

SUBJECT:   draft paper for your review

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D65]MAIL459358851.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750431F070000010A020100000002050000005F36000000020000431127F05291EDA6A87AOO
 MEDICAID PROGRAM IS COMING INTO COMPLIANCE WITH THE PATIENTS' BILL
 OF RIGHTS AND REITERATES CALL ON CONGRESS NOT TO ADJOURN WITHOUT
    MAKING A STRONG PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS THE LAW OF THE LAND
                           September 17, 1998

Today, in a speech before the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, President Clinton
announced that the Department of Health and Human Services has finalized a new regulation that
brings the Medicaid program, which serves about 38 million Americans, into compliance with the
patients' bill of rights. This new proposed regulation will provide critical patient protections to
children, people with disabilities, older Americans, and others in the Medicaid program, and is part of
the President's ongoing efforts to institute the patients' bill of rights for all Federal health plans. The
President also urged Congress not to adjourn without passing a strong patients' bill of rights and
criticized the Senate Republican Leadership for not even bringing this important legislation up for a
vote. Today, the President:

ANNOUNCED A NEW REGULATION TO BRING MEDICAID INTO COMPLIANCE WITH
THE PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS. The President announced that the Department of Health and
Human Services has finalized a new regulation that will give the over 15 million Medicaid
beneficiaries in managed care plans the patient protections they need and deserve. This new
regulation will require managed care plans in all fifty states to provide needed patient protections
including:
       Access to the specialists they need;
       Anti-gag rules to ensure that health professionals can discuss all medical treatment options with
        their patients;
       Access to providers for women's health services;
       Access to emergency room services when and where the need arises;
       Disclosure of clear, up-to-date information about benefits, plan operations, and protections; and
       A timely internal appeals process as well as an independent external appeals to assure patients
        can address grievances with their health plans.

HIGHLIGHTED THAT WE HAVE EXTENDED TO FEDERAL HEALTH PLANS SERVING
OVER 75 MILLION AMERICANS THROUGH EXECUTIVE ACTION. The Medicaid
regulation the President announced today is part of his longstanding effort to bring Federal health plans
into compliance with the patients' bill of rights. In June, the Department of Health and Human
Services extended the patients' bill of rights to Medicare beneficiaries. The Department of Defense has
issued a directive extending patient protections to 8 million servicemen and women and their families
and the Department of Veteran Affairs has extended patient protections as well. Taken together, these
executive actions are extending protections to health plans serving over 75 million Americans.

UNDERSCORED NEED FOR STRONG LEGISLATION AND URGED THE REPUBLICAN
LEADERSHIP TO STOP STALLING AND PASS A BILL THIS YEAR. While the President
has acted to hold Federal health plans are being held accountable to assuring high quality care by
implementing the patients' bill of rights where possible, Congress must act to ensure that Americans in
private health plans receive the patient protections they need and deserve. Just yesterday, the
Republican Leadership effectively shut down the Senate as they were refusing to allow an up or down
vote on the patients' bill of rights. The President urged the Republican Leadership to stop stalling and
not to adjourn without passing a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights.
                                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
LEADERSHiP PATIENTS' BILL OF RIGHTS. The President also reiterated his serious concerns
about the shortcomings of the current Republican Leadership bills which:

     Let HMOs, not informed health professionals, define medical necessity. The Republican
      Leadership proposals provide for an external appeals process, but make this process
      meaningless by allowing the HMOs themselves, rather than informed health professionals, to
      define what services are medically necessary. This loophole will make it very difficult for
      patients to prevail on appeals to get the treatment doctors believe they need.

     Fail to guarantee direct access to specialists. The Republican Leadership proposals fail
      to ensure that patients with serious health problems have direct access to the specialists
      they need. We believe that patients with cancer or heart disease should not be denied
      access to the doctors they need to treat their conditions.

     Reverse course on emergency room protections. The Republican Leadership proposals
      back away from the emergency room protections that Congress implemented in a
      bipartisan manner for Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries in the Balanced Budget Act
      of 1997. The bills include a watered-down provisions that do not ensure coverage for any
      treatment beyond an initial screening. These provisions put patients at risk for the huge
      costs associated with critical emergency treatment.

     Fail to protect patients from abrupt health care changes. The Republican Leadership bills
      fail to assure continuity of care when an employer changes health plans. These deficiencies
      mean that pregnant women or individuals undergoing care for a chronic illness may have their
      care suddenly altered mid course, potentially causing adverse health consequences.

     Allow financial incentives to threaten critical patient care. The Republican Leadership
      proposals fail to prohibit secret financial incentives to providers. This omission would leave
      patients vulnerable to financial incentives that limit patient care.

     Undermine existing medical privacy protections. The House Republican Leadership bill
      would preempt some existing medical privacy protections guaranteed by state law, without
      putting protections in their place. As a result, the Republican bill would increase the number of
      individuals who can review and give out health records without a patient's knowledge or
      consent.

     Fail to compensate patients who have suffered harm as a result of a wrongful health plan
      action. The proposed per-day penalties in the Republican Leadership plans fail to hold health
      plans accountable when patients suffer serious harm or even death because of a health plan's
      wrongful action. For example, if a health plan improperly denies a lifesaving cancer treatment to
      a child, it will incur a penalty only for the number of days it takes to reverse its decision; the
      plan will not have to pay the family for all the damages they will suffer as the result of having a
      child with a now untreatable disease. And because the plan will not have to pay for all the harm
      it causes, it will have insufficient incentive to change its health care practices in the future.


                                                                          Automated Records Manag
                                                                          Hex-n,.~-        .     ement System
                                                                              ~"4' ConversIOn
       Do not cover all health plans. Both Republican Leadership bills leave millions of Americans
        unprotected. The Lott proposal, for example, covers only self-insured plans, thus leaving out
        more than 100 million Americans, including millions of Americans in small businesses. These
        Americans are left to hope that states will provide them with the set of patient protections that
        the Republicans in Congress will not.




                                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


