RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: June Shih ( CN=June Shih/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-SEP-1998 17:08:08.00

SUBJECT:   new draft of race speech; suggestions for cuts greatly appreciated

TO: Robert B. Johnson ( CN=Robert B. Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paul E. Begala ( CN=Paul E. Begala/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Judith A. Winston ( CN=Judith A. Winston/OU=PIR/O=EOP @ EOP [ PIR 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Stacie Spector ( CN=Stacie Spector/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Edley ( Edley @ law.harvard.edu @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sidney Blumenthal ( CN=Sidney Blumenthal/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Minyon Moore ( CN=Minyon Moore/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Marjorie Tarmey ( CN=Marjorie Tarmey/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Ruby Shamir   CN=Ruby Shamir/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 9/17/98
June Shih
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS TO THE PRESIDENTO,S ADVISORY BOARD ON RACE
THE WHITE HOUSE
SEP~EMBER 18, 1998


        John Hope Franklin said recently, O&The task of trying to reshape
our society to bring'about a climate of racial healing is so enormous, it


strains the imagination." Let me begin by thanking John Hope Franklin,
Judy Winston and each member of my advisory board for straining their
imaginations, for finding the commitment and the courage to take on the
tremendous task of building One America.

        We all knew we wouldnD,t be able to solve the oldest and most
painful challenge in the history of America in just a yearD,s time.   But I
thank the Board for helping us take the first steps, for engaging
Americans in open dialogue about the issues that continue to divide,
segregate and separate our people.  From nearby Fairfax County, where
immigrant students from more than 150 nations learn side-by-side, to
Silicon Valley, where so many of the opportunities of the new millennium
are being created, you have helped highlight the course we must take
toward One America.

        For more than two centuries, America has been defined by our
struggle to live up to our most cherished ideals of freedom and equality.
These ideals have never just been faded words on parchment, forgotten in
our archives.  Instead, they have spurred us in our duty to bring all
Americans into the great circle of democracy.

        We fought a civil war because we understood that no country
founded on the belief that all men are created equal should allow any
person to hold another in slavery. We extended the vote to women because
no democracy can be called true when a majority'of its citizens are barred
from its privileges. We struck down legal segregation in our buses, our
schools, our restaurants, our neighborhoods because we realized that
separate can never truly be equal; that that divided, America can never
become truly great.

        Even with such clear and radiant ideals why has this struggle been
so difficult for our people? Just look at the history of the world. Much
of that history can be seen as a struggle against a simple but sinful
human tendency to fear those who are different. To discriminate and even
to hate, based on race or tribe or religion. The Catholics and the
Protestants in Northern Ireland ... the Hutus and Tutsis in Rwanda ... the
Arabs and the Jews in the Middle East.

         In America, progress has only come when we made a conscious effort
to overcome this all-too-human tendency -- when we have allowed practical
experience in our classrooms, our workplaces, neighborhoods to override
our impulses and reveal our shared values and common humanity.    When we
have celebrated our membership in one rich and diverse community even as
we cherished our own distinctive racial or ethnic or religious identities.

        Today, on the eve of a new millennium, I believe that America is
more just and more free than it has ever been. But too often, racial
progress has only come on the heels of a great national emergency, when we
have faced turmoil in our streets or a common enemy abroad.  I believe
now, at a time of unprecendented peace and prosperity, when our country is
becoming increasingly diverse, now is the time to complete the still
unfinished business of race in our hearts and in our society. That is why
the work of this board has been so important.

        Over the past year, I have had the privilege of leading three forums of
my own -- in Akron, in Houston, and on PBS.  For me, these conversations
underscored just how tough our mission is. Race is an issue with as many
nuances as there are people in this country, and everyone has a
deeply-felt opinion.  Some believe that race is no longer an issue; that
racism only occurs in outrageous and isolated incidents -- in Jasper,


Texas, for instance. Others believe that it is still the only issue; that
it is subtle and pervasive, that every time a police officer pulls over a
black man in an affluent neighborhood or a oright hispanic child is
mistakenly shunted into a remedial class, it is racism.  Some believe that
affirmative action is unfair and no longer necessary. Others believe that
it is the only way to ensure our universities reflect AmericaD,s growing
diversity.

        But I believe that behind all of these views is some important
common ground.  We all want opportupity for ourselves and our families.
We donQ,t believe that everyone deserves to succeed. But we do believe
that everyone deserves a fair and equal shot to live in peace and safety,
to get a world class education, to get a decent job, to make the most of
our talents and build better lives for their children. The problem is,
these basic opportunities still do not reach into every corner of every
community in America.  Fundamental gaps in opportunities for education,
jobs, credit, health care, housing still exist between the races.

        Throughout my Presidency, and throughout my career in public
service, I have worked hard to extend opportunity to every American. We
must build an America where the legacy of slavery and discrimination will
only be found in our history books, not in our living patterns, our
unemployment statistics or our politics. How do we get there?

        First, we must keep this conversation going.  In each of the
forums I participated in, things had just begun to get interesting when
we ran out of time. There must be no end to our national conversation on
race and our search for common ground.  I call on all of you in this room
and every American from all sectors of society to commit yourselves to
this task. And I have asked the faith community -- our churches, mosques,
synagogues -- to take the lead. I am proud to announce The National
Conference of Community and Justice -- led by Sandy Cloud, who is here
today, will soon convene a group of religious leaders to find ways the
faith community can foster racial reconciliation.

        Second, we must have the facts about race in America.  While we
all have strong opinions on the subject, very few have of us have the
facts to back them up.  That is why I am proud that the Council of
Economic Advisers, under the leadership of Janet Yellen and Rebecca Blank,
has produced a book -- Changing America: Indicators of Social and Economic
Well-Being by Race and Hispanic Origin -- that will help us understand how
far we have come and how far we still need to go in our efforts to extend
opportunity to all communities.

                Finally, we must act. My administration has put forward a
comprehensive agenda to expand opportunity for all Americans in
education, health care, housing, crime, credit and civil rights
enforcement.   Earlier today, the SBA five new initiatives to boost and
streamline minority lending, among them is an effort to provide more than
$1 billion in hard-to-get loans for small businesses.

                I believe the most important thing we can do to expand
opportunity is to strengthen education.    We know that too many schools
especially those attended by poor minorities      are not as good as they
should be. These students are caught in a web of low expectations, low
standards, poor teaching, and crowded classrooms -- conditions that would
make it very difficult for even the hardiest of children to bloom.    Here
are goals we must set for the nation:   Eliminate the gaps in resources and
achievement; raise accountability and standards for all children, teachers
and schools; build school communities that teach tolerance and prepare our


children for the diverse America they will lead in the 21st Century.

                The budget I have sent to Congress proposes new Education
Opportunity Zones to reward school districts in poor urban and rural areas
for undertaking the kind of sweeping reforms that cities like Chicago have
adopted -- closing down failing schools, promoting public school choice,
removing bad teachers, eliminating social promotions, and making sure
children get the extra help they need to succeed. And I am committed to
providing 35,000 new scholarships to teachers who agree to teach in our
neediest public schools.

                If we're going to succeed in the 21st century, we must
recognize that every child can learn, that every child deserves a world
class education. That is why I am very disappointed that the House of
Representatives missed an important opportunity today to move our nation
toward this goal, and to pass legislation that the American people want
and that every parent and teacher knows is the right thing to do.   The
House rejected a proposal -- sponsored by Rep. Clay -- to reduce class
size in grades 1-3 to an average of 18.  Instead, they passed a block
grant proposal which eliminates accountability and rejects our national
responsibility for helping communities to raise standards, improve
teaching, and bring the benefits of technology to our students.   If this
misguided legislation reaches my desk, I will veto it.

                ItO,s not often that I get to welcome two great heroes of
freedom to the White House in the same week.  As you know, I met with
Vaclav Havel the other day. And today, I was greeted before I came in by
the mother of our civil rights movement -- Rosa Parks.

                I went to end by urging all of you to look to the lives of
these two great heroes for inspiration in the years ahead.   Even in their
darkest moments, they never lost faith that in the end, freedom, justice
and equality would prevail. America must continue on its journey toward a
more perfect union.  And I call on each of you to lead us there.


