RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-SEP-1998 18:47:53.00

SUBJECT:   Re: DPC Scheduling Proposals

TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD } )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Includes health and welfare
---------------------- Forwarded by Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP on 09/17/98 06:46
PM ---------------------------




Laura Emmett
09/17/98 05:13:56 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Christa Robinson/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         Re: DPC Scheduling Proposals

   This includes welfare & health

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D52}MAIL42902206V.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043B6100000010A0201000000020500,oOOOOB91000000020000930735C5C60F67DDE31AFB


MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC October Event Ideas


Possible Welfare Event
1.      Child Support -- New National Case Registry: This month, HHS will put in place a
Federal Case Registry, a national database of child support cases. This new national database
will make it easier to locate deadbeat parents, particularly those that have moved to a different
state. HHS will do daily computer matches between the new Federal Case Registry and the
National Directory of New Hires (a national employee database created in October 1997 which is
continuously updated with "new hire" information on new employees). These matches will
locate working parents who owe child support; this information will be sent back to the states
which will contact the employers and garnish the wages of the delinquent parent. The registry
was proposed by the President in 1994 and enacted as part of the 1996 welfare reform law.
Approximately one-third of all child support cases involve parents living in different states.

        States will begin to submit their case registry data to HHS on October 1; HHS expects to
have 30 states in its system by the end of October and 40 states by the end of the year. This new
registry could be unveiled anytime in October.

        At the June 24th signing of the Deadbeat Parents Punishment Act, the President
announced that the National Directory of New Hires had located one million delinquent
parents since its October 1997 launch. The launch of the National Case Registry will make the
National Directory of New Hires even more useful, enabling every child support case to be
matched against the employer data.


Possible Health Care Events
1.      Long-Term Care: If Democrats introduce an alternative tax bill, we could do an event
(either before or concurrent with the Democratic unveiling) that highlights the President's
long-term care initiative. The President's proposal would provide for a $500-$1,000 tax credit
to people with long-term care needs or their caregivers. It would cost about $5 billion over 5
years and help about 2.2 million people. It would also establish a private long-term care
insurance offering to Federal employees through the Federal Employees Health Benefit plan.
OPM estimates that 300,000 people would buy these policies.

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
week, we will know whether the Senate can agree to bring the Jeffords-Kennedy Work Incentives
Improvement Act -- the disability community's top health priority -- to the floor for a vote. If it
does, because of our summer-long work to help develop this bill with the Senators and advocacy
communities, we could create a strong event with both the disability and AIDS communities to
give it a strong Presidential push. We could also announce the approval of four states for the
new "date certain" grant program. This long sought after initiative (by the disability
community) provides states the ability to use Medicaid resources to offer institutionalized
disabled persons the option of returning to the community -- within a specific timeframe -- to
receive their needed long-term care services. It would be viewed by the community as an
important signal that we are attempting to move the Medicaid away from its historic institutional
bias for the chronically ill.

3.       NGA Partnership Even on Children's Health: October is the 1st anniversary of the
effective date of the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and October 5th is Child
Health Day. We could release the first annual report on states' progress in implementing CHIP,
which is expected to coincide with a sufficient number of state approvals to cover 2.5 million
kids. At this event, we would launch phase one of our children's health outreach campaign with
NGA to target parents of uninsured children eligible for CHIP and Medicaid. As part of this
announcement, we would unveil a series of targeted radio ads in 9 states and well as highlight
innovate efforts by the Governors themselves. Finally, we are working on getting a commitment
from Americorps -- to have them help families sign up for Medicaid and CHIP at the local
level -- that could complement our range of Federal activities.

4.     Cancer Event(s): In addition to the September 26th Cancer March (and the President's
possible involvement through a radio address), October is National Breast Cancer Awareness
month. It is also the 5th anniversary of the President's launching of the National Action Plan on
Breast Cancer. We have tentatively scheduled October 21st for an event with the First Lady to
highlight a new information outreach and screening campaign focused particularly on
underserved minorities. Because of the President's strong cancer record, as well as his desire to
underscore our commitment to ending health disparities between races, this might provide a good
forum for the President to highlight our record.


Possible Education Events
1.     Announce Technology Grants: The Education Department is prepared to
announce $30 million in grants to approximately 17 states. ED is prepared to announce
these on Monday, September 21 but could be held until September 30 if necessary.

2.     Announce Charter Schools Grants: The Education Department is preparing to
award approximately $60-70 million to approximately 20 states. These awards may be
available as early as next week, and must be awarded by September 30.



                                                2
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
urban and rural communities. These grants must be awarded on Sept. 30; they wiD not be
available before and can't be held until later.

4.     Safe and Drug Free Schools Grants: Two different sets of grants totaling $5.1
million. These could be announced as early as 9/21 or 9/22 or as late as 9/30. (10 grants
for model $3.2 million for 10 model! demonstration safe and drug-free school partnerships
and $1.9 million for violence prevention programs started by universities).

5.      Possible HEA bill signing: The Higher Education Act is virtually certain to pass
this session, though the timing uncertain. It is likely to contain provisions to reduce
student loan interest rates, as well as programs that reflect our High Hopes and Teacher
Recruitment and Preparation proposals.

6.      Charter Schools bill signing: Prospects for passing the charter schools legislation
are still good though not guaranteed; at present it is impossible to predict timing.

7.     Early Literacy bill signing: Prospects for passing the early literacy bill are still
good though not guaranteed; at present it is impossible to predict timing.

8.     Oct. 15 Safe Schools Conference: Policy announcements for this conference
include: (1) the first annual report on school safety; (2) the Administration's approach to
overhauling the Safe and Drug Free Schools program; (3) a grants program, involving
funds from ED, Justice and HHS to support development and implementation of
comprehensive school safety programs; and (4) the establishment of a FEMA-Iike federal
response to school-related homicides.


Possible Crime Events
1.      Final COPS Grants for FY 1998: On September 24th or 25th, the President could
announce at an event or in his weekly radio address $370 million for grants to hire and redeploy
11,500 more police officers. This announcement would include 700 new police officers ($100
million) for Los Angeles, another 800 new hires for the rest of California. ($70 million) and $200
million for COPS MORE grants for police department to redeploy more than 10,000 officers.

2.      Elder Fraud and Crime: The President could take several actions to combat elder
abuse and crime, including: Elder Abuse (1) release the preliminary findings of an HHS
study on elder abuse; (2) create a new national center on elder abuse; (3) call on Congress
to reauthorize the Older Americans' Act, which includes services to help older Americans
at risk for abuse; Elder Fraud (4) launch new partnership between the Justice Department
and AARP to create Elder Fraud Prevention Teams (EFPTs) in four cities -- Miami,
Phoenix, San Diego, and Seattle (5) announce roughly $3 million in Justice Department
grants to combat fraud against the elderly; and (6) announce posting of new information


                                                3            Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
of this announcement will need to be released before the September 30th.

3.       TOP COPS: On October 9th, the President could sign legislation to expand educational
benefits for the children of slain local law enforcement officers. The President endorsed this
proposal -- backed by the National Association of Police Organizations and other police groups --
at last year's TOP COPS event in the Rose Garden. This proposal has strong bipartisan support
and has already passed the Senate; however, we will need to work with the police groups to get
this considered on the House floor as soon as possible.

4.      White House Conference on School Safety: On October 15th, the President will host a
White House Conference on School Safety and take the following actions: (1) release the first
annual Report on School Safety, which includes school crime data, model safe schools, and
recommended actions for parents and teachers to take to improve safety; (2) unveil new
principles to revamp the Safe and Drug-Free Schools program and call for additional funds in the
FY 2000 budget; (3) unveil the components of new FEMA-like assistance for communities to
respond to school-related homicides; (4) launch new comprehensive school safety grants which
will bring together various streams of funding from federal agencies; (5) kick-off a partnership
with MTV on school safety, which includes a year ofPSAs; and (6) release a manual to combat
bullying in schools. Other policy announcements and grants might also be available for release
at the conference.

5.      1997 FBI Crime Statistics: Coinciding with the October 18th release of the final 1997
FBI Uniform Report -- which will continue to show large decreases in crime -- the President
could give a major policy speech on how this Administration's efforts have helped to fuel the
longest sustained drop in violent crime in nearly 40 years. The speech would commemorate the
fourth year anniversary of the passage of the landmark 1994 Crime Act, highlight how this
Administration -- through signature initiatives such as COPS -- has helped to change the nation's
approach to crime, and begin to make the case for new crime proposals that will be included in
the State of the Union and FY 2000 budget.

6.       Report and Expansion of the President's Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative:
On October 23rd, the President could: (1) release the second annual report on the Youth Crime
Gun Interdiction Initiative (yCGII), which will provide new ATF data on guns used in crimes in
27 cities; (2) announce the availability of funds to hire 6 new ATF agents to investigate gun
trafficking in these 27 cities; and (3) propose a dramatic expansion of this initiative to all major
cities -- that is, to the approximately 65-70 cities with populations of 250,000 or more.
Additionally, since we expect the YCGn report to make a strong case for cracking down on
"straw purchasers" and gun shows, the President could consider announcing his support for
legislation requiring background checks for all secondary market gun purchases. This, however,
requires further consideration.




                                                 4             Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
1.      Naturalization event: Sometime during the month of October, the INS will deploy six
sets of naturalization backlog reduction teams comprised of adjudicators dedicated to
naturalization application processing. These teams will be sent to the six cities that represent
65% of the backlog -- New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, San Francisco, Miami, and Chicago.
At the same time, we hope that Congress will approve our request for $171 in reprogramming
funds -- money that will be dedicated to naturalization backlog efforts. We could announce the
deployment of one or more of these teams, along with the $171 million, highlighting our
commitment to reducing the naturalization backlog.

2.       Public charge and Medicaid: We hope to soon resolve the question (with INS and
State) of whether the receipt of Medicaid should be considered in the INS's analysis of whether a
person is "likely to become a public charge" ; thus, not eligible to adjust their immigration status
or be admitted to the U.S. Ifwe can come to an Administration position (in the next couple of
weeks) that receipt of Medicaid should not be considered (unless the applicant is
institutionalized), we can announce an INS proposed rule with that interpretation. This will be
very big in the Medicaid and immigrant communities because as long as Medicaid questions are
asked as part of an INS status determination, immigrants will be less inclined to sign up for
benefits to which they (or their children) are entitled. We can use the opportunity to talk about
our commitment to expanded Medicaid coverage, particularly to children (CHIP).

3.      0-IB legislation: In the next week or so, we should know whether there will be a bill
on H-I B (high-tech) visas that we intend to sign. If there is, it could be an opportunity to talk
about training U.S. workers first and keeping companies competitive through access to, when
necessary, the international labor market (the bill will have both new money for training, some
protection for U.S. workers, and an increase in the visas).


Possible Tobacco Events
1.      Counteradvertising: At the event, the President would direct HHS to: (1) designate the
CDC's Media Campaign Resource Center as a National Clearinghouse on Tobacco
Counteradvertising; (2) collect and disseminate a package of the "top-10" advertisements for
preventing youth smoking, and make these available to states and organizations for television
placement free of charge; and (3) make effective anti-tobacco curriculum available to every
school.

        We could invite supermodel Christy Turlington and musical group "Boyz II Men" to
participate in the event, both of whom have already demonstrated their commitment to this effort
by making public service announcements targeting youth smoking that are available through the
CDC (these ads would be among the "top 10" package). The President could also urge the
entertainment industry to do its part in reducing youth smoking, by urging broadcasters to air
public service announcements targeting youth smoking, actors to speak out on the subject, and
writers and directors to reduce the portrayal of smoking in movies and films.


                                                 5             Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
anti-tobacco plan. This plan includes covering over-the-counter nicotine replacement therapies
under military health care coverage, a military-wide counteradvertising campaign, incorporating
anti-tobacco messages into education and training programs for military personnel (cost: $60
million). At the event, the President could be joined by the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and other high-ranking military officers.

       Military personnel have higher rates of smoking than the general population (31.7
percent), and DOD tobacco-related health care costs are approximately $1.3 billion per year.
Their goal is to be smoke free by 2010.

3.     OSHA: The President would sign an Executive Order directing OSHA to issue within
one year a standard establishing a smoke-free workplace for all private sector employees. ETS
exposure in the workplace poses significant risks to employees who are non-smokers, including
lung cancer, heart disease, and respiratory problems. This standard would be similar to the
August 1997 Executive Order banning smoking in Federal building.

        OSHA has been working since 1991 on a standard regulating all indoor air quality (which
includes environmental tobacco smoke and air pollutants such as harmful bacteria and hazardous
chemicals). They are years away from completing this standard, largely because they do not
have sufficient scientific evidence to justify the regulation of indoor air pollutants. However,
they believe that if the President ordered a separate standard only on ETS, more resources would
be devoted to the project and they could finish it within 12-18 months.


Possible Service Events
1.      Americorps 100,000th Member Event (10/23): CNS is planning national service
events in Washington, DC and elsewhere around the country on October 23 to celebrate the
swearing-in of the 100,000th Americorp member. CNS has submitted a scheduling request to
have the President swear in Americorps members in one location and have thousands of others
participate via satellite hook-ups. During this event, the President could also announce:

·      Americorps Promise Fellowships: The announcement of $5 million in grants to support
       500 -1000 fellowships to help implement programs in support of the five goals for
       children and youth set at the Presidents' Summit for America's Future. The President
       unveiled this fellowship program at the City Year National Convention in Cleveland,
       Ohio.

·      President's Service Awards: The highest volunteer service award which has been
       annually presented by the President andlor Mrs. Clinton to twenty Americans who have
       demonstrated outstanding volunteer service to their communities. This year's awards
       will be aligned with the five goals for children and youth identified at the Presidents'
       Summit.


                                               6
                                                            Automated Records Management System
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
       the President's Student Service Award will be given to all young people who complete
       100 hours of service in their communities. This is part of a three-part strategy for
       inspiring and recognizing national service by young people, the other two are: (1) Leader
       schools -- schools with exemplary service programs; and (2) service scholarships --
       $1000 for one student per high school who has performed outstanding community
       service.


Possible Community Empowerment Events
1.      Bill Signing on Individual Development Accounts: As of today, the House Passed the
IDA bill drafted by Harkin and Coates. The bill would provide for the first time direct funding
for IDAs, something the President has supported since 1992. The Senate has provided funding
of $1 0 million to go along with the authorization. This legislation now goes to conference.
Along with the bill signing, we could also announce that the President is sending a letter to the
bank regulators asking that IDA accounts count towards a financial institutions Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA) requirements.

2.      Welfare to Work Housing Vouchers: Assuming the appropriations bill is eventually
signed, Congress should fund some amount (17,000 in the House but only 7,000 in the Senate) of
the President's request for new, incremental Welfare to Work Housing Vouchers. This is the
first major incremental increase in years.

3.      Homeless Veterans: On September 28-30, the VA is having a conference in Baltimore
on homeless veterans. The President could attend and announce the VA's grants for homeless
veterans. Alternatively, the V A could hold the announcement ofthe grants and we could
announce it in October. There might be some HUD grants he could announce as well. In
addition, the VA did its FY1997 survey of homeless veterans that shows that almost 25% of the
veterans they serve could be considered homeless. VA thinks that this report has not been
announced yet (I still have to get final confirmation on that)


Possible Children and Families Events
1.      Launch of Children's Health Outreach Campaign: The President and/or First Lady
could announce, with the National Governors Association and America's Promise, the launch of
our children's health outreach campaign in ten states (Colorado, Delaware, Florida, Idaho,
Indiana, Massachusetts, Oklahoma, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Utah). The campaign consists of
paid radio advertisements and a series of commitments by non-profit groups and private
corporations to get information to low-income families about the Children's Health Insurance
Program and Medicaid.

2.      Announcement of New Child Care Fiscal Data. The President could announce new
fiscal data of the number of children served with child care assistance through the Child Care and


                                                7
                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
in the block grant -- we expect the data to indicate that we are serving approximately 1.8 million
children of the 10 million eligible for assistance. This is the first data to examine the CCDBG
created by welfare reform in 1996 (when four child care assistance programs were consolidated).

3.       Signing Ceremony for the Head Start Reauthorization Bill: The President could host
a bill signing ceremony for the expected Head Start Reauthorization bill (which is now heading
to Conference). Head Start provides intensive, full and half day services to low-income
pre-school children and their families. This event could serve to highlight the Clinton
Administration's significant strides with the Head Start program, including: (1) significantly
increasing Head Start participation; (2) creating Early Head Start for infants and toddlers; and (3)
dramatically improving program quality.

4.      Breast Cancer Event: As an event marking October as Breast Cancer Awareness
Month, the President and First Lady could release a report from HHS detailing the progress of the
Administration in the fight against breast cancer five years after the Administration and
advocates jointly issued the National Action Plan on Breast Cancer. The report would describe
the Administration's success in reaching many of the goals of the Action Plan, and would
demonstrate the important link between Administration activities, such as increased investment
in research, and recent breakthroughs in the fight against this disease. The event would also
provide the President with the opportunity to direct the Secretary of Health and Human Services
to make substantial further progress over the next two years on the goals of the action plan we
have yet to reach, such as coordination of efforts to place women into breast cancer clinical trials
and better dissemination of information about breast cancer.

5.      Signing Ceremony for the Quality Child Care for Federal Employees Act (If passed
as a Free-Standing Bill): The President could host a bill singing event for the expected Quality
Child Care for Federal Employees Act, which makes important improvements to
federally-sponsored child care. The bill reinforces the executive memorandum that the President
issued (in March 1998) to improve federally-sponsored child care in the executive branch by
ensuring proper background checks of child care providers, and achieving full accreditation of
child care facilities. The legislation applies to all federally sponsored child care (executive,
judicial and legislative branches), and includes other important provisions, such as: (l) giving
GSA new oversight responsibilities for most federally-sponsored child care and directing GSA to
develop, issue and enforce uniform health and safety standards; and (2) authorizing agencies to
use appropriated funds for child care tuition subsidies. The event could also serve to highlight the
DOD and GSA reports to the President that respond to his Executive Memorandum. NOTE: the
legislation's vehicle (Treasury-Postal Appropriations versus stand alone bill) and the timing of
its passage are unclear; if the bill comes to the President as a part of the appropriations bill, a
separate signing ceremony is not be possible.

6.     CEO Roundtable Discussion on Work/Family Issues: The President could host a
meeting of CEO's to discuss "family-friendly" workplace practices that meet the needs of the


                                                 8
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex·Dump Conversion
the Changing Labor Market. Additionally, the President could signal support for the design of a
paid parental leave program (policy development process required). This meeting would build on
the work of the Treasury Child Care Working Group, run by the Secretary Rubin (the President
released its report and the First Lady met with the CEO working group in May, 1998).

7.     Kaiser Study on Violence: The Foundation says it could break out a separate study on
incidence of violence on shows where it is not expected.

8.     Family Report: If it can be fixed.


Possible Consumer Protection Ideas
1.      Food Safety: The President could announce some combination of the following: a
preliminary USDA study showing that salmonella risks have declined by almost 50% in chicken
and almost 40% in swine in part due to HACCP program. However, we should do this event on
the message openings on the 24th or 25th or as the radio address on the 26th. This event shows
that the President's food safety initiative is working and that we should get our food safety budget
fully funded. In addition, USDA has approximately $1 to $2 million dollars worth of grants for
projects such as Safe Food for Mom and Tots and Distance Leaming for food safety. (I will
send a separate paragraph of what an event for next week would look like).

       The Administration could also produce a show and tell event demonstrating the
importance of research -- federal research has led to technologies that dramatically reduce
salmonella in chicken and e-coli in cows.

2.       Binge drinking: The Distillers have offered to do an event with representatives of some
of the several hundred universities using their new alcohol education material. We would need
to clarify MADD's position. In addition, the distillers have a policy of not placing billboards
near schools. They offered to work to find existing billboards that might be tom down. This
would be part of an effort to discourage children from drinking.


Possible Other Ideas
1.     Rural Event: It is likely there will be a substantial emergency spending bill to sign for
devastated farmers.

2.     E-Rate: FCC said they will have some deliverables on e-rate that we should look into.

3.     Defibrillators: We should hear about the HHS heart attack/defibrillator study.




                                                 9
                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Helt-Dump Conversion


