 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:18-SEP-1998 11:05:00.00

 SUBJECT:   Complete Weekly Report 9/18

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D56]MAIL423674060.226 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF575043560F0000010A02010000000205000000EE360000000200004C9E4717C29A1387FC8283
 6EE3A88CBED05B3AA71E91DFAFDCF4D2AB58058BCB3C2487F59A931443BEC109E6B71860C8E901


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report

        Crime -- Juvenile Crime: This week, the House attached two major House juvenile
crime bills passed last year -- H.R. 3, which we oppose, and HR 1818, a prevention bill which we
support -- to a noncontroversial Senate bill reauthorizing funds for the Center for Missing and
Exploited Children. The bill passed on the suspension calendar by a vote of 280-126. The
juvenile crime bills are now items that must be resolved in conference. Senate Democrats are
sure to oppose the move to appoint conferees.

                Crime -- COPS Grants: This week, the COPS Office released over $20 million
in grants to 27 jurisdictions to hire 331 officers. Next week, the COPS Office will release over
$300 million in grants, including: (1) $200 million COPS MORE grants to 600 law enforcement
agencies to fund 10,000 police and police equivalents; (2) $100 million under a long-awaited
waiver for Los Angeles to fund over 700 new officers; and (3) roughly $6 million to four other
law enforcement agencies in California to hire an additional 82 officers.

         Children and Families --Head Start: On Monday, the House passed a Head Start
Reauthorization bill, stripping from the bill objectionable provisions added in Committee (such
as vouchers), on the insistence of the Administration and House Democrats. The Senate has
already passed a strong Head Start Reauthorization bill, paving the way for a speedy conference,
and, we hope, a bill signing ceremony next month in which we can highlight the important
achievements in the Head Start program during your Presidency. Both the House and Senate
bills reauthorize the program at sums near your request and add important new goals for the
program, such as "school readiness." A likely conference debate will be whether additional new
investments in Head Start should be targeted to improving quality or serving more children. Our
position has been that we must maintain a careful balance between quality and expansion --
continuing to make needed improvements, but also serving more eligible children. While the
Senate bill adopts our position, the House bill unfortunately targets most new dollars into quality
improvements, such as salary enhancements, thereby precluding reaching our goal of serving 1
million children. We will continue to fight in Conference to achieve a better balance between
these two important goals.

        Immigration -- H-2AGuestworkers: This past July the Senate passed an amendment to
the CJS appropriations bill, sponsored by Senators Wyden and Graham, that would create a new
agricultural guestworker (H-2A) program. This bill would severely weaken the labor

                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                Hex.Dump Conversion
bill's passage (68 to 31), it has lost support among Senate Democrats, principally because labor
and Hispanic groups have made clear their vehement opposition. Last week, we met with a
group of Democratic staffers to discuss our serious substantive concerns with the bill's approach.
Our goal is to get this amendment stripped from the CJS bill and to do the real work offorging a
consensus reform solution with members of Congress over the next several months.

        Health Care -- Medicare Home Health Update: At your direction, we have been
providing technical assistance to the Congressional Committee's of jurisdiction in their efforts to
develop changes to the BBA's home health care reimbursement provisions that the industry (Val
Halamandaris) feels are harming providers and their ability to provide quality service to
Medicare beneficiaries. On Tuesday, Ways and Means Subcommittee Chairman Bill Thomas
unveiled a new and fairly creative policy alternative that has some potential. It would raise per
beneficiary and industry payment rates and begin to moderate geographical reimbursement
disparities. Although not everything the home health folks wanted, Val (Elena: Val is a good
friend of the POTUS and the President asked us, as you will recall, to be helpful where we could)
sent generally positive signals about it. The primary problem with Mr. Thomas' approach is that
it would cost $1.4 billion over 5 years and, rather than use Medicare program payment offsets,
would be paid for with the budget surplus. Following on the heels of the Democrats' strong vote
against surplus-funded tax cuts on Thursday, we believe they (and us) are likely to oppose the
proposal's financing. Although we might be able to sustain this position, it will place great
pressure on us to help produce Medicare offsets -- most of which are politically unviable. We
will be meeting with the Democrats on Friday and early next week to determine if we can come
up with an acceptable savings package and, regardless, how best to position ourselves on this
politically sensitive issue.

        Welfare Reform -- Grants to Study What Happens to People Leaving the Rolls: On
Friday, HHS awarded $3 million in grants to 10 states and 3 counties to help gather information
about outcomes of families who leave welfare. The studies will track employment and earnings;
returns to welfare; participation in Food Stamps, Medicaid, child support and child welfare; and
family and child well-being. Florida will look at the impact of welfare reform on different
ethnic groups, and Arizona's study will include a large Native American population.
Massachusetts will examine the first group of families to hit their 24-month time limit. Several
of the states will also track outcomes for families who are diverted from the rolls and for
those who are sanctioned.

        Welfare Reform -- New Federal Child Support Case Registry: Next month, HHS
will put in place another of the critical building blocks of the interstate child support system
proposed in your 1994 welfare reform bill and enacted in 1996. The Federal Case Registry, a
national database of child support cases, will make it easier to locate deadbeat parents,
particularly those living in other states. The registry will enable HHS to do automatic, daily
computer matches of parents who owe support (the Federal Case Registry) and a national
employee database (the National Directory of New Hires, a directory created in October 1997


                                                 2        Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion



    which is updated daily with "new hire" information submitted by employers). These matches
    will locate working parents who owe child support and provide states with the wage and
    employer information they need to garnish the wages of the delinquent parent. States will begin
    to submit their case registry data to HHS on October I; HHS expects to have 30 states in its
    system by the end of October and 40 states by the end of the year. In June, at the signing of the
    Deadbeat Parents Punishment Act, you announced that the National Directory of New Hires had
    in nine months located one million delinquent parents; the launch of the Federal Case Registry
    will make the new hire data even more useful by providing even more delinquent cases for it to
    be matched against.

            Community Empowerment -- Regulation B: Last Spring, Treasury coordinated a
    comment letter to the Federal Reserve signed by DOl, OCC, OTS, SBA, FTC and HUD that
    supported a proposal to amend Regulation B implementing the Equal Credit Opportunity Act to
    allow, but not require, banks to voluntarily collect data on the race and income ofloan applicants,
    a practice currently prohibited. This data is already reported for home mortgage loans and has
    proven critical to identifying gaps in access to capital. This revision of Reg B would begin to
    allow banks to self-assess their outreach and approval practices for non-mortgage loans,
    especially small business loans. It would also build on the success of your reform of the
    Community Reinvestment Act. Although the Fed considered and rejected a similar proposal in
    December 1996, we believe the Fed may be more willing to approve the change at this time.
    Factors that may influence them favorably include the coordinated Administration letter,
    supportive comment letters from a few large banks, and recent changes in the composition of the
    Board of Governors themselves. We now anticipate Federal Reserve action by the end of the
    year based on past timing, however there is no specific time line mandated. We will keep you
    apprised of the situation and should we get advance notice of Fed approval, will seek to arrange
    an opportunity for you to make a statement in person.




                                                    3
                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


