RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Eric P. Goosby ( CN=Eric P. Goosby/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-MAY-1997 09:28:26.00

SUBJECT:   Re: medical research

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Eleana:

Background:

A Public Watch group made up of some leading epidemiologists and ethicits,
wrote a letter under Sid Wolfe's signature (ethicits) accusing the CDC and
NIH of unethical conduct in 15 studies based in thrid world countries
(mainly cental and western Africa).  These studies are focused on looking
at perinatal transmission of HIV. As you recall in 1994 in the AIDS
Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) study 076, it was shown that when AZT was
orally admnistered to HIV positive pregnant women during gestation (2nd
trimester to term) and intravenously at delivery, followed by oral syrup
with the newborn for 6 weeks, the transmission of HIV went from 27% to
8%.

Issue:
The studies in question do not offer the known, proven effective
intervention of AZT to the study participants, but offer unproven cheaper
variations on the AZT interventions (oral preparations; less time on drug
; other antiretrovirals are tried) .
This was justified by the CDC by making one basic assumption:  the
standard of care these countries does not include AZT of any kind,
therefore, if they are randomized to a study arm that inlcudes some form
of AZT it is better then their current situation.  In addition, each of
the study arms has the potential and likelyhood of being effective.

The Public Watch group has accused HHS of a "Tuskegee-like" process and
demands the studies be stopped.
CDC points out all of these studies which began in 1993 (before 076
results) went through institutional review boards (IRB's) both in the US
and in each hosting country, and contend they are ethical in design.

HHS is in the middle of a review that has a broad spectrum of opinon.
This will come to completion by Friday of this week, or earlynext week.
The potential for it coming up at the ceremony is small but present in my
estimate.  The concerned groups have no obvious connections with the
Tuskegee survivors.

I would be happy to talk with you about this further.

Eric


