RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-SEP-1998 22:07:56.00

SUBJECT:     CHC Draft

TO: Este1a Mendoza       CN=Estela Mendoza/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jake Siewert ( CN=Jake Siewert/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Fred DuVal ( CN=Fred DuVal/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Janet Murguia ( CN=Janet Murguia/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP ( WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Mickey Ibarra ( CN=Mickey Ibarra/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP ( WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paul E. Begala ( CN=Paul E. Begala/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP ( WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jeffrey L. Farrow ( CN=Jeffrey L. Farrow/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP ( WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP ( WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 9/22/98 9:00pm

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR CONGRESSIONAL HISPANIC CAUCUS DINNER
WASHINGTON, DC
September 23, 1998

           Acknowledgments: TK

        Before we begin, I want to say a word about the terrible hurricane
that has ripped through the Caribbean. (INSERT TKl

        Now, IO,d like to pay tribute to the two men we are honoring here
tonight -- Representative Henry Gonzalez, and Representative Esteban
Torres.   O&Henry B08 was more than a pioneer -- more than a brilliant


prophet on the need to make our economy work for ordinary people. With
his stubborn insistence on standing on the House floor and standing up for
principle, he has been a conscience for the Congress and the country. And
we are very grateful.  Esteban Torres is the best of the newest
generation.  From his days as a UAW shop steward to his days as chair of
this caucus, he has fought for working people of all backgrounds. He has
fought to make certain that economic growth benefits the people not only
of this country but of Mexico as well.

        For the six years in a row, I have looked forward to coming here
   to join in the energy and the commitment and the creativity of the
fastest growing community in America.  I know that the Vice President
spent the evening with many of you last night at the Hispanic Heritage
Awards.  In so many ways, that rich heritage -- its values of family,
faith, and community, of hard work, passion, and patriotism -- that is
AmericaO,s heritage, too. That legacy is at the heart of everything the
Hispanic Caucus stands for -- and I have been honored to work alongside
you for six years now.  IO,d like to take a moment to think back on all
that we have accomplished together.

        Together, we expanded the Earned Income Tax Credit and helped cut taxes
for 15 million hard-working families -- including more than 1 million
Hispanics. When the Republicans tried to. slash it we said no.  Together,
we increased the minimum wage to give 10 million Americans.
-- including nearly 2 million Hispanic Americans -- a well-deserved
raise. Now, I think itO,s time to increase the minimum wage again, and I
am disappointed that yesterday the Senate voted against doing just that.
We value families -- we should raise the value of the minimum wage.

        Together we fought for and won the biggest increase in children's health
care in more than three decades, to insure up to 5 million uninsured
children across this country. We expanded the Head Start program to help
our children get off on the right foot. We passed the Family and Medical
Leave Act that gave millions of people the chance to take time off from
work to care for an ailing parent or a newborn child.

        Together, we have opened the doors of higher education with the HOPE
Scholarship, with more Pell Grants, with tax credits for all higher
education, with deductible student loans.  Because of our efforts,
everyone who is willing to work hard can go to college.

             Together with the Vice President's leadership, we created
more than 100 empowerment zones and enterprise communities, established
community development banks, doubled small business loans to minorities
and tripled them to women.  In fact, businesses owned and operated by
Hispanic women are the fastest growing category of small business in
America today.

        Together we shaped and passed the historic crime bill that is taking guns
off our streets, putting more police on our streets and more prevention to
keep our children out of trouble in the first place.

        Together, we have built a stronger America:  nearly 17 million
jobs ... the lowest unemployment rate in 28 years ... the lowest Hispanic
unemployment rate in a generation ... the fastest real wage growth in 20
years ... a record number of new small businesses every year ... violent
crime down a record six years in a row '"   and the lowest crime rate in
25 years. None of this could have happened without the leadership, the
friendship, the ideas of the CHC.


        I also want to give much-deserved credit to my staff.  One good
reason that things are looking so.good for so much of America, is because
my administration looks so much like America. One of my proudest
accomplishments was assembling the most diverse administration in history
-- as the Vice President just said, the greatest number of Hispanic
American appointments in history. We are not successful in spite of our
diversity -- we are successful because of it.
0,
        Now, we must decide what we should do with this moment of
prosperity and progress    how can we use the resources it is producing
and the self-confidence it is generating -- to build a brighter future for
all our people?

        Some people think that now is the time to kick back and relax.
There is an old Mexican proverb that says: O&El que no siembra, no levanta
08 [ell kay no see-EM-bra no leh-VAHN-tahl -- He who doesnO,t sow,
doesnO,t get a crop. We must use this time to sow the seeds of the
future, and build the America we want for our children. And we cannot
afford to rest.

        I say we cannot rest until we save Social Security for the 21st Century.
In a few days, we'll have the first balanced budget and surplus in 29
years.  I believe we must not spend one penny of that surplus until we
have saved Social Security.  Some say we should use the surplus to pay for
a tax cut.   My balanced budget proves that we can reserve the surplus and
still have targeted tax cuts for education ... to build and repair old
schools ... to help families pay for child care ... to help small
businesses take out pensions for their employees. And everyone of those
tax cuts is paid for in my balanced budget.

         I say we cannot rest until all children in all communities have a
world-class education. My balanced budget will help to hire 100,000 more
teachers ... to reduce class size in the early grades to 18 ... to build
or modernize 5,000 schools· ... to hook up all our classrooms, even in the
poorest neighborhoods, to the Internet ... to reward school districts for
undertaking the kind of sweeping reforms weO,ve seen in cities like.
Chicago ... to hire 35,000 more teachers to teach in the inner city and
other struggling communities.

        You and I know that education is the key to opportunity. But you also
know that far, far too many Hispanic young people are not getting the
education they need to succeed.  That is why I have appointed the
first-ever Presidential Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for
Hispanics.  And that is why I have proposed the first-ever Hispanic
Education Action Plan -- to reach out to Hispanic young people, and
encourage them to stay in high school, to go on to college, and to reach
for their dreams.

        And you and I know that unless they learn English, those young people may
never reach their full potential. That is why I fought for and won a 35%
increase in funding for bilingual education in the balanced budget
agreement. This will help 1,000 school districts all across America to
improve teacher training and add extra classes for students who have not ye
t mastered English. We shouldnO,t have to fight divisive political
battles to do what is right for our children.

        I say we cannot rest until we protect our families with a strong,
enforceable PatientsO, Bill of Rights.  Managed care can help make health
care more affordable for more families.  But with 160 million Americans in
managed care today, we must say to these plans:  DonO,t turn people away


from an emergency room.  DonO,t turn people away from a specialist. Do
nO,t let an accountant make decisions only a doctor should make.
Traditional care or managed care, every American qeserves quality care.

        We cannot rest while our communities are so thoroughly segregated by
income and by race. The Federal Government should lead the way both in
words and in deeds.  First, we must put an end to unfair housing practices
wherever and whenever they occur.  I have asked HUD Secretary Cuomo to
double the number of anti-housing discrimination cases.  Next, I have
directed Secretary Cuomo to work with you to undertake a major legislative
overhaul so that our public housing admissions policies help deconcentrate
poverty, mix incomes, and thereby mix people of all races and
ethnicities. We cannot live together as a nation if we donO,t live
together in our communities.

        So let's pledge tonight to join together in the fight for public
housing legislation that includes our historic admissions reforms --
reforms that will tear down the walls that divide and integrate public
housing for generations to come.

         We cannot rest until every community, every neighborhood, every block,
every family has the chance to reap the benefits of our economic growth.
That is why we must fund the empowerment initiatives the Vice President
and Secretary Cuomo have worked so hard for, to expand funding for the
community development banks, to step up enforcement of fair housing laws,
to revitalize more urban brownfield areas, to restore summer jobs for our
young people, and to provide housing assistance for those leaving welfare
and entering work.
         And we cannot rest until we have done even more to break the cycle of
welfare dependency and despair. We should all be proud that we have the
smallest percentage of our people on welfare in 29 years -- with nearly 4
mil,lion fewer people since I signed the welfare reform bill into law. We
should all be proud that we made good on our promise to restore some
benefits to legal immigrants. But we know that there is much to be done.

        The pressures to move from welfare to work are intense -- and we
know the transition can be particularly difficult for Hispanic women, many
of whom lack language as well as job skills.  I am committed to working
with you to ensure that every individual has the tools to make this
transition. That's why I fought for a $3 billion Welfare to Work fund in
the balanced budget, and $50 million more for Welfare to Work
transportation. And that is why I have proposed a $21 billion child care
initiative, to add to the $4 billion we fought for in the Welfare bill.

        I say we cannot rest until every AmericanO,s voice can be heard in the
halls of power -- that is one very good reason why we must ensure a fair
and accurate Census.  Some in Congress would have us ignore the best
scientific methods for ensuring the most accurate count. This is
unacceptable.  In 1990, 5 percent of Hispanics were not counted; nearly
70,000 Hispanic children in Los Angeles County alone were left out.  In
the year 2000, we can -- and must -- do better. This is a fundamental
issue, a crucial civil rights issue.  Every American counts. We must
count every American.

         And while weO,re at it -- letO,s give the 4 million people of Puerto Rico
the right to choose their own status.    In December, they will go to the
polls. The Senate Republican leaders say they will O&consider08 the
results of that referendum.    I say we should be bound by the results of
that referendum.   Puerto Ricans are American citizens -- let Puerto Rican
people decide.



        We cannot rest until we contain the economic turmoil in Russia and Asia
and help spur robust economic growth throughout the world.   Growth at home
depends upon growth abroad. Many of you came with me when I traveled to
Latin America earlier this year. We saw many things on that trip --
vibrant people, ancient customs, and a spirit of entrepreneurism that is
making Latin America one of the worldD,s fastest growing economies. That
is why I have urged the major industrial economies to stand ready to use
the $15 billion in emergency IMF funds to help stop the financial
contagion from spreading to Latin America and elsewhere.   And we must help
the IMF put out the worldD,s economic fires by paying our fair share.

        Finally, we cannot rest until we solve the oldest, most stubborn, most
painful challenge of our nation -- the lingering problems and limitless
possibilities of our growing diversity.  Last week, for the final time, I
met with my Advisory Board on Race and received their report.   I am proud
of their work, the guidance they have given us for·policy, for dialogue,
for specific practices in every community in this country.  But we know we
have only just begun a work that will take a lifetime; only just begun to
find ways finally to lift the burden of racial and ethnic discrimination,
and redeem the full promise of America.

        More than any other nation on earth, America has drawn our
strength from our diversity, as wave after wave of immigrants have come to
our shores in search of a better life for their families.  Today, we are
the most ethnicaily and racially diverse democracy in the history of the
world.  With nearly one million people coming legally to America every
year from countries allover the world, we must ask ourselves: will these
changes strengthen and unite us, or weaken and divide us?

         I believe that immigration is not only good for America -- it is
America.   It is our history -- it is our heritage -- and it is our hope
for the future.   As ethnic conflicts tear countries and families apart
around the world, we can prove that a diverse people can live together in
peace, learning from each another, drawing on each otherD,s strengths,
building on one anotherD,s accomplishments.

        We must welcome new immigrants, and do everything we can to
encourage them to learn our language, embrace our way of life, and become
full participants in our society by becoming citizens. That is why I have
called on the INS to streamline and improve the naturalization process.
My balanced budget would help reduce the backlog of applications and
improve customer service. When people take responsibility to become
citizens, we should do everything we can to help them -- whether they work
in a Fortune 500 company, in a department store, or in the fields, as so
many have before them.   They deserve a chance -- and we must give it to
them.

          America has always stood proud as a nation dedicated to widening
the circle of opportunity, to deepening the meaning of our freedom, and to
 forming that more perfect union.   One of the most passionate advocates for
those ideals our country has ever known -- indeed, one of our greatest
American heroes -- was Cesar Chavez. Thirty years ago, he met a kindred
spirit in Robert Kennedy, who had traveled to California where Chavez lay,
fasting in penance for the violence caused by the struggle for farm
workers rights. That night, Bobby Kennedy and Cesar Chavez broke bread
together in a Thanksgiving Mass . . Someone had to read these words Chavez
was too weak to speak, words I would like to share with you tonight.
'"J&Our lives are all that really belong to us, so it is how we use our
lives that determines what kind of people we are.1 18 That night, Robert


Kennedy made up his mind to run for President.
0,
         My friends, you and I are bound together by our commitment to use
our lives to make this country a better place for all our people, to build
a better world for our children. This is not a time to rest.    It is tim.e
to work.   I am honored to share this precious moment in time with all of
you, and to work together to build that better world.

        Thank you and God bless you all.


