RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TlME:23-SEP-1998 17:59:41.00

SUBJECT:   Revised Final CHC remarks -- changes in bold

TO: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Minyon Moore ( CN=Minyon Moore/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Mickey Ibarra      CN=Mickey Ibarra/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jake Siewert    CN=Jake Siewert/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Janet Murguia ( CN=Janet Murguia/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 9/23/98 6:00pm
Jordan Tamagni

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR CONGRESSIONAL HISPANIC CAUCUS INSTITUTE DINNER
WASHINGTON, DC
September 23, 1998

        Acknowledgments: SBA Administrator Alvarez; Sec. Richardson; Sec. Caldera
; Sec. Riley; Sec. Herman; Sec. Cuomo; Sec. Daley; Sec. Shalala; Sec.
Slater; ONDCP Dir. McCaffrey; AG Reno; Members of the Hispanic Caucus;
other Members of Congress.

        Before we begin, I want to say a word about Hurricane Georges [zhorzhel.
In Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Haiti, and the Dominican
Republic, businesses and homes have been swept away, and, tragically,
lives have been lost.  Tonight, our thoughts and prayers are with the
victims of this terrible storm.  FEMA Director James Lee witt has told me
that we are already assisting in the clean up effort, and helping the
people of Florida to prepare for the hurricane.  And will be there every
step of the way to help families and communities to rebuild.

        Now, IO,d like to pay tribute to the two men we are honoring here
tonight -_. Rep. Henry Gonzalez, and Rep. Esteban Torres.  with his


stubborn insistence on standing on the House floor and standing up for
principle, O&Henry B08 he has been more than a pioneer -- he has been a
conscience for the Congress and the country.  Esteban Torres was not
content merely to walk on a trail blazed by leaders like Henry -- he has
widened it. From his days as a UAW shop steward to his days as chair of
this caucus, he has fought tirelessly to make certain that economic growth
benefits all working people, not only of this country but of Mexico as
well.

        For six years in a row, I have looked forward to coming here -- to
JOln in the energy and the drive and the dedication of the fastest growing
community in America.  I know that the Vice President was with many of you
at the Hispanic Heritage Awards.  In so many ways, that rich heritage --
its values of family and faith, community and commitment -- is AmericaD,s
heritage, too. That legacy is at the heart of everything the Hispanic
Caucus stands for -- and I have been honored to work alongside you.  IO,d
like to reflect on all we have accomplished together.

        Together, we expanded the Earned Income Tax Credit and helped cut taxes
for 15 million hard-working families -- including more than 1 million
Hispanics. When the Republicans tried to slash it we said no.   Together,
we increased the minimum wage to give 10 million Americans.
-- including nearly 2 million Hispanic Americans -- a well-deserved
raise. Now, I think itO,s time to increase the minimum wage again, and I
am disappointed that yesterday the Senate voted against doing just that.
We value families -- we should raise the value of the minimum wage.

        Together we fought for and· won the biggest increase in children's health
care in more than three decades, to insure up to 5 million uninsured
children across this country. We expanded the Head Start program to help
our children get off on the right foot. We passed the Family and Medical
Leave Act that gave millions of people the chance to take time off from
work to care for an ailing parent or a newborn child.

            Together, we have opened the doors of higher education with
the HOPE Scholarship, with more Pell Grants, with tax credits for all
higher education, with deductible student loans.  Because of our efforts,
everyone who is willing to work hard can go to college.

             Together with the Vice President'S leadership, we created
more than 100 empowerment zones and enterprise communities, established
community development banks, doubled small business loans to minorities
and tripled them to women.  In fact, businesses owned and operated by
Hispanic women are the fastest growing category of small business in
America today. Together we shaped and passed the historic crime bill that
is taking guns off our streets, putting more police on our streets and
more prevention to keep our children out of trouble in the first place.

        Together, we have built a stronger America: nearly 17 million
jobs '"   the lowest unemployment rate in 28 years ... the lowest Hispanic
unemployment rate in a generation ... the fastest real wage growth in 20
years ... a record number of new small businesses every year ... violent
crime down a record six years in a row ... and the lowest crime rate in
25 years.   None of this could have happened without the leadership, the
friendShip, the ideas of the CHC.

        I also want to give much-deserved credit to my staff [Maria Echaveste,
Mickey Ibarra, Janet Murguia, Maritza Rivera, Estela Mendoza, to name only
a few).  One of my proudest accomplishments has been assembling the most
diverse administration in history. We are not successful in spite of our


diversity -- we are successful because of it.
0,
        Now, we must decide what we should do with this moment of
prosperity and progress    how can we use the resources it is producing
and the self-confidence it is generating -- to build a brighter future for
all our people?

        Some people think that now is the time to kick back and relax.
But there is an old Mexican proverb that says: D&El que no siembra, no
levantaDB [ell kay no see-EM-bra no leh-VAHN-tahl -- D&He who doesnD,t
sow, doesnD,t get a crop.DB We must use this time to sow the seeds of the
future, and build the America we want for our children. And we cannot
afford to rest.

        I say we cannot rest until we save Social Security for the 21st Century.
In a few days, we will have the first balanced budget and surplus in 29
years.  I believe we must not squander one penny of that surplus until we
have saved Social Security.  Some say we should use the surplus to pay for
a tax cut.   My balanced budget proves that we can reserve the surplus,
save Social Security, and still have targeted tax cuts for education, the
environment, school construction, and child care. And everyone of those
tax cuts is paid for in my balanced budget.

        We cannot rest until all children in all communities have a
world-class education. My balanced budget will help to hire 100,000 more
teachers ... to reduce class size in the early grades to 1B ... to build
or modernize 5,000 schools ... to hook up all our classrooms, even in the
poorest neighborhoods, to the Internet '"   to reward school districts for
undertaking the kind of sweeping reforms weD,ve seen in cit~es like
Chicago ... to hire 35,000 more teachers to teach in the inner city and
other struggling communities.

         You and I know that education is the key to opportunity.   But you also
know that far, far too many Hispanic young people are not getting the
education they need to succeed. That is why I established the
Presidential Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanics.
And that is why I have proposed a $600 million Hispanic Education Action
plan:   to transform schools with high dropout rates ... to support Hispanic
colleges ... to help adults who want to learn English or go back and get a
diploma      to help all Latinos, young and old, to reach for their dreams.

        And you and I know our children must master English. That is why I fought
for and won a 35% increase in bilingual education funding in the balanced
budget agreement. This will help 1,000 school districts all across
America to improve teacher training and add extra classes for students who
have not yet mastered English.  And I am proposing that we double that
investment in teacher training this year, and help communities to train
20,000 teachers to help children with limited English.

        Let me be clear: I believe that being able to speak more than one
language is a gift -- but unless our children learn English, they will
never reach their full potential. We shouldnD,t have to fight divisive
political battles to do what is right for our children.

        I say we cannot rest until we protect our families with a strong,
enforceable PatientsD, Bill of Rights. Managed care can help make health
care more affordable for more families.  But with 160 million Americans in
managed care today, we must say to these plans: DonD,t turn people away
from an emergency room. DonD,t turn people away from a specialist. Do
nD,t let an accountant make decisions only a doctor should make.


Traditional care or managed care, every American deserves quality care.

        We cannot rest while our communities are segregated by income and by race
. The Federal Government should lead the way both in words and in deeds.
I have asked Sec. Cuomo to crack down on unfair housing practices by
doubling the number of housing discrimination cases.  I have also directed
Secretary Cuomo to work with you to undertake a major legislative overhaul
so our public housing admissions policies help deconcentrate poverty, mix
incomes, and thereby mix people of all races and ethnicities. We cannot
live together as a nation if we donO,t live together in our communities.
Letn,s work together on this.

        We cannot rest until every community, every neighborhood, every family
can reap the benefits of our economic growth.   That is why we must fund
the empowerment initiatives the Vice President and Secretary Cuomo have
worked so hard for, from expanding funding for community development banks
and revitalizing urban brownfield areas, to restoring summer jobs for our
young people, and providing housing assistance for people moving from
welfare to work.

        We should all be proud that we have the smallest percentage of our
people on welfare in 29 years -- with nearly 4 million fewer people since
I signed the welfare reform bill into law. We should all be proud that we
made good on our promise to restore some benefits to legal immigrants.
But we know that there is much to be done.

        The pressures to move from welfare to work are intense, and the
transition can be especially difficult for Hispanic women, many of whom
lack language as well as job skills.  I am committed to working with you
to ensure that every individual has the tools to make this transition.
That's why I fought for a $3 billion Welfare to Work fund in the balanced
budget, and $50 million more for Welfare to Work transportation.  And that
is why I have proposed a $21 billion child care initiative, to add to the
$4 billion we fought for in the Welfare bill.  We can do this -- but we
cannot rest.

        I say we cannot rest until every AmericanO,s voice can be heard in the
halls of power -- that is one very good reason why we must ensure a fair
and accurate Census.  Some in Congress would have us ignore the best
scientific methods for ensuring the most accurate count. This is
unacceptable.  In 1990, 5 percent of Hispanics were not counted; nearly
70,000 Hispanic children in Los Angeles County alone were left out.  In
the year 2000, we can -- and must -- do better. This is a fundamental
issue, a crucial civil rights issue.  Every American counts. We must
count every American.

         And while weO,re at it -- letO,s give the 4 million people of Puerto Rico
the right to choose their own status.     In December, they will go to the
polls. The Senate Republican leaders say they will O&consider08 the
results of that referendum.   I say we must respect the results of that
referendum -- and work to implement the choice the Puerto Rican people
make.   Puerto Ricans are U.S., and nationhood, statehood, or status quo,
the decision must be theirs to make.

        We cannot rest until we contain economic turmoil in Russia and Asia and
help spur economic growth throughout the world. Growth at home depends
upon growth abroad. Many of you came with me when I traveled to Latin
America earlier this year, and we saw the spirit of entrepreneurism that
is making Latin America one of the ~orldD,s fastest growing economies.   I
have urged the major industrial economies to stand ready to use the $15


billion in emergency IMF funds to help stop the financial contagion from
spreading to Latin America and elsewhere. And we must further help the
IMF by paying our fair share.

        We know that expanding trade is good for our economy, but we must
not lose sight of the fact that some communities are not sharing fully in
benefits of trade.  I have proposed a significant expansion of funds for
the development bank that helps these communities. We need to work
together to ensure that we get these funds.  Trade is good for America --
we need to make sure that it is good for every American.

         Finally, we cannot rest until we solve the oldest, most stubborn, most
painful challenge of our nation -- the lingering problems and limitless
possibilities of our growing diversity.   Last week, for the final time, I
met with my Advisory Board on Race and received their report.   I am proud
of their work, the guidance they have given us for policy, for dialogue,
for specific practices in every community in this country. But we know we
have only just begun a work that will take a lifetime; only just begun to
find ways finally to lift the burden of racial and ethnic discrimination,
and redeem the full promise of America.

        More than any other nation on earth, America has drawn our
strength from our diversity, as wave after wave of immigrants have come
here in search of a better life.   Today, we are the most ethnically and
racially diverse democracy in the history of the world. With nearly one
million people coming legally to America every year from countries all
over the world, we must ask ourselves: will these changes strengthen and
unite us, or weaken and divide us?

         I believe that immigration is not only good for America -- it is
America.   It is our history -- it is our heritage -- and it is our hope
for the future.   As ethnic conflicts tear countries and families apart
around the world, we are proving that a diverse people can live together
in peace, learning from each another, drawing on each otherD,s strengths,
building on one anotherD,s accomplishments.

        We must welcome new immigrants, and do everything we can to
encourage them to learn our language, embrace our way of life, and become
full participants in our society by becoming citizens. That is why I have
called on the INS to streamline and improve the naturalization process.
My balanced budget would help reduce the backlog of applications and
improve customer service. When people take responsibility to become
citizens, we should do everything we can to help them -- whether they work
in a Fortune 500 company, in a department store, or in the fields.   They
deserve a chance -- and we must give it to them.

        America has always stood proud as a nation dedicated to widening
the circle of opportunity, to deepening the meaning of our freedom, and to
forming that more perfect union.  One of the most passionate advocates for
those ideals our country has ever known -- indeed, one of our greatest
American heroes -- was Cesar Chavez. Thirty years ago, he met a kindred
spirit in Robert Kennedy, who had traveled to California where Chavez lay,
fasting in penance for the violence caused by the struggle for farm
workers rights.  That night, Bobby Kennedy and Cesar Chavez broke bread
together in a Thanksgiving Mass.  Someone read the words Chavez was too
weak to speak -- words I would like to share with you tonight: D&Our lives
are all that really belong to us, so it is how we use our lives that
determines what kind of people we are.DB That night, Robert Kennedy made
up his mind to run for President.
D,


         My friends, you and I are bound together by our commitment to use
our lives to make this country a better place for all our people, to build
a better world for our children. This is not a time to rest.    It is time
to work.   I am honored to share this precious moment in time with all of
you, and'to work together to build that better world.

       Thank you and God bless you all.


