           RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

           CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

           CREATION DATE/TlME:24-SEP-1998 19:39:21.00

           SUBJECT:   hereugo

           TO: Laura Errunett   CN=Laura Errunett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
           READ:UNKNOWN

           TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=E1ena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TEXT:
           ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
           ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

           TEXT:
           Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D16]MAIL42373376Y.226 to ASCII,
            The following is a HEX DUMP:

           FF5750436E060000010A020100000002050000007C31000000020000A51FAEC39282844C8B0154
           91C1E3D5D1E082445A550B5D5B74FC5AF54F58896256A31CF27A77CC165DB78538E2B0637D18D8
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
         PRESIDENT CLINTON AND VICE PRESIDENT GORE ANNOUNCE HISTORIC EFFORTS
                             TO RENEW THE WAR ON CANCER
                                     September 26, 1998

        Today, the President and Vice President launched a new series of initiatives to redouble our efforts in the
        war against cancer. The President outlined these new steps in his weekly radio address on cancer and the
        Vice President delivered the keynote speech to tens of thousands of Americans at the March to Conquer
        Cancer on the National Mall. They announced a series of initiatives to step efforts to renew the war on
        cancer, including:

        ADVANCING COMMITMENT TO HIGH QUALITY RESEARCH

               Called on the Congress to pass the President's historic multi-year commitment to cancer
               research. While scientists have made important strides in cancer,experts believe that we are at the
               cusp of important new breakthroughs in the war against cancer. Today, the President and Vice
               President called on Congress to pass the Administration's historic five-year, 65 percent increase in
               cancer research at the National Institutes of Health, as an important down payment. This
               multi-year investment would assure that our nation's scientists can conduct more extensive and
               fruitful research, secure in the knowledge that the research will not be counterproductive and
               inefficiently interrupted as a result of funding lapses.

               Announced that Federal cancer research programs will fully integrate patients and
               advocates into their research and agenda setting process within a year. Cancer advocates
               and patients provide a unique and critical perspective to setting the cancer research agenda.
               Building on unprecedented efforts to integrate patients in the Department of Defense cancer
               research program and ongoing innovative efforts at NCr, the President and Vice President
               announced that by next year patients and advocates will be fully integrated activities such as
               reviewing grant proposals and planning policy at NCr.

        USING NEW PROGRESS IN GENETICS TO ADVANCE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT
        FOR CANCER

               Announced that, in the first year of the Cancer Genome Anatomy Project (CGAP), scientists
               have identified twice as many genes and gene sequences as expected. In 1996, the Vice
               President unveiled the CGAP, a comprehensive effort to profile genes in precancerous and
               cancerous cells, making it possible to unravel the genetics of cancer. The President and Vice
               President announced that in the first year of this historic effort, the project has already identified
               more than 300,000 DNA sequences and 12,000 new genes, doubling initial expectations by the
               NCr.

               Issued historic challenge to scientists to use the CGAP· to develop new diagnostic techniques
               for every major cancer in the next two years. Efforts to unravel the genetics of cancer should
               be used to make unprecedented progress in improving detection and treatment for cancer patients.
               The President and the Vice President issued a challenge to scientists to use new knowledge about
               genetics to develop new diagnostic strategies for major cancers in the next two years, so that
               doctors can pinpoint cancers in their earliest and often most treatable stages.

               Challenged Congress to pass bipartisan legislation preventing genetic discrimination.
                                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                According to one report, 63 percent of Americans would not take a genetic test if their health
                insurers or employers could get access to the results. The President and Vice President renewed
                their call for Congress to pass bipartisan legislation, similar to legislation introduced by Rep.
                Slaughter and Senator Snowe, to prohibit health plans and employers from using genetic
                screening to discriminate against individuals.

           APPLY AND EXPEDITE THE NUMBER OF RESEARCH BREAKTHROUGHS BY
           INCREASING THE NUMBER OF PATIENTS ENROLLED IN NEW NATIONAL CLINICAL
           TRIALS SYSTEM.

                 Directed NCI to fully operationalize its new computer-based clinical trials system for breast,
                 prostate, and colon cancers by next spring. The President and the Vice President directed NCI
                 to fully implement the new system to better enable physicians to enroll patients in trials. He
               . directed them to complete this system for breast, colon and prostate cancer by next spring and to
                 expedite this simplified system for other cancers as well. This historic effort will ensure that
                 physicians are informed about cutting edge cancer clinical trials and will allow them to enroll
                 patients on the spot. This effort will gives tens of thousands of cancer patients improved access
                 cutting edge cancer clinical trials and also speed up answers on the efficacy of new treatments.

               Challenged Congress to pass a bipartisan initiative that authorizes coverage of cancer
               clinical trials for Medicare beneficiaries. Americans over the age of 65 make up half of all
               cancer patients, and are 10 times more likely to get cancer than younger Americans. However,
               older Americans frequently cannot participate in cutting edge cancer clinical trials because
               Medicare does not pay for patient costs for cancer clinical trials. The President and Vice
               President renewed the call on Congress to pass a proposal, similar to legislation supported by
               Senators Mack and Rockefeller, that authorizes coverage of clinical trials for Medicare
               beneficiaries without harming the Trust Fund.

           NEW STEPS TO IMPROVE QUALITY OF CARE FOR CANCER PATIENTS AND
           SURVIVORS

               Renewed call on Congress to pass a strong enforceable bipartisan patients' bill of rights that
               would assure cancer patients high quality care. The President and the Vice President urged
               Congress to stop delaying and pass a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights. The patients' bill of
               rights would provide many critical protections for patients with cancer including access to the
               specialists they need and continuity of care protections that prevents patients from having abrupt
               changes in care in the middle of treatment.

               Unveiled groundbreaking research grants to examine how to prevent cancer recurrence,
               understand the lifelong impact of cancer treatment, and other quality of life issues for cancer
               survivors. The Vice President announced that the NCI is releasing $15 million in new cancer
               survivorship grants to fund top-of-the-line research to examine the impact of this disease on
               patients and their families. Specifically, researchers will examine the long-term effects of
               treatments, how to prevent reoccurrence, the impact of cancer on families, and new strategies to
               improve the quality of life for cancer survivors and their families.


           APPROVING NEW CUTTING EDGE DRUGS THAT PATIENTS CAN ACCESS.



      Announced that FDA has approved a record number of cancer drugs and that cancer
      patients and their advocates are fully integrated in the FDA. In 1996, the President launched
      the FDA Initiative on Reinventing the Regulation of Cancer Drugs. Since that time, the FDA
      Division of Oncology Drug Products has approved more than twice as many new therapies as in
      the three years prior to the initiative.

      Urged Congress to confirm Jane Henney, the first woman oncologist nominated as FDA
      Commissioner. The President and Vice President urged the Senate not to adjourn without
      confirming Dr. Jane Henney, the first woman oncologist to be nominated as FDA Commissioner.

  USING NEW TECHNOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO FIGHT CANCER

      Issued nationwide challenge for new technological approaches to fight cancer. Winning the
      war against cancer requires innovative, out-of-the-box approaches that have never been considered
      to prevent, detect, treat, and one day cure this disease. Today, the Director ofNCI is issuing an
      $48 million challenge to utilize new technologies, ranging from military defense to interplanetary
      probes to engineering to computer technology, to prevent, detect, and treat cancer.

  URGING CONGRESS TO PASS COMPREHENSIVE TOBACCO LEGISLATION

      The President and Vice President are fighting against the leading cause of preventable
      cancer -- tobacco. Today they reminded Americans that they need a Congress that has the
      courage to pass comprehensive tobacco legislation to stop kids from smoking.




                                  Automated Records Management System
                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


