RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Kate P. Donovan ( CN=Kate P. Donovan/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-SEP-1998 20:46:36.00

SUBJECT:   C/J/S; INTERIOR; DC APPROPS LETTERS

TO: Julie M. Anderson ( CN=Julie M. Anderson/OU=WHCCTF/O=EOP@EOP [ WHCCTF 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: RUDMAN_M@Al@CD@VAXGTWY    RUDMAN_M@Al@CD@VAXGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1 ) (NSC)
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Todd Stern   CN=Todd Stern/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Kerri A. Jones ( CN=Kerri A. Jones/OU=OSTP/O=EOP@EOP [ OSTP 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Kathleen A. McGinty ( CN=Kathleen A. McGinty/OU=CEQ/O=EOP@EOP [ CEQ 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Martha Foley ( CN=Martha Foley/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sally Katzen ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: John Podesta ( CN=John Podesta/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert M. Shireman ( CN=Robert M. Shireman/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Peterson ( CN=Michelle Peterson/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: G. E. DeSeve ( CN=G. E. DeSeve/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jeffrey M. Smith ( CN=Jeffrey M. Smith/OU=OSTP/O=EOP@EOP [ .OSTP 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Wesley P. Warren ( CN=Wesley P. Warren/OU=CEQ/O=EOP@EOP [ CEQ 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Lisa M. Kountoupes ( CN=Lisa M. Kountoupes/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )


READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Ron Klain ( CN=Ron Klain/O=OVP@OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Rahm I. Emanuel ( CN=Rahm I. Emanuel/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: FARRAR_J@Al@CD@VAXGTWY ( FARRAR_J@Al@CD@VAXGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1 )   (NSC)
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Victoria A. wachino ( CN=Victoria A. Wachino/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Robert L. Nabors ( CN=Robert L. Nabors/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Lisa Zweig ( CN=Lisa Zweig/Ou=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Charles Konigsberg ( CN=Charles Konigsberg/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Shannon Mason ( CN=Shannon Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/Ou=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jessica L. Gibson ( CN=Jessica L. Gibson/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Rosemary Evans ( CN=Rosemary Evans/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Adrienne C. Erbach ( CN=Adrienne C. Erbach/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Peter A. Weissman ( CN=Peter A. Weissman/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Judy Jablow ( CN=Judy Jablow/OU=CEQ/O=EOP@EOP [ CEQ 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Charles R. Marr ( CN=Charles R. Marr/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Elizabeth Gore ( CN=Elizabeth Gore/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )


READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jonathan H. Adashek ( CN=Jonathan H. Adashek/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO ) .)
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Kevin S. Moran ( CN=Kevin S. Moran/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below are draft conferees letters for three appropriations bills: 1)
C/J/S; 2) Interior; and 3) District of Columbia. We aim to send all three
letters by cob Tuesday, 9/29.  Please review & provide comments by 1pm,
Tuesday. Thank you very much.




==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D82)MAIL41138417T.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750433A090000010A02010000000205000000EOC00000000200000C39A6B5C1CE8A86DC04FF
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

The Honorable Bob Livingston
Chainnan
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Mr. Chainnan:

        This letter provides the Administration's views on the Commerce, Justice, and State, the
Judiciary, and Related Agencies Appropriations Bill, FY 1999, as passed by the House and by
the Senate. As the conferees develop a final version of the bill, your consideration ofthe
Administration's views would be appreciated.

        The Administration appreciates the Congress' support for many of the President's
priorities within the 302(b) allocation. For example, we appreciate the funding levels provided
by both the House and the Senate for law enforcement programs in general and the COPS
program in particular. Funding COPS at the requested level of $1.4 billion is consistent with the
Balanced Budget Agreement and would enable us to achieve the goal of hiring 100,000
additional police officers by the year 2000.

         However, the allocation is simply insufficient to make the necessary investments in other
critical programs funded by this bill. The only way to achieve the appropriate investment level
is to offset discretionary spending by using savings in other areas. The President's FY 1999
Budget proposes levels of discretionary spending for FY 1999 that confonn to the Bipartisan
Budget Agreement by making savings in mandatory and other programs available to help finance
this spending. In the Transportation Equity Act, Congress -- on a broad, bipartisan basis -- took
similar action in approving funding for surface transportation programs paid for with mandatory
offsets. We want to work with the Congress on mutually agreeable mandatory and other offsets
that would be used to increase high-priority discretionary programs, including those funded by
this bill. In addition, we hope that the Congress will reduce funding for lower priority and
unrequested discretionary programs, and redirect funding to programs of higher priority.

        The Administration has very serious concerns, discussed below, with the Congress'
inadequate funding of a number of priority programs, as well as with objectionable language
provisions. If the bill presented to the President does not address these issues, the President's
senior advisers would recommend that he veto the bill.

Legal Services Corporation

       The Administration appreciates the funding level of $300 million provided for the Legal
Services Corporation (LSC) in the Senate bill. While we acknowledge the House amendment to
increase funding above the House Committee level, the resulting House funding level for LSC
remains unacceptable. The House version of the bill would fund LSC at $250 million, $33
million below the FY 1998 level and $90 million below the President's request of$340 million.
The House level is 38 percent below the FY 1995 level of $400 million and calls into question
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

the Government's commitment to ensure that all Americans have access to the judicial system.
In addition, the Supreme Court's recent ruling that interest on lawyer trust accounts cannot be
used to generate resources for civil legal services eliminates a funding source that provided LSC
programs with more than $57 million last year. We urge the conferees to fully fund the
President's request.

Department of Commerce

         Decennial Census. The language in the House bill that would release funds for only the
first half of FY 1999 is unacceptable. It is critical that the Congress provide full-year funding
for the Decennial Census without any restrictions on the use of statistical sampling. Delays or
disruptions would unacceptably complicate the management of this massive operation. We
strongly urge the conferees to remove the onerous House language restrictions and provide
funding that will allow the Census Bureau to implement its current plan. This plan was
developed by statistical experts and is based on recommendations from the National Academy of
Sciences, which found that regardless of the resources committed, the methodologies employed
in the past could not achieve satisfactory accuracy. The statistical methods incorporated in the.
Bureau's plan would produce the most accurate census possible and virtually eliminate the large
undercounts of minorities, children, and other groups that occurred in the 1990 census.

        National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The Administration urges Congress
to fully fund priority programs, including: the Clean Water Initiative, including the Coastal
Non-point program, to protect coastal communities; the GLOBE program, to promote scientific
discovery and student achievement; Endangered Species Act and Magnuson-Stevens Act
implementation; the Global Change Program, to understand the implications of extreme weather
events such as EI Nino; and, the National Weather Service, to improve services that inform
communities of severe weather.

       The Administration objects to language in the House-passed bill that would impose
severe personnel and funding limitations on NOAA's executive direction and central
administrative support areas. These restrictions would result in a loss of accountability in the
management of NOAA's operations.

        The Administration urges the conferees to restore funding necessary to maintain existing
contracts, particularly for geostationary spacecraft procurement and polar instrument
development. Both the House and Senate bills fail to include adequate funding to fulfill contract
obligations for the converged polar satellite program and the recently-awarded geostationary
follow-on contract. Renegotiation ofthese contracts would jeopardize satellite continuity for
both civilian and military weather operations and increase costs.

       National Institute for Standards and Technology. The Administration is disappointed by
reductions to the Advanced Technology Program (ATP), which fosters cutting-edge research.
We urge the conferees to provide the President's request for new awards and to drop bill


                                                 2
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
language placing restrictions on new awards that reduce ATP' s ability to manage carryover
balances effectively. Also, the Administration is concerned that Congress' exclusion of the
requested advance appropriation for the Advanced Measurement Laboratory would increase costs
and delay completion of the facility by at least a year.

        Statistics Initiatives. The Administration is concerned that both the House and Senate
bills do not include adequate funding for high-priority statistical initiatives, particularly the
improvement of National Account measures, the Poverty Measure initiative, and the Continuous
Measurement program, which will provide annual demographic information on the population
and eliminate the need for the "long form" in the 2010 Census.

        National Information Infrastructure Program. The Administration urges the conferees to
fully fund the President's request for the National Information Infrastructure Grants Program,
which provides seed money for innovative projects that deploy, use, and evaluate advanced
information technology.

        Economic Development Administration (EDA). The Administration is concerned about
the funding level for EDA in the Senate-passed bill. EDA assists distressed communities in
dealing with the burdens imposed by industry downsizing and international trade agreements and
has achieved significant results in creating jobs, leveraging private sector dollars, and increasing
local tax bases.

Agricultural Guest Workers

         The Administration strongly urges the conferees to delete provisions in the Senate-passed
bill that would create a new agricultural guest worker program. We believe that the Agricultural
Job Opportunity, Benefits, and Security Act of 1998 is likely to increase illegal immigration to
the U.S., reduce job opportunities for legal U.S. farm workers, and depress wages and work
standards for U.S. farm workers. These provisions, therefore, are unacceptable. Consistent with
the findings and recommendations of two bi-partisan commissions -- the Commission on
Immigration Reform and the Commission on Agricultural Workers -- the President opposes a
new guest worker program. However, the Administration shares the goal of assuring an
adequate, predictable labor supply of farm workers and will work with the Congress to develop
reforms to the current program to ensure that it responds to agricultural needs while protecting
U.S. farm workers.

Small Business Administration

       The Administration strongly objects to the funding levels for Small Business
Administration (SBA) disaster loans and operating expenses. We urge the conferees to restore
funding so that SBA may continue to provide vital services to the Nation's small business
community and assistance to the victims of natural disasters.



                                                 3
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

        The House's funding level for SBA's Salaries and Expenses account regular operating
expenses represents a 29-percent reduction from the President's request and includes a
requirement that all of the reduction be taken from headquarters functions. This funding level
would require a reduction in staff of more than 1,300 staff years through severe
reductions-in-force. Not even the elimination of all headquarters employees would satisfy the
House Report's requirement that all reductions be taken solely from non-district Offices.

        The Senate mark of $94 million to administer the Disaster Loan Program is a 43-percent
reduction from the President's request. Such a drastic reduction in funding to originate and
service disaster loans would result in the cessation ofloans and services to the victims of natural
disasters by the beginning of calendar year 1999.

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission

       The Administration strongly urges the conferees to fully fund the President's request of
$279 million for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), $18.5 million above
the House level and $25.4 million above the Senate level. The additional resources are essential
and would allow EEOC to reduce the backlog of pending complaints and implement
much-needed reforms in the way all complaints are managed, including an enhanced alternative
dispute resolution program. We look forward to working with the Congress to provide funding
for EEOC and other programs included in the President's civil rights enforcement initiative.

Department of Justice

       The Administration appreciates the Congress'continued support for law
enforcement and other Department of Justice activities. However, as discussed below, we
are concerned about Congress' action in a number of areas.

       Imposition of State Ethics Rules. The House-passed bill includes unacceptable
language that would impose State ethics rules on Federal attorneys and establish an
independent board that could fire Federal agents, prosecutors, and civil law enforcement
attorneys. These provisions would undermine Federal law enforcement by subjecting
Department of Justice attorneys to multiple and inconsistent State rules of conduct,
transferring to the States the authority to regulate the conduct of Federal attorneys in the
performance of their Federal law enforcement duties. For example, this legislation would
hamper investigations of drug operations across State lines as well as other
multi-jurisdiction investigations such as the Oklahoma City bombing investigation.

       Brady Act Implementation. The Senate bill contains unacceptable language that
would undermine implementation of the Brady Act and the National Instant Check
System. The Administration urges the conferees to reject this language and to continue to
work with the Administration to keep guns out of the hands of criminals, the mentally
unstable, and other prohibited purchasers.


                                                 4
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

        Immigration and Naturalization Service Examination and User Fees. The Senate
bill inappropriately diverts $166 million in receipts from the Immigration and
Naturalization Service's (INS's) Immigration Examination and User Fee accounts for
expenses not directly related to the immigration services for which they are assessed. In
addition, the Department of Justice has forwarded a reprogramming action for $171
million to address a funding shortfall in the Examination Fee account and provide
necessary resources to reduce the citizenship application backlog and implement
management reforms. The Senate recommendation would exacerbate this funding
shortfall. The Administration urges the conferees to ensure that immigration fees are used
to reduce the backlog of pending citizenship applications, as well as to approve the
reprogramming of departmental resources for naturalization process reengineering and
application backlog reduction.

        Winstar. The Justice Department critically needs resources to fund the Winstar
litigation, in which the Department is defending against $20 to $30 billion in claims against
the Government. The Administration appreciates the Senate's willingness to fund
Winstar, but opposes the Senate's approach to funding for Wins tar, which would require
substantial reductions to the litigating divisions' other activities, including Civil Rights,
Civil, Criminal, and other legal divisions.

        Title V -- At-Risk Children's Grant Program. The Administration urges the conferees to
provide the $95 million requested for the At-Risk children's proposal. The At-Risk proposal
supports community programs that prevent young people from becoming involved in the criminal
justice system, including mentoring, truancy prevention, and gang intervention.

       Drug Testing and Intervention. The Administration urges the conferees to provide the
$85 million requested for the drug testing and intervention program. Systematic drug testing is a
proven, cost-effective means of using the coercive power of the criminal justice system to move
non-violent offenders into drug treatment programs.

        Protection Against Chemical and Biological Weapons. We appreciate the Congress'
support of the Administration's efforts to combat terrorism, particularly the use of chemical and
biological weapons. However, we encourage the conferees to fully fund all of the items
requested by the Administration, and, in particular, detection equipment for State and local bomb
squads.

        Protection Against Attacks on Critical Infrastructure. The Administration urges the
conferees to provide the full $34 million requested for expenses related to protection of the
Nation's critical infrastructure, including funding for potential transfer to the Department of
Commerce's Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office and for the FBI's National Infrastructure
Protection Center. Failure to provide requested funding for these initiatives would endanger the
Government's efforts to fight cybercrime.



                                                5
                                                                          HeX-Dump Conversion


        Indian Country. While the Senate mark for Indian Country criminal justice assistance is
preferable to the House level, we urge the conferees to fully fund the Administration's request,
including FBI and U.S. Attorneys resources. This initiative seeks to provide much-needed funds
to address a serious public safety crisis.

International Affairs Programs

        On September 22nd, the President transmitted an FY 1998 emergency supplemental
funding request to address urgent needs relating to the terrorist bombings of the U.S.
embassies in Nairobi, Kenya and Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania. In consultation with Congress,
the Administration has prepared this request and looks forward to working with Congress
to enact this proposal as quickly as possible. We are encouraged by the strong bipartisan
support and commitment to protect U.S. citizens and U.S. interests around the world
including our overseas official presence. In this regard, the Administration urges support
for the FY 1999 request for various operating accounts, which are needed in addition to the
Emergency Supplemental to support our overseas presence and provide the annual funds
for security programs and other activities.

        State Department Operations. The Administration appreciates the Congress' support for
the Department of State's Diplomatic and Consular Programs and Salaries and Expenses
accounts. However, both versions of the bill include reductions to, or unrequested earmarks in,
these accounts totaling over $30 million. Such reductions would prevent the Department from
meeting expected wage and price increases, covering critical overseas staffing gaps, and
addressing other infrastructure shortfalls. Further, the exclusion of $38 million from the
House-passed bill for information technology improvements in the Capital Investment Fund
would jeopardize the Department's effort to achieve Y2K compliance. In addition, the
administration supports the Senate's permanent extension of the Machine Readable Visa
authority and opposes the cap on this authority in the House-passed bill. The House version
would limit the Department's ability to execute the President's Border Security Program.

        International Organizations and Peacekeeping. The Administration is concerned that
funding reductions and earmarks, especially in the Senate version, for the Contributions to
International Organizations (CIO) and Contributions for International Peacekeeping Activities
(CIP A) accounts would increase arrears and impair the ability of the United States to address
foreign policy interests through the mechanism of U.N. peacekeeping. Given uncertainties in
the Balkan region and elsewhere, the Administration urges that the CIP A request level be
provided. The Administration is also concerned that the CIO account be crafted in a
manner that allows sufficient payments to be made to the United Nations before December
31st in order to avoid a loss of vote by the United States in the U.N. General Assembly.

        The Administration appreciates the steps the Congress has taken to fund the request for
arrearage payments this year. We want to work with the Congress to ensure that these funds are
available in a timely fashion to retain our influence in these organizations and to identify reform


                                                 6
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

measures that further U.S. interests. However, we strongly oppose the authorization
requirement in both versions of the bill that is intended to subject this important foreign policy
measure to the unrelated issue of family planning policy.

        The Administration strongly believes that activities relating to the Comprehensive
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty should be funded at the $29 million level, as requested in the
Nonproliferation, Anti-terrorism, Demining, and Related Programs account. We oppose the
House-passed bill's proposal to provide up to $15 million for these needs by transfer from the
CIO account without any increase in funding.

         United States Information Agency. The Administration is very concerned about
reductions to the United States Information Agency (USIA), which both the House and Senate
fund below the President's request, by $30 million and $68 million, respectively. Given that the
USIA request is virtually at the FY 1998 level, any reductions would hurt core public diplomacy
activities, Year 2000 compliance, critical broadcasting activities, including broadcasting to
Africa, and important grant programs. The Senate-passed version of the bill is partiCUlarly
problematic because it severely underfunds international information programs by $35 million
(most of which is due to the bill's omission of funding for overseas administrative costs) and
broadcasting programs by $46 million. For broadcasting, the reduction would require a personnel
reduction-in-force, eliminate broadcast language services, and defer necessary capital and
technical radio modernization improvements.

        Jerusalem. The Administration strongly objects to provisions in the Senate bill
concerning Jerusalem that would intrude impermissibly upon the President's constitutional
authority to conduct diplomacy and determine recognition and would undermine ongoing efforts
to promote a peaceful resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

        Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. The Administration strongly opposes the House provision
that seeks to curtail funding for U.s. participation in the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty's Standing
Consultative Commission (SCC). The Administration has made clear that the 1997
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) referred to in the House language will be sent to the
Senate for advice and consent as soon as Russia ratifies START II; while we will continue to
meet with other states in the SCC to discuss Treaty-related issues, the MOU will not be
implemented without Senate approval. (Twice-yearly meetings of the SCC are required under
the Treaty, which was ratified by the Senate in 1972 by a vote of 96 to 3. The SCC deals with
Treaty related issues and works to resolve disputes and ensure compliance.)

         Property Claims. The Administration strongly opposes language in the House-passed
bill that would prevent intervention by the Justice Department and other agencies in certain U.S.
court proceedings to seize property of foreign governments designated as state sponsors of
terrorism. Such a measure likely would result in seizures of property in direct violation of U.S.
statutory and treaty law and in giving priority to certain U.S. claimants over long-standing,
legitimate claims by other U.S. citizens. It could also lead to costs incurred by the United States


                                                 7
                                                                                                ement System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

 in the event of judgments for foreign governments, retaliation against U.S. diplomatic properties
abroad, and seizure of property where the United States is claiming an interest in actual
ownership of the property. Moreover, this provision would undermine the Administration's
ability to protect the interests ofthe United States in U.S. courts.

          International Emergency Economic Powers Act. The Administration opposes language
in the Senate-passed bill that would limit the President's ability to impose sanctions under the
International Emergency Economics Powers Act. The provision would interfere with the
President's authority to target sanctions in specific situations, restricting and important foreign
po Ii cy too I.

         Vietnam and Haiti. The Administration is concerned that language in both versions of
the bill regarding Vietnam would unconstitutionally constrain the President's authority with
respect to the conduct of diplomacy. In addition, language in the Senate-passed bill regarding
Haiti purports, in some circumstances, to limit the President's unfettered constitutional authority
to "receive ambassadors and other public ministers."

Federal Communications Commission

        The Administration is concerned that both versions of the bill exclude funding for the
Federal Communications Commission's (FCC's) scheduled move to the Portals complex, and
that the House bill provides none of the FCC's requested increases. Denial of funding for
Portals would impair the FCC's ability to implement the mandates of the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 and carry out critical mission operations. The House's overall level could require an
agency-wide furlough or reduction-in-force.

Internet Regulation

        The Administration strongly supports the objectives of provisions in the Senate-passed
bill regarding Internet regulation. However, the Administration has concerns about the
provisions as currently drafted ahd urges the conferees to delete them. Instead, we look forward
to working with Congress to develop legislation that will address our mutual goals through the
authorization process. Specifically, the Administration supports legislation that would require
every school and library using the e-rate to certify that it has developed a plan to protect its
schoolchildren from inappropriate content. Such legislation cannot follow a "one-size-fits-all"
approach that could interfere with local judgments about how to best address the problem. In
addition, while we share the important goal of empowering parents and teachers to protect
minors from harmful material that is distributed commercially over the World Wide Web,
imposing Federal criminal penalties for such distribution is inadvisable at this time. Such a new
criminal statute could divert investigative and prosecutorial resources from combating hard core
traffickers in child pornography. Moreover, because such a provision could be subject to serious
constitutional challenge, it is important to carefully address the constitutional questions before



                                                 8
                                                                       Hex-Dump C           . anagement System
                                                                                    On versIOn

enacting any Internet content regulation. Given the progress that the private sector has made
and is continuing to make in empowering parents and teachers to protect minors from harmful
material, there is no need to rush an appropriations rider now without due consideration of these
issues.

Year 2000 Computer Conversion

         In the FY 1999 Budget, the President requested more than $1 billion for Year 2000
(Y2K) computer conversion. In addition, the budget anticipated that additional requirements
would emerge over the course of the year and included an allowance for emergencies and other
unanticipated needs. On September 2nd, the President transmitted to the Congress a request
for $3.25 billion in FY 1998 contingent emergency funding for Y2K computer conversion
activities. This supplemental request would create a funding mechanism that is consistent with
both the needs anticipated in the President's budget and the Senate's action creating a $3.25
billion contingent emergency reserve to provide the resources and the flexibility necessary to
respond to critical unanticipated Y2K-related requirements. It is essential to make Y2K funding
available quickly and flexibly. Efforts to defer action on the emergency fund in the Treasury
and General Government appropriations bill are very troubling, particularly in light of the fact
that several appropriations bills -- including the House version of Commerce, Justice, State -- do
not include funding for base Y2K requests.

      Additional Administration concerns are contained in the enclosure. We look forward to
working with the conferees to address our mutual concerns.

                                             Sincerely,




                                             Jacob J. Lew
                                             Director



                    Identical Letter Sent to The Honorable Bob Livingston,
                 The Honorable David R. Obey, The Honorable Harold Rogers,
                  The Honorable Alan Mollohan, The Honorable Ted Stevens,
                  The Honorable Robert C. Byrd, The Honorable Judd Gregg,
                             and The Honorable Ernest F. HolJings




                                                9
                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                       Enclosure
                                                                                    (Conference)



                           ADDITIONAL CONCERNS
        H.R. 4276 -- DEPARTMENTS OF COMMERCE, JUSTICE, AND STATE,
    THE JUDICIARY, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS BILL, FY 1999
                (AS PASSED BY THE HOUSE AND BY THE SENATE)


Department of Commerce

      Minority Business Development Agency. Management reforms at the Minority Business
       Development Agency (MBDA) have improved delivery of programs and technical
       assistance, and MBDA has emerged as a stronger, more focused agency. The
       Administration objects to the reduction to MBDA's base made by both the House and the
       Senate and requests restoration of$2.8 million.

Department of Justice

      Bureau of Prisons/Abortion. The Administration urges the conferees to strike language
       that would prohibit the Bureau of Prisons from funding abortions except in cases of rape
       or where the life of the mother is endangered.

      Iuvenile Iustice Block Grant. The Administration is concerned that the Juvenile Justice
       Block Grant program, funded at $250 million in the House-passed bill and $100 million
       in the Senate-passed bill, may authorize a broad and unfocused range of spending. We
       urge the Congress to provide funding for more targeted activities, including direct funds
       for local prosecutors to address juvenile and quality of life crimes.

      Narrowband Communications. , The Administration is disappointed that neither version
       of the bill would provide the $86 million requested to establish a fund for the
       consolidation and coordination of the Department's conversion to narrowband
       communications systems. We urge the conferees to establish such a fund and to restore
       the $24 million in base resources.

      Federal Bureau of Investigation. The Administration asks that the conferees
       provide the $50 million requested for the FBI's Information Sharing Initiative (lSI).
        The House level, $20 million below the request, would prevent the FBI from
       improving its electronic case file information, thereby increasing the effectiveness
       and efficiency of the FBI's investigations. Furthermore, the House reporting
       requirement on lSI would impede the FBI's ongoing efforts to provide critical
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

information technology infrastructure support using existing resources.
                                                                        R D               ......~ement System
                                                                          ex- ump Conversion

e      INS Border Management Strategy. The Administration appreciates Congress'
       support for the Administration's border control initiative. However, both the
       House and Senate marks are insufficient to support our comprehensive, bipartisan
       border management and enforcement strategy. We urge the conferees to fully fund
       the President's request for the border infrastructure and technology, detention
       support, and interior enforcement initiatives.

      Counterdrug Strategy. The Administration strongly opposes Senate Report
       language that would direct the Attorney General to create a new interagency
       counterdrug strategy. The Director of National Drug Control Policy is mandated
       by statute to perform this function; it should not be transferred to the Attorney
       General. However, we understand from a colloquy on the Senate floor that the
       intent of this language is to encourage the Justice Department to work closely with
       ONDCP on implementing the National Drug Control Strategy and ONDCP's
       Performance Measures of Effectiveness. The Report language should be dropped
       or clarified consistent with the colloquy.


                                                   .
       Controlled Substances Act. The Administration has serious concerns about
       sections 118 and 119 ofthe Senate-passed bill, which would weaken the Drug
       Enforcement Administration's authority to regulate the flow of drugs classified as
       controlled substances. The provisions would allow relief for recordkeeping and
       reporting violations. Careless, negligent, or unknowing violations, which are
       properly subject to misdemeanor penalties under current law, create an opportunity
       to divert drugs to illicit channels just as do knowing or intentional violations.

      Antitrust Division. The Administration opposes the Senate-passed bill's provision
       prohibiting Antitrust Division personnel from traveling abroad to encourage a foreign
       country to take an antitrust action. This provision would infringe upon the President's
       constitutional authority to conduct the foreign relations of the United States.

      Resources for Combating Terrorism. Section 117 of the Senate bill sets forth
       requirements for reporting resources devoted to combating terrorism. The
       Administration is pleased to provide data on these very important efforts. However, the
       bill proscribes a format and detail that will be difficult and burdensome to provide. In
       addition, there are other statutory requirements for reporting resources devoted to
       combating terrorism. Flexibility is essential in order to develop a meaningful report that
       can satisfy multiple requirements.

Nursing Relief for Disadvantaged Areas

      The Administration opposes the Nursing Relief for Disadvantaged Areas Act of 1998,
       which has been included in the Senate-passed bill. This legislation is unnecessary, since



                                               2
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

       no national nursing shortage exists; it duplicates currently authorized employment visa
       programs; and, it fails to provide adequate protections for U.S. workers. We urge the
       conferees to drop this objectionable provision.

Environmental Riders

      The Administration objects to a provision of section 619 of the Senate bill that would
       require certain Exxon Valdez settlement funds to be spent only for grants for marine
       research and community and economic restoration. This language is contrary to the
       Clean Water Act and a court-ordered consent decree that require that the State and
       Federal natural resource trustees determine how these funds should best be used. In
       addition, section 208 ofthe Senate bill would create an executive committee within the
       North Pacific Research Board. The Board does not include a representative from the
       Department of the Interior. The Administration believes that the Department should be a
       member of the executive committee because of its major program responsibilities within
       the State of Alaska.

Department of State

      Emergencies in the Diplomatic and Consular Service. The Administration prefers
       the House version of the Emergencies in the Diplomatic and Consular Service and
       Representation Allowances accounts over the Senate version, which would transfer
       funds from the Emergencies account into the Representation Allowances account.

      Personnel Details. The Administration opposes language in the Senate report purporting
       to limit the detail of personnel by the Department of State. These details serve a variety
       of interests, including obtaining information on threats to U.S. missions abroad, recruiting
       of talented persons to the Foreign Service, and providing expertise to other agencies and
       offices in the U.S. Government that address foreign policy matters.

      U.N. Budget Certification. The Administration opposes the House version's
       semi-annual U.N. budget certification, which withholds $100 million of the $297 million
       payment to the U.N. which is funded in the CIO account. The withholding requirement
       is excessive and it exacerbates our funding problems with the U.N. The provision also
       ignores extraordinary requirements and is inconsistent with the U.N. budget process.

     Certification on International Organizations. The Administration opposes the
      certification process contained in the Senate report regarding the overhead costs of
      international organizations. The most critical work of many of these organizations
      is to support meetings of technical and policy experts from member states. This
      certification process could have the effect of creating additional arrears and
      detracting from the' ability of the United States to achieve meaningful reforms. The
      Administration would consider an annual certification patterned after that


                                                3
contained in H.R. 1757.       Hex-Dump Conversion




                          4
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
Office of the United States Trade Representative

      The Administration urges the conferees to provide the Senate level -- full funding of the
       President's request -- for the Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR)
       and to restore bill language giving USTR no-year funding availability for up to $2.5
       million of the appropriation. In addition, we request that the conferees and strike the
       Senate provision directing four USTR employees to study the Canadian Wheat Board.

Other International Programs

      The Administration urges the conferees to provide the Senate-passed level for the Anns
       Control and Disannament Agency and is concerned about potential reductions for the
       Asia Foundation, the American Institute in Taiwan, and the International Commissions.
       Such reductions would place a disproportionate burden on the operating budgets of these
       small agencies.




                                               5
                                        Hex-Dump Conversion




The Honorable David R. Obey
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Representative Obey:


The Honorable Harold Rogers
Chairman
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice,
  State, and Judiciary Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Mr. Chairman:


The Honorable Alan Mollohan
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice,
  State, and Judiciary Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Representative Mollohan:



The Honorable Ted Stevens
Chairman
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Mr. Chairman:




The Honorable Robert C. Byrd
Committee on Appropriations
                                        Hex-Dump Conversion




United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Senator Byrd:


The Honorable Judd Gregg
Chainnan
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice,
  State, and Judiciary Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Mr. Chainnan:


The Honorable Ernest F. Hollings
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice,
  State, and Judiciary Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Senator Hollings:
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion




The Honorable Bob Livingston
Chairman
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Mr. Chairman:

        The purpose of this.letter is to provide the Administration's views on H.R. 4193 and S.
2237, the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Bill, FY 1999, as
passed by the House and as reported by the Senate Appropriations Committee, respectively. As
the conferees develop a final version of the bill, your consideration of the Administration's views
would be appreciated. Due to inadequate funding levels for priority programs and at least 30
objectionable language riders, discussed below, the President's senior advisers would recommend
that he veto the bill if it were presented to him as approved by the House and as reported by the
Senate Committee.

        The Administration appreciates efforts by the House and Senate to accommodate certain
of the President's priorities within the 302(b) allocation. However, the allocation is simply
insufficient to make the necessary investments in programs funded by this bill. The only way to
achieve the appropriate investment level is to offset discretionary spending by using savings
in other areas.

       The President's FY 1999 Budget proposes levels of discretionary spending for FY
1999 that conform to the Bipartisan Budget Agreement by making savings in mandatory
and other programs available to help finance this spending. In the Transportation Equity
Act, Congress -- on a broad, bipartisan basis -- took similar action in approving funding
for surface transportation programs together with mandatory offsets. In addition, this
year, as in the past, such mandatory offsets have been approved by the House and Senate
in other appropriations bills. The Administration urges the conferees to consider such
mandatory proposals for other priority discretionary programs, including those funded
through this bill.

       The Administration's specific concerns with funding and language provisions of the
House-passed and Senate Committee-reported bills are discussed below. The
Administration recognizes that negotiations are ongoing, and that some of these issues may
be resolved prior to conference.
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
Departments of the Interior and Agriculture

      The Administration strongly objects to inadequate funding provided by the
House-passed and Senate Committee bills for high priority programs within these two
departments, including:

             Everglades restoration and other land acquisition funding from the Land
              and Water Conservation Fund;

             the Clean Water Action Plan to clean up America's ground and surface
              waterways;

             the Disaster Information Network providing enhanced data to protect
              Americans and reduce economic loss;

             BIA education operations and school construction, the Indian Country law
              enforcement initiative, and the land consolidation pilot project;

             Indian Trust System reforms under BIA and the Office of Special Trustee;

             the Endangered Species Programs, including landowner incentive grants;

             key Forest Service natural resource protection, road maintenance, and
              general administration programs, while increasing the timber program by
              $12 million in the House-passed bill and $20 million in the Senate Committee
              bill; and,

             finally, specific earmarks for many unrequested construction and land
              projects that would limit the land management agencies' ability to allocate
              funds for high priority needs.

         The Administration urges the conferees to report a clean bill that does not attempt
to roll back environmental protections and circumvent the public hearing process by
attaching riders to appropriation bills. Unfortunately, the House-passed bill and Senate
Committee bill contain at least 30 objectionable riders, 28 in bill language and two in report
language. The Administration strongly objects to such language, including provisions in both
bills that would:

             unwisely tertninate the Interior Columbia Basin Ecosystem Management Project
              covering parts of six Northwest States;

             transfer the jurisdiction over the valued Land Between The Lakes National
              Recreation Area from the Tennessee Valley Authority, where it has been
              successfully managed for over 35 years, to the U.S. Forest Service, a
              disruptive change that would involve additional transition costs without

                                               2
                                                                        Hex-Dwnp Conversion
               improving service; and,

              establish specific tenns and conditions for the abolishment of purchaser road
               credits, including the requirement to calculate payments to States based on the
               value of the road.

       The Administration strongly objects to provisions of the House-passed bill that would:

              remove 75 acres in Florida from the coastal barrier protection system, providing
               taxpayer subsidies for private development of environmentally fragile barrier
               islands;

              impose a road easement across the Chugach National Forest in Alaska that is
               inconsistent with the 1982 agreement reached between the Government and the
               Chugach Alaska Corporation, thereby preventing the Government from making
               modifications to protect the environment while authorizing environmentally
               damaging management practices and undennining an ongoing discussion to
               detennine road access options based on the latest survey and environmental
               analysis;

             shift $67 million from the General Administration to Wildland fire suppression
              operations;

             prohibit improvements -- even planning or design of improvements -- to
              Pennsylvania Avenue in front of the White House; and,

             prevent the BIA and the Indian Health Service from entering into any new or
              expanded self-detennination ("638") contracts or self-governance compacts with
              tribes, contrary to our government-to-government policy.

        The Administration commends the Senate for addressing many of the problems with
section 129 concerning Tribal Priority Allocations but strongly objects to provisions of the
Senate Committee bill that would:

             establish an unprecedented easement for the community of King Cove for a road
              and utilities across a wilderness area in Alaska in the Izembek National Wildlife
              Refuge;

             mandate a high timber offer level on the Tongass National Forest in Alaska,
              regardless of environmental impacts, other resource priorities, and the ongoing
              public process for finalizing the Tongass Forest Plan;

             continue to delay rules that would establish the fair market value for Federal
              and Indian oil leases, costing the Treasury $64 million a year in underpaid
              royalties;

                                                3
    Hex-Dump Conversion




4
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
   delay implementation of needed regulatory improvements of hardrock
    mining on public lands to protect the environment and the Federal treasury;

   amend an authorizing statute, the 1992 Elwha Act, to change significantly the
    congressionally approved plan for restoring Elwha River and Olympic
    National park and leave the National Park Service owning two
    non-compliant dams without the funds to remove tIiem;

   hinder efforts to restore endangered and threatened Pacific salmon runs in
    the Columbia and Snake Rivers;

   require the Forest Service to maximize commercial wood harvesting before
    the agency conducts prescribed burning projects, effectively stopping most
    prescribed burns and endangering lives and property;

   prohibit Grizzly Bear reintroduction into the Selway-Bitteroot area of Idaho
    and Montana;

   prohibit the Secretary from promulgating and implementing regulations to provide
    procedures for class III casino operations on Indian lands and also prohibit the
    initiation of any new rule making (Senate floor amendment 3592);

   amend, in two different provisions, the National Forest Management Act, to
    prohibit forest plan revisions, thus requiring continued use of inadequate
    and dated forest plans -- even beyond their statutory 15 year lifespan;

   prohibit Park Service regulation of commercial fishing in Glacier Bay
    National Park in Alaska;

   place unnecessary limits on Federal land acquisitions in Alaska;

   prevent the Forest Service from charging fair market value for summer
    vacation homes in an Idaho national forest, undermining the current effort to
    reappraise all such leases nationwide;

   require the Forest Service to trade timber in return for restoration practices;

   require unauthorized four-wheel-drive roads to be obliterated before any
    other type of road can be decommissioned, virtually preventing work on
    regular roads that pose serious environmental and safety risks;




                                    5
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
              waive environmental laws and automatically extend the term of grazing
               leases that are undergoing review by the Bureau of Land Management even
               though authority already exists to protect lease holders from termination of
               leases undergoing review;

              undermine the CFO Act and the responsibilities of USDA top management
               by encouraging the Forest Service to select and implement a financial
               computer system that is independent of the Department of Agriculture;

              force the Forest Service to sell all Alaskan timber sales using an outdated,
               impracticable appraisal method that undermines the public return on
               national forest management; and,

              prohibit the Department of the Interior from using FY 1999 funds to transfer
               land into trust status in Minnesota, setting a precedent for limitations on
               trust land acquisition.

       In addition, the Senate Committee Report includes objectionable language,
including language that would:

             require timber sale offers from national forests to be 3.8 billion board feet rather
              than the 3.4 billion board feet assumed in the FY 1999 Budget; and,

             direct the National Park Service to maintain aviation access to. a gravel
              airstrip within the Denali National Park, effectively overturning a 1997
              Environmental Impact Statement calling for eventually closing the airstrip
              and relying on a paved airstrip 10 miles away.

Land and Water Conservation Fund

        The House-passed and Senate Committee bills have underfunded land acquisitions to
protect our national parks, forests, refuges, and public lands. The House-passed bill provides
only $139 million of the $270 million requested, with Everglades land acquisition funds cut by
half. The Senate Committee has provided $233 million of the $270 million requested. This
reduction in funding would prevent the Administration from making significant land acquisitions
such as Cumberland Island National Seashore in Georgia and West Eugene Wetland in Oregon.
The Administration urges the conferees to provide full funding ofthis important priority.

       The Administration objects to the House and Senate Appropriations Committees'
continued inaction in not yet approving the release of a substantial portion of the FY 1998 Title
V priority land acquisition funds. We would like to work with you to resolve this expeditiously.




                                                6
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
Millennium Program

        The Administration is concerned that the House-passed bill does not provide any of the
$50 million requested for the Millennium Program. The Administration appreciates very much
the $13 million provided by the Senate Committee to the National Park Service and the
Smithsonian Institution for Millennium Program projects. We strongly urge the Senate to
provide full funding with maximum flexibility and discretion for allocation in order to preserve
other important cultural and historic treasures for the next millennium that are in danger of
deteriorating beyond repair. Many of these projects are time-sensitive and cannot be delayed.

Department of Energy

       The Administration objects to cuts to the request for Energy Conservation made by
the House and by the Senate Committee -- $177 million and $162 million, respectively.
These cuts would be damaging to progress in partnerships with industry on improved
industrial energy efficiency, development of more efficient autos and trucks, and designs
and materials for more efficient buildings.

        The President's budget requests $36 million for payment to the State of California
for the Retired Teachers System associated with the sale of Elk Hills, which is not included
in either the House or Senate bill. The Administration prefers that this payment be
appropriated consistent with the FY 1996 Defense Authorization Act (P.L. 104-106).

       The Administration would like to work with the conferees to restore funding to
these important Department of Energy programs.

Indian Health Service

         The Administration is concerned that the House-passed and Senate Committee bills do
not include funding for many requested programs. In particular, neither the House nor Senate
Committee bills include the $4 million increase requested for an alcohol and substance abuse
initiative, nor a $10 million increase requested as a part of an HHS-wide effort to reduce health
disparities in minority populations. In addition, the Senate Committee bill does not include the
funding increase requested for first-year construction of the Fort Defiance Health Facility. We
urge the conferees to provide the request levels for these activities.

       The Administration strongly objects to the House and Senate's inclusion of
authorizing language, without hearings or tribal consultation, that requires contract
support costs to be distributed to tribes on a pro-rata (proportional) basis.




                                                7
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
Cultural Agencies

        The Administration appreciates the House and Senate's support for the National
Endowment for the Arts (NEA). We urge the conferees to provide funding for NEA and the
National Endowment for the Humanities at the President's requested level of $136 million each
and for the Institute for Museum and Library Services at the requested level of$26 million.

        Likewise, the Administration appreciates the House and Senate's support for the other
cultural agencies funded by this bill, including the full request for the National Gallery of Art.
However, the Administration urges the conferees to fully fund the John F. Kennedy Center for
the Performing Arts and the Smithsonian's National Museum of the American Indian. The
Administration also urges the conferees to provide the full $40 million request for repair and
restoration in the Smithsonian Institution and the requested funding for digitization of the
Smithsonian collections.

       We look forward to working with the conferees to address our mutual concerns.

                                              Sincerely,




                                              Jacob 1. Lew
                                              Director




                    Identical Letter Sent to The Honorable Bob Livingston,
                 The Honorable David R. Obey, The Honorable Ralph Regula,
                 The Honorable Sidney R. Yates, The Honorable Ted Stevens,
                The Honorable Robert C. Byrd, and The Honorable Slade Gorton




                                                  8
                                    Hex-Dump Conversion




The Honorable David R. Obey
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Representative Obey:


The Honorable Ralph Regula
Chairman
Subcommittee on Interior and
 Related Agencies Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Mr. Chairman:


The Honorable Sidney R. Yates
Subcommittee on Interior and
  Related Agencies Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Representative Yates:


The Honorable Ted Stevens
Chairman
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Mr. Chairman:


The Honorable Robert C. Byrd
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510
                                    Hex-Dump Conversion




Dear Senator Byrd:


The Honorable Slade Gorton
Chainnan
Subcommittee on Interior and
  Related Agencies Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Mr. Chainnan:
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion




The Honorable Bob Livingston
Chairman
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Mr. Chairman:

        The purpose of this letter is to provide the Administration's views on H.R 4380 and S.
2333, the District of Columbia Appropriations Bill, FY 1999, as passed by the House and as
reported by the Senate Appropriations Committee, respectively. As the conferees develop a
final version of the bill, your consideration of the Administration's views would be appreciated.

         The Administration commends the Senate for producing a bill that is consistent with the
goals of the National Capital Revitalization and Self-Government Improvement Act of 1997 and
that is free of extraneous micromanagement provisions that would impose the will of Congress
on the Government of the District of Columbia. Regrettably, the House-passed bill contains
numerous instances of congressional micromanagement, provides insufficient funding for the
D.C. economic development initiative, and includes three highly objectionable provisions. We
urge the conferees to adopt a bill that addresses these concerns.

Objectionable Provisions

        The House-passed bill contains three provisions that would seriously undermine local
control. If these provisions were included in the bill presented to the President, his senior
advisers would recommend that the President veto the bill. These unacceptable provisions are:

      A provision to provide for the use of private school vouchers in the District. The
       Administration would strongly oppose any legislation allowing the use of Federal
       taxpayer funds for private school vouchers. Instead of investing additional resources in
       public schools, vouchers would allow a few selected students to attend private schools
       and would draw resources and attention away from the hard work of reforming public
       schools that serve the overwhelming majority of D.C. students. Establishing a private
       school voucher system in the Nation's Capital would set a dangerous precedent for using
       Federal taxpayer funds for schools that are not accountable to the public.

      A provision that would prohibit adoptions in the District by couples that are unmarried or
       not related by blood. The Administration supports section 149 of the Senate Committee
       bill, The District of Columbia Adoption Improvement Act of 1998. This legislation
       would provide much needed administrative and management reforms in the D.C. Child
       service providers to perform adoption and recruitment services and eliminating all
       administrative barriers to adoption.

      A provision that would prohibit the use of Federal and local funds for needle exchange
       programs and would prohibit private agencies from supporting needle exchange programs
       if they receive Federal or local funds (even ifthe funds used for the needle exchange
       programs are their own).

Economic Development Initiative

         The House-passed bill does not contain funding for critically needed management
reforms or funding to capitalize the locally-chartered National Capital Revitalization Corporation
(NCRC). The Senate Committee bill provides $500,000 to conduct a study and prepare a report
on the feasibility of an economic development corporation in the District and $25 million in
support of management reforms. Like the House, the Senate has not provided any of the $50
million requested in the FY 1999 Budget to capitalize the NCRC. The Administration believes
that an independent economic development corporation is essential in order to ensure effective
management coordination and oversight of projects in the District. Further, we believe that it is
critical to the District's economic future to capitalize the NCRC in FY 1999. The
Administration strongly urges the conferees to allocate additional resources for economic
development.

D.C. Charter Schools

       The Administration appreciates the House's full support of charter schools and public
schools in the District and supports the appropriation of$32.6 million for D.C. charter schools.
We are concerned that the Senate Committee bill does not provide sufficient funding to support
educational services for all the students who wish to attend charter schools and other public
schools in the District of Columbia. We look forward to working with the conferees and with
D.C. Public Schools to ensure that there are adequate resources to allow all eligible charter
schools and their students to receive sufficient funding.

Abortion

        The Administration strongly opposes the language included in both the House-passed and
Senate Committee-reported bills that would prohibit the use of Federal and local funds to pay for
abortions in the District except in those cases where the life of the mother is endangered or in
situations involving rape or incest. The Administration continues to view the prohibition on the
use of local funds as an unwarranted intrusion into the affairs of the District and would support
striking this provision.




                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                       Hex-D~p.Conversion
                                                                              ~:


                                                                                   "

                                    Sincerely,




                                    Jacob J. Lew
                                    Director



            Identical Letter Sent to The Honorable Bob Livingston,
       The Honorable David R. Obey, The Honorable Charles H. Taylor,
         The Honorable James P. Moran, The Honorable Ted Stevens,
        The Honorable Robert C. Byrd, The Honorable Lauch Faircloth,
                       and The Honorable Barbara Boxer




                                                            Automated Records Management SYS!l'm
                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
                                  Hex-Dump Conversion




The Honorable David R. Obey
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Representative Obey: .


The Honorable Charles H. Taylor
Chairman
Subcommittee on District
  of Columbia Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Mr. Chairman:


The Honorable James P. Moran
Subcommittee on District
  of Columbia Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Representative Moran:



The Honorable Ted Stevens
Chairman
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Mr. Chairman:




The Honorable Robert C. Byrd
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
                                Hex-Dump Conversion




Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Senator Byrd:


The Honorable Lauch Faircloth
Chairman
Subcommittee on District
 of Columbia Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Mr. Chairman:


The Honorable Barbara Boxer
Subcommittee on District
 of Columbia Appropriations
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Senatpr Boxer:


