RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-0CT-1998 20:31:41.00

SUBJECT:   H2A -- recruitment

TO: Sally Katzen ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Shannon Mason ( CN=Shannon Mason/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cecilia E. Rouse ( CN=Cecilia E. Rouse/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
AgNet
At today's H-2A meeting, we went over the AgNet proposal that was
developed by OMB. The proposal is attached.

The group agreed that AgNet should be presented as a tool to help
formalize the recruitment process for growers. The key differences
between this proposal and the Wyden-Graham registry are: (1) this would
not replace the growers's postitive recruitment requirements; (2) it would
not serve as a verification system (to verify authorization to work); and
(3) it requires active seaching on the system by growers for workers and
allows workers'a way to search for growers; under the registry system, the
govt. had the responsibility to match workers to growers on the system.

This system could be up and running in about a month, but would take
longer to perfect.   If we proposed this, we would likely want it to be
evaluated after five years, to determine if it useful to growers and
workers.   USDA and DOL agreed that growers could be required to
participate in AgNet in order to participate in the H-2A program.   The
success of the program rests heavily on getting the participation of large
number's of growers and workers.

Verification Issue
Though all agree that the AgNet system could prove very helpful for
growers and workers, it does not solve the fundamental issue of how to
better determine if workers are authorized to work.   The America's Job
Bank folks oppose the sytem being used, in part, to' feed a verification
system. They see AJB (and the proposed AgNet) as an information sharing
network -- not as an enforcement tool of the government.   No other checks
of this kind are done on those who post for jobs.   In fact, the AJB folks
have argued that the less this looks like the government, the more likely
we will get large numbers of participants.  In addition, it may be
problematic to require verification for workers who participate in AgNet,
but not for workers who participate in other parts of America's Job Bank.

The INS does operate employment verification pilots that could be modified
to effectively verify farmworkers.  However, Ceci and I (and OMB) continue


to believe that the responsibility for verifying workers should remain
with the grower. Thus, a grower that finds workers through AgNet would
have the same responsibility to do an 1-9 check as he/she has with workers
recruited by other means.  If the grower wants additional assurances that
his/her workforce is legal, the grower can participate in the INS's em
ployment verification pilot program.

Growers don't want to participate in the employment verification pilot
program b/c if they know their workforce is illegal, they are liable for
sanctions (there is an intent standard for liability in IRCA) , If they
find out their workforce is illegal and don't want to be sanctioned, they
have to use the H2A program, which they characterize as too difficult
(either b/c it is burdensome or b/c it is costly).

Thus, the real issue with verification comes back to cost.


==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D92]MAIL46373718C.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504393100000010A02010000000205000000554200000002000004A23C6C443A6A44EBA10B
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                            DRAFT
                                                                                            10/6/98

                                RECRUITMENT PROPOSAL
             "AMERICA'S AGRICULTURAL LABOR NETWORK (AGNET)"


Problem -- Federal government recruitment assistance.

Growers are required under the H-2A program to conduct positive recruitment efforts prior to
applying for foreign workers. One aspect of this requirement is to post the job opportunity with
the local Employment Service office.

Unfortunately, less than 2% of agricultural job placements are through the local Employment
Service office. Between June 1995 and July 1996, about 190,000 migrant and seasonal farm
 workers sought employment through the U.S. Employment Service State offices and only about
.65,000 were actually placed in agricultural jobs. This method of placement has become
increasingly ineffective for this industry which has become more reliant on using private sector
intermediary labor brokers -- farm labor contractors. The Federal government should re-target
its resources to more effectively aid growers and workers in finding labor and employment.

Proposal -- America's Agricultural Labor Network (AgNet).

The majority oHarm workers find employment through a kinship/friendship network. One
problem with this method is that it spawns and reinforces illegal migration to the U.S.; another is
that it is highly inefficient in a geographically diffuse labor market. Workers spend time trying
to locate employment when they could be earning money. The Federal government could serve
as an information broker by developing a system that allows growers to find workers and workers
to find employment opportunities that meet their needs (e.g., location, duration, type of crop,
etc.). This would benefit growers and workers by having an efficient alternative mechanism to
match workers with employment opportunities.

Model -- America 's Job Bank.

America's Job Bank (AJB) is a partnership between the U.S. Department of Labor and the
state-operated public Employment Service. AJB links these state offices electronically through
an Internet web site. There is no charge to employers or job seekers to use this service.

·      For job seekers, AJB provides a nationwide listing of job opportunities and allows them
       to file a resume that enables employers to find them.

·     For employers, AJB provides a quick way to list job openings, national exposure, and an
      easily accessible applicant pool.
Approximately 900,000 jobs are listed in AJB on an average day.l It takes about 72 hours to

                                                1
                                Hex-Dump Conversion


register with AJB and about 24 hours to list a job vacancy. These times will improve over the
coming year as the software is updated.

America 's Agricultural Labor Network (AgNet).

What is AgNet? America's Agricultural Labor Network (AgNet) would be an information
system devoted to the agriculture industry which would contain job opportunities and worker
resumes. AgNet would be based on AJB, but would be a separate web site. The two sites
would be linked so basic information in AgNet is automatically placed in AJB.

The State Employment Service would serve a similar function, as in AJB, to scan listings for
obvious problems prior to posting on the Internet. This provides some basic quality control.
However, this is not a process for venfying an applicant's immigration status.

What information will be available in AgNet? The job listing would provide the conditions of
employment including location, crop, duration of employment, wages, skills requested, and
whether housing and/or transportation is provided. In addition, it would include information on
how to contact the employer and the required worker disclosures. The worker resumes would
include, among other things, qualifications, desired location and crop, and information on how to
be contacted. The contact and hiring arrangement is between the grower, or FLC, and the
worker, not the government. Examples from AJB are attached. The specific information
included in the system would be modified to reflect the agriculture industry.

The system must meet the challenges of helping workers gain access to it and connecting
English-speaking growers with many Spanish-speaking workers. The system will initially be in
English but to address this concern will eventually be designed in Spanish as well.

Who can use it? This system would be accessible to the public generally including growers,
workers, farm labor contractors, community based organizations2 (CBOs), and unions.
Browsing the system is anonymous. CBOs could serve as a point of contact for workers or
growers. The system could be designed to have "counse1orlbroker accounts" to allow an
organization to search for jobs for multiple workers or list jobs for multiple growers. Such a
design change would likely not be available until later in 1999.

How will workers and growers gain access to the system? Given this is a low-wage industry,
gaining access to AgNet will be a challenge. Some places that may be able to provide access
include local libraries, CBOs, unions, State Employment Service offices, and U.S. Department of

       I Very few of these listings are for agricultural jobs, with only 479 such listings

nationwide on October 5, 1998.

        2 Community based organizations include churches, farm labor organizations, and
agricultural grower organizations.


                                                 2
                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
Agriculture extension offices.

What are the benefits of AgNet? AgNet would be a free service provided to workers and
growers. Ideally, workers would be able to plan their entire employment cycle using this
system. For example, the worker could line-up jobs from Florida up to New York. This would
provide more control and stability for the worker.

Growers would benefit by gaining access to a two-sided recruitment system. Now, growers file
requests for workers with the Employment Service and wait for referrals -- a one-sided system.
Under this system, growers would be able to search for, identify, and contact qualified, available
workers in addition to listing their job openings. Also, the grower would gain exposure to a
national audience of workers. With electronic posting, the grower would have complete control
ofhislher job postings and would be expected to suspend them once hislher jobs had been filled.

Who will own AgNet? AgNet will be owned and operated by a partnership. The partnership
will consist of farm worker and grower organizations, supported by the U.S. Department of
Labor and U.S. Department of Agriculture. The partnership will determine the final design of
the system. Due to the time it would take to establish a partnership, initial implementation of
the system will be through the current AJB partnership between the State Employment Service
and the U.S. Department of Labor.

How will growers and workers learn about the system? The critical link to the success of this
system is buy-in by the farm worker and grower organizations. Given most workers find jobs
through word of mouth, the partnership will have to conduct extensive outreach. In addition to
fliers and newspaper ads, public service announcements on Spanish radio could serve as a good
median. The Federal government could also conduct outreach efforts through its programs
including the U.S. Department of Agriculture extension offices.

How long will it take to set up AgNet? The system could be activated in approximately one
month after initial design modifications are made. It will take additional time to implement
further design changes, requested by the partnership, that reflect this industry's needs. The goal
would be to have xx,OOO job opportunities in AgNet by the end of January, 1999.

Who will pay for AgNet? The Federal government will provide this service through a grant to
the partnership. Initial funding will be provided to the State Employment Service until the
partnership is forined. Given the software for the labor network has already been developed, it
will cost a minimal amount of money to activate this system. Additional customizing of the
system (e.g., Spanish language version or adding the "counselorlbroker" features) will cost a
relatively small amount of money. There will be a separate cost for training and outreach to the
various CBOs and unions.

Preliminary estimates:



                                                3
                           Hex-Dump Conversion


         Year 1:       $       25,000 (annual system costs)
                       $      150,000 (design changes)
                       $            ??? (training and outreach)   *
         Year 2:       $        25,000 (annual system costs)

                       $      100,000 (additional design changes)
                       $            ??? (training and outreach) *

         Year 3:       $       25,000 (annual system costs)
    and out-years      $            ??? (national outreach)

*    This funding level would provide:

         --grants to CBOs and unions for equipment and advertising;
         --funds for computer related training of CBOs and unions; and,
         --national outreach to workers and growers.


