RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-0CT-1998 16:48:57.00

SUBJECT:   Info you Requested reo Adding Tobacco Control to the McCain menu

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This reflects our conversations with Chris and Jeanne. ==================== ATTACHME
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D98]MAIL403585183.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504370040000010A02010000000205000000D1390000000200000A8E85FC4D34682B5FF5AF
0052ACFA8074AC4DAA1FFDF49AA1FA90AB7F48D5A6F1FE3404D61D1DA7C51328B672FA4F41AB89
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                         October 7, 1998


NOTE TO BRUCE AND ELENA

FROM:          Cynthia Rice and Cynthia Dailard

CC:            Chris Jennings and Jeanne Lambrew

SUBJ:          Adding Tobacco Control to McCain Menu

We have attached three versions oflegislative language that could be used to add state tobacco
control efforts to the McCain menu of items on which states must spend half of their settlement
funds. (These edits would add an eighth option to the menu; to require a certain percentage of
the restricted funds to be used for tobacco control efforts, section 4S2(b)(2) listed below would
also have to be amended).

The options vary from least to most detailed. The first version is based on Hansen-Meehan, the
second is a very slimmed down version of McCain, and the third is a somewhat slimmed-down
version of the McCain language. The most detailed option is the Conrad proposal (not attached)
which incorporates all the McCain language. HHS has not yet reviewed these options.

Chris has made a strong argument that we should not be the ones to propose dropping anything
that was on the McCain menu, but that we should instead wait to see if others propose to do so.

Overall, an amendment would need to have the following pieces:

I. Waiver of Medicaid Recovery (To be drafted by Hill)
    Should include:
     A. Requirements on State Spending as a Condition of Waiver
     B. Requirements to Contribute Share of Federal Costs as Condition of Waiver

II. Use of State Settlement Funds (See options below)
     Should include:
     A. What Percent of Funds Restricted
     B. Menu of Program Upon Which Restricted Funds Can Be Spent
     C. Children's Outreach Options

III. Payfor Language (To be drafted by Hill)
       Should require states to pay:
       A. Amount CBO expects federal government to recover from state tobacco settlements
       B. Amount CBO expects federal Medicaid costs will increase due to use of new
        Medicaid outreach options                         .
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
Proposal Based on Hansen-Meehan

Add the following to the state menu   list~d   under McCain sec. 452(b)(2)

(H) state tobacco control activities, which include:
        (i)    public awareness campaigns to discourage the use of tobacco products;
        (ii)   child-oriented and community-based programs to discourage the use of tobacco
               products; and
        Oii)   tobacco use cessation programs, which are consistent with the most recent tobacco
               use cessation guidelines issued by the Agency for Health Care Policy Research or
               are approved as safe and effective for tobacco use cessation by the Food and Drug
               Administration.
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

Proposal Based on McCain

Add the/ollowing to the state menu listed under McCain sec. 452(b)(2)

(H) state tobacco control activities, which include:

       (i)     a media-based counteradvertising campaign to discourage the use of tobacco
               products;
       (ii)    state, community and school-based education and prevention programs to
               discourage the use of tobacco products;
       (iii)   evidence-based tobacco use cessation programs, consistent with the most recent
               tobacco use cessation guidelines issued by the Agency for Health Care Policy
               Research or are approved as safe and effective for tobacco use cessation by the
               Food and Drug Administration; and
       (iv)    activities to enforce youth access restrictions in order to reduce the sale and
               distribution of tobacco products to individuals under 18 years of age.
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
Proposal Based on McCain

Add the/allowing to the state menu listed under McCain sec. 452(b)(2)

(H) state tobacco control activities, which include:
        (i)    evidence-based activities for tobacco use prevention and control, including state,
               community and school-based initiatives;
        (ii)   a statewide campaign to reduce tobacco usage through media-based (such as
               counter-advertising campaigns) and non-media based education, prevention and
               cessation campaigns designed to discourage the use of tobacco products by
               individuals, to encourage those who use such products to quit, and to educate the
               public about the hazards of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke;
        (iii)  evidence-based cessation activities, which are consistent with the most recent
               tobacco use cessation guidelines issued by the Agency for Health Care Policy
               Research or are approved as safe and effective for tobacco use cessation by the
               Food and Drug Administration, including:
               (aa)    evidence-based programs designed to assist individuals to quit their use of
                       tobacco products;
               (bb) training in cessation methods for health professionals;
               (cc)    programs to encourage health insurers and health plans to provide
                       coverage for evidence-based tobacco use cessation interventions or
                       therapies; and
        (iv)   implementing and enforcing a tobacco retailer licensing program in a manner that
               can reasonably be expected to reduce the sale and distribution of tobacco products
               to individuals under 18 years of age.
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
McCain Bill State Spending Language

SEC. 452. GRANTS TO STATES.
 (a) Amounts._ From the amount made available under section 451(a) for each fiscal year, each
State shall receive a grant on a quarterly basis according to a formula.

 (b) Use of Funds.

 (1) Unrestricted funds._ A State may use funds, not to exceed 50 percent of the amount
received under this section in a fiscal year, for any activities determined appropriate by the State.

 (2) Restricted funds._ A State shall use not less than 50 percent of the amount received under
this section in a fiscal year to carry out additional activities or provide additional services under_

 (A) the State program under the maternal and child health services block grant under title V of
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.c. 701 et seq.);

 (B) the State program for child care under the funding for child care under section 418 of the
Social Security Act, notwithstanding subsection (b)(2) of that section;

 (C) the State program for child welfare and abuse under the Federally-funded child welfare and
abuse programs under title IV -B of the Social Security Act;

(D) programs administered within the State under the authority of the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration under title XIX, part B of the Public Health Service Act;

 (E) the Safe and Drug-Free Schools Program under title IV, part A, of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7111 et seq.);

 (F) the Department of Education's Dwight D. Eisenhower Professional Development program
under title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6601 et seq.);
and

 (G) the State Children's Health Insurance Program authorized under title XXlofthe Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.), provided that the amount expended on this program
does not exceed 6 percent of the total amount of restricted funds available to the State each fiscal
year.

 (c) No Substitution of Spending._ Amounts referred to in subsection (b )(2) shall be used to
supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, or local funds provided for any of the programs
described in subparagraphs (A) through (G) of subsection (b )(2). Restricted funds, except as
provided for in subsection (b)(2)(G), shall not be used as State matching funds. Amounts
provided to the State under any of the provisions oflaw referred to in such subparagraph shall
not be reduced solely as a result of the availability of funds under this section.
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
  (d) Federal-State Match Rates._ Matching requirements, as provided in the statutory authority
for the programs described in subsection (b )(2), apply to each program listed under subsection
(b )(2), except for the program described under subsection (b )(2)(B). For the program described
under subsection (b)(2)(B), after an individual State has expended resources sufficient to receive
its full Federal amount under section 4IS(a)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (subject to the
matching requirements in section 4IS(a)(2)(C) of such Act), the Federal share of expenditures
shall be SO percent.

 (e) Maintenance of Effort._ To receive funds under this subsection, States must demonstrate a
maintenance of effort. This maintenance of effort is defined as the sum of_

 (1) an amount equal to 95 percent of Federal fiscal year 1997 State spending on the programs
under subparagraphs (B), (c), and (D) of subsection (b)(2); and

 (2) an amount equal to the product of the amount described in paragraph (1) and_

 (A) for fiscal year 1999, the lower oC

 (i) general inflation as measured by the consumer price index for the previous year; or

 (ii) the annual growth in the Federal appropriation for the program in the previous fiscal year;
and                   .

 (B) for subsequent fiscal years, the lower oC

 (i) the cumulative general inflation as measured by the consumer price index for the period
between 1997 and the previous year; or

 (ii) the cumulative growth in the Federal appropriation for the program for the period between
fiscal year 1997 and the previous fiscal year.

The 95-percent maintenance-of-effort requirement in paragraph (1), and the adjustments in
paragraph (2), apply to each program identified in paragraph (1) on an individual basis.

 (f) Options for Children's Health Outreach._ In addition to the options for the use of grants
described in this section, the following are new options to be added to States' choices for
conducting children's health outreach:

 (1) Expansion of presumptive eligibility option for children._

 (A) In genera\._ Section I 920A(b)(3)(A)(I) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.
I 396r-Ia(b)(3)(A)(I)) is amended_

 (i) by striking "described in subsection (a) or (II) is authorized" and inserting "described in
subsection (a), (II) is authorized"; and
                                                                               Hex-Dump ConveI1ion

 (ii) by inserting before the semicolon ", eligibility for benefits under part A of title IV,
eligibility of a child to receive benefits under the State plan under this title or title XXI, (III) is a
staff member of a public school, child care resource and referral center, or agency administering
a plan under part D of title IV, or (IV) is so designated by the State".

 (B) Technical amendments._ Section 1920A of that Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-la) is amended_

 (i) in subsection (b)(3)(A)(ii), by striking "paragraph (1)(A)" and inserting "paragraph (2)(A)";
and

 (ii)in subsection (c)(2), in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking "subsection
(b){l)(A)" and inserting "subsection (b)(2)(A)".

 (2) Removal of requirement that children's health insurance program allotments be reduced by
costs related to presumptive eligibility determinations._

 (A) In genera\._ Section 2104(d) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.c. 1397dd(d)) is amended
by striking "the sum oC' and all that follows through the paragraph designation "(2)" and
merging all that remains of subsection (d) into a single sentence.

 (B) Effective date._ The amendment made by subsection (a) shall be deemed to have taken
effect on August 5, 1997.
 (3) Increased funding for administrative costs related to outreach and eligibility determinations
for children._ Section 1931 (h) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.c. 1396u-l (h)) is amended_

 (A) by striking the subsection caption and inserting "(h) Increased federal matching rate for
administrative costs related to outreach and eligibility determinations for children._";

 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking "eligibility determinations" and all that follows and inserting
"determinations of the eligibility of children for benefits under the State plan under this title or
title XXI, outreach to children likely to be eligible for such benefits, and such other outreach-and
eligibility-related activities as the Secretary may approve.";

 (C) in paragraph (3), by striking "and ending with fiscal year 2000 shall not exceed
$500,000,000" and inserting' 'shall not exceed $525,000,000"; and

 (D) by striking paragraph (4).

 (g) Periodic reassessment of spending options._ Spending options under subsection (b )(2) will
be reassessed jointly by the States and Federal government every 5 years and be reported to the
Secretary.


