 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1997 16:58:17.00

     SUBJECT:   Diana noticed this Texas story in WH bulletin: note that an Archer spokesm

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
  Archer "supports" Hutchison's measure, "but he doesn't want to have
 states coming up [to Capitol
 Hill] asking for special waivers that have to be written into legislative
 language.  This is something
 the White House can do on their own, without any involvement by Congress."


     Texas Lawmakers Seek Welfare Reform Meeting With Bowles. Several
          members of Texas' congressional delegation are seeking to meet next
          week with White House Chief of Staff Erskine Bowles and discuss
          Texas' welfare reform plan. Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, whose office
          is circulating a letter requesting the meeting, has also filed an
          amendment to the supplemental appropriations bill that would allow
          Texas to go ahead with its welfare plan.
                In crafting its welfare reform proposal, a spokesperson for
          Gov. George W. Bush said the state submitted to the Department of
          Health and Human Services an RFO -- or RequesE For Offers -- which
          would allow private-sector companies to bid for the job of
          engineering Texas' welfare reform.   However, the Clinton
          Administration met last week with state officials and reportedly
          denied the RFO.
               According to an HHS official:   "We met with them, and they want
          to hire a contractor who will develop a full plan. However, one of
          the ambitious goals" of the Texas plan involves "re-engineering
          their eligibility program by taking the three different Federal
          programs [welfare, Medicaid and food stamps] ... and rolling it into
          one set of eligibility." Added the official: "We told them that in
          the statute, under determination of eligibility, it says anybody who
          has discretion to screen in or screen out someone has to be a
          public-sector employee. So that could not involve private-sector
          contractors." The official continued:    "That's what the law says.
          It's one way of saying this is a fundamental function of government.
          And there is a reason the law was written that way. The notion is
          about protecting the rights of beneficiaries, because those who are
          not part of the public system might have other interests beyond
          their intended role here."
               Bush's spokesperson said Texas wants "to consolidate the
          eligibility interviews for all of the programs.    We are trying to
          tap the technological expertise of the private sector.    Our state
          agencies want to team up with private sector companies. We're
          trying to create a one-stop shop, so that someone who needs help
          comes in and is interviewed, and we can determine what kind of help
          that person needs." The Administration official said:      "We see
          their goal is better services, sort of 'one-stop shopping' for
          benefits, and cost effectiveness.   But, although Congress gave the


     states: .. unlimited flexibility in how they design their welfare
     program, they didn't change the laws affecting Medicaid and food
     stamps. Those two programs' certification of eligibility has to be
     done by public-sector employees."
           Bush's spokesperson said the state has turned to its Federal
     delegation.    "Despite the words of the Clinton Administration that
     they want to help states get welfare waivers, their actions make it
     clear they do not," the spokesperson said, adding:    "Texas is tired
     of the double-talk and the runaround, and we are going to proceed
     with other means."
           A Hutchison aide said several members of the delegation are
     signing a letter, seeking a meeting with Bowles "next Tuesday,
     Wednesday, or Thursday." The aide said Hutchison is also sponsoring
     an amendment to allow the bidding process to go forward.    If the
     amendment is not considered during debate on the supplemental bill,
     the aide said Hutchison "will continue to look for the appropriate
     legislative opportunity to get Texas the approval."
           Meanwhile, an aide to Texas GOP Rep. Bill Archer, chair of the
     Ways and Means Committee, said Archer "supports" Hutchison's
     measure, "but he doesn't want to have states coming up [to Capitol
     Hill] asking for special waivers that have to be written into
     legislative language.    This is something the White House can do on
     their own, without.any involvement by Congress."


