RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-0CT-1998 22:25:59.00

SUBJECT:   Drug Bills

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Bruce, Elena, Rahm:

Per Elena, I have skimmed the 4 drug bills put forth by the R's; here are
my thoughts ...

1. Mostly no big issues.    In truth, there's not too much worth fighting
for in these bills. The demand reduction bill, reauthorization proposal
and miscellaneous resolutions, etc., don't seem to include any big
surprises, we should be able to generally accept them.   OMB has asked
ONDCP and some of the agency folks to generally mark-up the bills with our
preferred language, and Deich's thinking is whatever changes we
get ... fine. I agree w/that.  I am not too versed on the supply bill,
which mostly authorizes interdiction and international drug funds, but NSC
is taking the lead on it.

2.   One McCaffrey issue. McCaffrey's Chief of Staff expressed that the
General, with some cleaning up, is generally okay with the bills, too.
However, he strongly objects to the 3-year authorization proposed by the
R's.   He insists we should have 5 years and wants to be personally
notified if we don't get this in negotiations .... hmmm.

3. Two observations -- Goals, Legalization. The ONDCP reauthorization
still includes pretty lofty goals for reducing drug use over the next 5
years.  The goals are no longer binding, as in previous iterations of the
bill, but I think they'll prove to be a future headache.  Still, the R's
are insistent, and ONDCP doesn't think we'll move them any more than we
have. Also, I don't think we should make a big deal about language
prohibiting the study of drug legalization.  ONDCP doesn't think it
precludes our ability to conduct certain research, but HHS is sure to
disagree.  I say mark-up the language and take what we get.

4. Two possible opportunities. Lastly, I'm attaching language from bills
that we support that I believe are worth putting into the mix.  The first
is our proposal to use prison funds for drug testing and intervention and
to require states to raise penalties for drug trafficking into prisons.
The second is an R's bill to launch a demo on teen drug testing and
drivers licenses -- something we support and just can't seem to get going.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================


ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   o   00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D42]MAIL45419648D.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504332040000010A02010000000205000000ED15000000020000FCB0232E6E4CD42052640F

HR 3799 IH

                                 105th CONGRESS

                                    2d Session

                                    H. R. 3799

To establish programs designed to bring about drug free teenage driving.

                      IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                                  May 6,1998

Mr. MICA (for himself, Mr. PORTMAN, Mr. HASTERT, Mr. SOUDER, Mr. MCCOLLUM,
Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN, and Mr. GOSS) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure



                                     A BILL

To establish programs designed to bring about drug free teenage driving.

      Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
      America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

      This Act may be cited as the 'Drug Free Teenage Drivers Act'.

SEC. 2. DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.

      The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration shall, within 180 days of the date of
the
      enactment of this Act, establish a demonstration program in the States to provide voluntary
      drug testing for all teenager applicants (or other first time applicants for a driver's license
      regardless of age) for a driver's license. Information respecting an applicant's choice not to
      take the drug test or the result of the drug test on the applicant shall be made available to the
      applicant's automobile insurance company. If an applicant tests positive in the drug test, the
      State in which the program is established--

           (1) will not issue a license to the applicant; and

                                        Automated Records Management System
                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
           positive in a drug test before re!lPplying for a license.

SEC. 3. INCENTIVE GRANT PROGRAM.

     (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Transportation shall establish an incentive grant
program
     to States to assist the States in improving their laws relating to controlled substances and
     driving.

      (b) GRANT REQUIREMENTS- To qualify for a grant under subsection (a) a State shall do
      the following:

           (1) Enact, actively enforce, and publicize a law which makes it illegal to drive in the
           State with any measurable amount of an illegal controlled substance in the driver's
body.
           An illegal controlled substance is a controlled substance for which an individual does
not
           have a legal written prescription. An individual who is convicted of such illegal driving
           shall--

                (A) have the individual's driving license suspended until the individual completes
                the State drug treatment program referred to in subparagraph (8) and does not
                test positive in a drug test; and

                (8) require the individual to participate in a State drug treatment program.

           (2) Enact, actively enforce, and publicize a law which authorizes the suspension (for an
           appropriate term as determined by the State) of a driver's license if the driver is
           convicted of any criminal offense relating to drugs.

           (3) Enact a law which provides that beginning driver applicants and other individuals
           applying for or renewing a driver's license will be provided information about the laws
           referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) and will be required to answer drug-related
           questions on their applications.

      (c) USE- A State may only use a grant under subsection (a) to implement and enforce the
      programs described in subsection (b).

SEC. 4. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.

      The Secretary of Transportation shall provide to the States technical assistance for--

           (1) training law enforcement officers in the Standardized Field Sobriety Testing

                                     Automated Records Management System
                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

         (2) expanding drug information and training by involving prosecutors in community
drug
          prevention programs; and
         (3) promoting uniform sanctions for drug offenses, referring drug offenders to
         assessment and treatment programs and involving judges in community drug
prevention
          programs.




                                Automated Records Management System
                                Hex-Dump Conversion
(Introduced in the House)

HR 3606 IH

                               105th CONGRESS

                                  2d Session

                                  H. R. 3606

To provide for drug testing of and interventions with incarcerated offenders and reduce drug
trafficking and related crime in correctional facilities.

                    IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                              March 31, 1998

Mr. CONYERS (for himself and Mr. BARRETT of Wisconsin) introduced the following bill;
which
was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary



                                   A BILL

To provide for drug testing of and interventions with incarcerated offenders and reduce drug
trafficking and related crime in correctional facilities.

     Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
     America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the 'Drug Testing, Intervention, and Trafficking Reduction Within
    Prisons Act of 1998'.

SEC .. 2. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE OF FUNDS
UNDER THE VIOLENT OFFENDER INCARCERATION AND
TRUTH-IN-SENTENCING GRANTS PROGRAM.

     Section 201 05(b) of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 is
     amended to read as follows:

     '(b) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS-

                                Automated Records Management System
                                Hex-Dump Conversion
           20103 or section 20104, a State shall--

                '(A) provide assurances to the Attorney General that the State has implemented
                or will implement not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this
                subtitle, policies that provide for the recognition of the rights of crime victims;
and

                '(B) no later than September 1, 1998, have a program of drug testing and
                intervention for appropriate categories of convicted offenders during periods of
                incarceration and criminal justice supervision, with sanctions including denial or
                revocation of release for positive drug tests, consistent with guidelines issued by
                the Attorney General.

          '(2) USE OF FUNDS- Funds provided under section 20103 or section 20104 of this
          subtitle may be applied to the cost of offender drug testing and appropriate intervention
          programs during periods of incarceration and criminal justice supervision, consistent
          with guidelines issued by the Attorney General. Further, such funds may be used by the
          States to pay the costs of providing to the Attorney General a baseline study on their
          prison drug abuse problem. Such studies shall be consistent with guidelines issued by
          the Attorney General.

          '(3) SYSTEM OF SANCTIONS AND PENALTIES- Beginning in fiscal year 2000,
          and thereafter, States receiving funds pursuant to section 20103 or section 20104 of
          this subtitle shall have a system of sanctions and penalties that address drug trafficking
          within and into correctional facilities under their jurisdiction. Such systems shall be in
          accordance with guidelines issued by the Attorney General. Beginning in fiscal year
          2000, and each year thereafter, any State that the Attorney General determines not to
          be in compliance with the provisions of this paragraph, shall have the funds for which
          they would have otherwise been eligible to receive under section 20103 or section
          20104, reduced by 10 percent for each fiscal year for which the Attorney General
          determines they do not comply. Any funds that are not allocated for failure to comply
          with this section shall be reallocated to States that comply with this section.'.

SEC. 3. USE OF RESIDENTIAL SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT
GRANTS TO PROVIDE FOR SERVICES DURING AND AFTER
INCARCERATION.

      Section 1901 of part S of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42
      U.S.C. 3796ff) is amended by adding at the end the following:

      '(c) ADDITIONAL USE OF FUNDS- States that demonstrate that they have existing
      in-prison drug treatment programs that are in compliance with Federal requirements, may
use
      funds awarded under this part for treatment and sanctions both during incarceration and

                                  Automated Records Management System
                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
        release.'.




                     Automated Records Management System
                     Hex-Dump Conversion
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 084 - FOLDER 002
[10/12/1998 --10/14/1998]


