RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-0CT-1998 12:05:32.00

SUBJECT:     Re: state settlement

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia Dailard ( CN=Cynthia Dailard/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Based on Wall Street and news reports, CD put together these helpful
comparisons of marketing restrictions in the proposed settlement

Compares proposed state settlement, FDA rule, and Minnesota

Compares proposed state settlement and FDA rule




Bruce N. Reed
10/11/98 03:51:03 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP, Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         state settlement

Two news items from Gary Black: Timing slips to week of 10/26, and
Scruggs's secret plan on Medicare rider isn't much of a secret.

October 9, 1998



HIGHLIGHTS

   1.Anticipated timing of the new AG settlement   has slipped to the week
of 10/26. This was said
     to be due to a prior sCheduling conflict by   lead AG Gregoire, but may
reflect additional time
     needed to get a critical mass of AGs behind   the deal prior to its
announcement. Or, it may
     reflect the industry needing time to digest   what has become a very
complex set of renegade
     provisions.


   2.0ur biggest fear is not the renegade issue (which the industry has
overblown), or that states
     won't sign up (they want the money), but that after the deal is
consummated, state legislators
     will pass legislation that imposes licensing fees -- but fail to give
credits to companies who
     signed the accord. This would effectively raise taxes twice on deal
signatories, and once on
     non-signatories. We don't believe the AG settlement can be voided,
for instance, if a state
     passed a licensing law at odds with the spirit of the deal.
   3.Washington update: Before Congress adjourns Monday, we could see
efforts to attach two
     tobacco-related riders to the omnibus appropriations bill (which
effectively allows the
     government to avoid shutting down in the absence of formal
appropriations bills) :

          One rider sponsored by senators from Florida and Texas allows
states to keep all of
          their tobacco settlement proceeds, rather than give the federal
government its share
          under HCFA. This would increase the appeal of the new AG deal to
the states.

          Second rider clarifies a 1960s statute that the federal
government can bring a Medicare
          recovery action against the tobacco industry. Given no appetite
by Republicans to bring
          new claims against the industry, odds of this passing are very
low.

   4.We reiterate outperform ratings on Philip Morris, RJR, and UST. While
timing on this deal
     remains slippery, which naturally fuels investor uncertainty, we
believe 1) there will be a new
     AG deal that will be supported by a critical mass of AGs announced
within a few weeks; 2)
     Virtually all states will ultimately embrace the deal, given overall
weakness of AG cases, and
     few suitable alternatives with which to put new regulations on the
tobacco companies. Our
     expectation now is that stocks will not trade off when the deal is
announced, given the short
      (7-14 day) opt-in period

ADDITIONAL DETAILS

   1.Settlement update: Below, we have clarified s6me outstanding issues
about which we have
     been asked on the new settlement:

     Cost -- The cost to settle with the remaining 47 states (including
Puerto Rico) will be about
     $180 billion. This would bring the total cost of the deal to $220
billion -- in line with our
     expectations, but higher than some analysts are predicting.

     Renegade credits -- The exact mechanism by which renegade credits are
allocated appears to


     be more of a compromise between PM and RJR than we had indicated in
our note last week.
     Credits would be allocated to those who actually lose share, but only
to a certain threshold.
     Once that threshold is crossed, the credits get divided based on
market share.

     Marketing restrictions -- The industry would agree to ban billboards
and transit signs, product
     placements in movies, branded merchandise, and all but one
sponsorship per manufacturer.
     Size limits would be imposed on outdoor signage at retail and on
signage that faces out of retail
     locations (14 sq. feet). Cartoons would be banned in advertising, but
not humans or animals.

     Licensing fees -- The industry's goal is to get all of the states to
pass licensing fees for
     manufacturers who do not sign onto this accord. We believe the
vehicle used would be that
     each state would impose licensing fees for all manufacturers, but
exempt manufacturers who
     sign the new accord. This, combined with the provision that smaller
manufacturers (under 3%
     share) be a part of this agreement at no cost as long as they don't
grow share, makes it difficult
     to see why smaller players wouldn't sign this deal. If a renegade
joins, and holds share, he
     pays nothing. If a renegade doesn't join, and the state passes a
licensing fee, the renegade will
     have to pay on all units sold, and not just those above last year's
share.

     State licensing incentives -- States that pass tobacco licensing
laws, with credits for those who
     sign the accord, would be exempted from having to contribute to the
renegade credit pool
     back to the industry if overall renegade share increases. The As more
states adopt licensing
     provisions, the pressure grows for the remaining states to do the
same -- or they will have to
     give back more of the payments. Example: If 30 states pass licensing
provisions, the remaining
     20 states would split the costs of the renegade credits. If 40 states
pass licensing provisions,
     10 states split the same costs of the renegade credits. If all 50
states pass licensing laws, there
     would be no renegade credit. rhere would also be no renegade credit
if share merely shifted
     from one of the signatories to another signatory (i.e., Philip Morris
takes share from RJR) .

      Liggett -- We believe that Liggett (1.4% share) could void his
agreements with most of the 47
      states involved in the new deal under most favored nations provisions
in the old deals. This
      new deal, which allows Liggett to be covered at essentially no cost
 (for smaller players, any
      volume below last year's share is grandfathered in free), is better
than Liggett's old deal, which


    . compels Liggett to pay on average 27.5-30% of pretax profits to the
42 states with whom
      Liggett has settled.

   2.Bye, bye Congress. Congress is now expected to adjourn on Monday.
Given the ongoing
     impeachment inquiry, the House will be adjourned subject to the call
of the Speaker, which
     means House members will likely return for impeachment hearings after
the Election. The
     Senate is effectively gone until January, beginning Monday.

     There are two tobacco issues that could become riders on the omnibus
appropriations bill that
     will be passed by Congress to keep Washington running in the absence
of a formal budget:

     Provision that allows states to keep all their Medicaid winnings.
Senators from three of the
     four states that have settled with the industry (Bilirakis from FL,
Bailey from TX, Lott from
     MS) have proposed a rider to be attached to the omnibus
appropriations bill (to keep the
     government running) that would preclude the federal government from
taking any percentage
     of funds that states receive from tobacco settlements. Under federal
statutes governing
     Medicaid (Title 19 of Social Security Act), the federal government is
entitled to reclaim its
     Medicaid % contribution (on average, federal government pays 60% of
each state's Medicaid
     bills, percentages vary from 50% - 80%) from states that get Medicaid
reimbursement from
     third parties. We put high odds on this rider passing, given Lott's
involvement. Clinton is
     unlikely to insist that the rider be struck. If passed, this will
give a hostile state a further
     incentive to embrace the AG settlement, since they would get to keep
their entire settlement
     amount, but have to give back the federal share if the state won a
judgment at trial.

     Provision that clarifies that federal government can sue the tobacco
industry. Separately,
     anti-tobacco senators, egged on by plaintiff counsel Richard Scruggs,
want to include a rider in
     this omnibus appropriations bill clarifying the federal government's
authority to bring a direct
     action for Medicare recovery under statutes that govern Medicare
(Title 18 of Social Security
     Act). Remember, Scruggs' plan was to get the federal government to
bring a federal recovery
     claim, and then get the industry to settle with the federal
government for $150 - $175 billion,
     with offsets for settlements or judgments for class actions, punitive
damages, consolidations,
     and other exposures not covered by the AG settlement, but which were
included in the original
     June 20 accord. Scruggs' incentive, of course, is probably higher
fees for Scruggs. We put low


       odds on Richard Scruggs convincing Republicans to include a rider in
  this omnibus bill
       clarifying that the federal government can sue the tobacco industry.




  ==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
  ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

  TEXT:
  Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D98)MAIL402877583.226 to   ~SCII,
   The following is a HEX DUMP:

  FF575043B2090000010A020100000002050000004714000000020000097F3F3926CC435834012C
                       the FDA Rule and the AG's Proposed State Settlement
                                                 (October 13, 1998)



Advertising Restriction                                        FDA Rule       AG's
                                                                              Proposed
                                                                              Settlement

Bans all billboards                                            No             Yes

Balls all transit advertisement                                No             Yes

Bans outdoor advertising within 1000 feet of schools and       Yes            No
public playgrounds

Restricts advertising to black-and-white text only for         Yes            No
publications, direct mail or outdoor billboards except in
publications with a predominant adult readership or at adult
only facilities

Restricts advertising to black-and-white text only for point   Yes            No
of purchase sales.

Imposes size limits on outdoor signs at retail locations (14   No             Yes·
square feet)

Prohibits the sale or giveaways of promotional products        Yes            Yes
like caps or gym bags that carry cigarette brand names or
logos

Prohibits brand-name sponsorship of sporting or                Yes            No. Allows
entertainment events, but permits it in the corporate name                    one
                                                                              sponsor-ship
                                                                              per
                                                                              manufacturer.

Prohibits placement of tobacco products in films               No             Yes




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                    the FDA Rule, Minnesota Settlement,
                                     and AG's Proposed State Settlement
                                                 (October 13, 1998)



Advertising Restriction                                        FDA Rule          Minnesota      AG's
                                                                                 Settlement     Proposed
                                                                                                Settlement

Bans all billboards                                            No                Yes            Yes

Balls all transit advertisement                                No                No             Yes

Bans outdoor advertising within 1000 feet of schools and       Yes               Yes            No
public playgrounds

Restricts advertising to black-and-white text only for         Yes               No             No
publications, direct mail or outdoor billboards except in
publications with a predominant adult readership or at adult
only facilities

Restricts advertising to black-and-white text only for point   Yes               No             No
of purchase sales.

Imposes size limits on outdoor signs at retail locations (14   No                No             Yes
square feet)

Prohibits the sale or giveaways of promotional products        Yes               Yes            Yes
like caps or gym bags that carry cigarette brand names or
logos

Prohibits brand-name sponsorship of sporting or                Yes               No             No. Allows
entertainment events, but permits it in the corporate name                                      one
                                                                                                sponsor-ship
                                                                                                per
                                                                                                manufacturer.

Prohibits placement of tobacco products in films               No                Yes            Yes




                                                                    Automated Records Mariagement System
                                                                    He.lt.Dump Conversion


