RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-0CT-1998 00:21:26.00

SUBJECT:   paper for tomorrow

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached are:

1) Two-pager on the annual report on school safety/announcements
2) Four separate one pagers with more detail on the main announcements

Questions and answers to follow.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D12]MAIL45706568G.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043DE060000010A020100000002050000007A360000000200003815A7298CF994818ED750
05D15D3A1678COA60EB80A72EE0212380F7A7ED4DD03DFIA2F99423B520CF2AOC5F6E5BC3DD446
                           October 15, 1998

   The White House Conference on School Safety. Although schools are generally safer
    today than they were just a few years ago -- and statistics show that students are safer
    sitting in a classroom than walking down a street -- there is still much more that we can
    do to improve school safety and security. In particular, the multiple shootings that took
    place in schools in Pearl, MS, Paducah, KY, Jonesboro, AK, and Springfield, OR, serve
    as painful reminders that no community is immune from senseless violence -- and that all
    communities must do their best to prevent such tragedies from ever occurring. The
    White House Conference on School Safety provides an opportunity for Americans to
    learn more about how they can make their own schools and communities safer.

   Unveiling the First Annual Report on School Crime and Safety. At the conference,
    the President will unveil the first Annual Report on School Crime and Safety -- a report
    intended to give parents, principals and policy makers-an accurate, yearly snapshot of the
    school crime, as well as to provide information on what practical steps they can take to
    make their schools safer.

    Major Findings of the Report:

           Students less likely to be victimized but more likely to feel unsafe. Although
           the number of multiple homicide events at schools has increased since 1993 (from
           2 to 6 -- and with 4 times as many victims), the overall school crime rate has
           actually dropped (from 164 crimes per 1,000 students in 1993 to about 128 such
           crimes in 1996). However, the percentage of students reporting that they felt
           unsafe at or on their way to school has increased.

           Most schools safer than community at large. While the overall level of school
           and non-school crime is about the same (about 3 million crimes in each setting),
           students are more than twice as likely to experience serious violent crime while
           out of school. And the very worst violent victimizations -- murders and suicides
           -- rarely occur in or near schools. Fewer than 1% of the 7,357 thousand children
           who were murdered in 1992-93 -- or 63 -- were killed at school.

           Serious crime and violence concentrated in a small percentage of schools.
           Only about 10% of public schools report serious or violent crimes to their local
           police departments. Nearly half -- or 47% -- of schools report less serious or
           non-violent crimes to police, and 43% report absolutely no crimes at all.

           Violence more likely in larger, urban schools and with older students. One
           third of large schools (1,000+ students) report serious violent crimes to police,
           compared with less than one tenth of small schools. Also urban schools are twice
           as likely as rural schools to report serious violent crimes, and middle and high
           schools are 4 times more likely than elementary schools to report such crimes.

                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
           fights without weapons are the crimes most often reported to police by middle and
           high schools. Theft is the most common school crime overall. In 1996, less
           than 10% of crimes against students were of a serious or violent nature.

    Other Important Findings:

           Fewer weapons in schools. About 6% of high school seniors --less than in
           recent years -- are carrying firearms and other weapons to schools. Also, the
           percentage of seniors intentionally injured -- with or without weapons -- has not
           changed significantly over the past 20 years.

           Gang presence has nearly doubled. Between 1989 and 1995, the percentage of
           students reporting the presence of street gangs in their schools increased from
           15% to 28% -- including large increases at urban, suburban and rural schools.

           Violence and drugs linked. Students who reported being the victims of violent
           crimes at schools were more likely to report the availability of drugs at school.
           The presence of gangs and guns is also related to school crime and the
           victimization of students.

           Teachers often crime victims. On average, 3% of teachers are the victims of
           violent crimes, and nearly 5% are the victims of theft.

   The President's Call to Action. During a panel discussion with a group of recognized
    school safety advocates and youth violence experts, the President will announce a series
    of new initiatives that address many of the problems identified in the Annual Report on
    School Crime and Safety. Specifically, he will propose:

           (1) A New Federal Response for Violent Deaths in Schools.         President Clinton
           will propose a $12 million plan to create Project SERVE, a federal School
           Emergency Response to Violence effort, to help schools and local communities
           respond to school-related violent deaths, such as those that occurred last year in
           Jonesboro Arkansas, Paducah Kentucky, Pearl Mississippi and Springfield
           Oregon. Based on the experiences of these communities last year--and with input
           from local officials and educators in these and other communities-- the plan will
           enable the federal government to assist local communities in much the same way
           FEMA assists in response to natural and human-caused disasters.

           (2) Targeted Resources for Schools with Serious Crime Problems. To help
           give the estimated 10% of schools with serious crime problems the tools they
           need to put the security of our children first, the President will announce a new
           $65 million initiative to hire 2,000 community police and School Resource
           Officers to work in schools -- and to train police, educators and other members of
           the community to help recognize the early warning signs of violence.


                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                  HW(aDump Conversion
President Clinton will announce his plan for a significant overhaul of the nearly
$600 million Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program. Under
the President's proposal, schools will be required to adopt rigorous,
comprehensive school safety plans that include: tough, but fair, discipline policies;
safe passage to and from schools; effective drug and violence policies; annual
school safety report cards; links to after school programs; efforts to involve
parents; and crisis management plans.                                 .

(4) A Community-Wide Response to School Safety and Youth Violence. To
help communities throughout the country promote a coordinated, comprehensive
response to school safety, the President will launch a new Safe Schools -- Safe
Communities initiative designed to help 10 cities develop and implement
community-wide school safety plans. A minimum of $25 million in discretionary
grants from the Departments of Education, Justice and Health and Human Service
-- or $1-3 million per site -- will be made available for this initiative.

The President will also kick-off an MTV -sponsored, year-long media campaign
on school and youth violence. Working with the Departments of Education and
Justice, and the National Endowment for the Arts, MTV will distribute a Youth
Action Guide that aims to engage youth in solutions to violence.




                                                           Automated Records Management System.
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

To help give the estimated 10% of schools with serious crime problems the tools they need to put
the security of our children first, the President will announce a new $65 million initiative to hire
2,000 community police and School Resource Officers to work in schools -- and to train police,
educators and other members of the community to help recognize the early warning signs of
violence.

2,000 Community Police Officers for Schools

While students are less likely to be a crime victim at school than in previous years, serious crime
continues to plague many larger and urban schools -- and more students now feel unsafe at or on
their way to school.

      Building on the President's successful Community Policing Initiative. To help address the
       needs of these schools, the President will announce the availability of$60 million from
       his COPS Program to hire new community police and School Resource officers to work
       in schools with serious crime problems. These new funds wiIl help communities to
       expand their community policing efforts to include school crime problems as part of their
       overaIl community policing strategies. GeneraIly, local police departments will receive
       up to $125,000 per officer for three years -- with no local match required.

      New training resources. AdditionaIly, this new initiative wiJI dedicate $5 miJIion
       through the COPS Office's Regional Community Policing Institutes -- for the training of
       school safety officers, and towards educators and other community members for training
       in the recognition of the early warning signs of school violence.

A record of building partnerships between law enforcement and schools

      Forging School-Based Partnerships Between Schools and Law Enforcement. In
       September 1998, the President announced $16.4 miIlion in grants to 155 law enforcement
       agencies to fund new School-Based Partnerships grants through the Department of
       Justice. These grants will be used by policing agencies to work with schools and
       community-based organizations to address crime in and around schools. This initiative
       emphasizes using principles of community policing and problem-solving methods to
       address the causes of school-related crime. The grants will help strengthen partnerships
       between local law enforcement and schools, and help them to focus on school crime, drug
       use and discipline problems.

      Meeting the President's Pledge of 100,000 More Police. Last week, the Justice
       Department's Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) announced $27.4
       million in grants for 151 policing agencies across the country to hire 428 officers --
       bringing the total number of officers funded under the President's COPS Initiative to over
       88,500 -- keeping the COPS Initiative ahead of schedule and under budget.


                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

President Clinton will propose a $12 million School Emergency Response to Violence -- or
Project SERV -- to help schools and local communities respond to school-related violent deaths,
such as those that occurred last year in Jonesboro, Arkansas; Paducah, Kentucky; Pearl,
Mississippi; and Springfield, Oregon. Developed with input from local officials and educators
in these and other communities, Project SERV will enable the federal government to assist local
communities in much the same way FEMA assists in response to natural disasters.

Project SERV: Helping Communities Respond to School Shootings. To help communities
respond to rare but tragic school-related violent incidents, Project SERV will provide
communities with resources to respond to immediate crisis need; to provide increased security
and ongoing counseling; and to help state and local officials plan for, prevent against and
respond to similar tragedies. The mission of Project SERV will be to:

       Provide Immediate Assistance for Emergency Response. As soon as a school-related
       violent or traumatic incident occurs, the federal government will be able to provide the
       affected community with immediate assistance, through:

             A $12 million Emergency Response Fund to help communities meet urgent and
              unplanned for costs, such as additional security personnel, emergency mental
              health crisis counseling, short- and long-term counseling to students, facuIty, and
              their families.

             Crisis Response Experts trained by the Departments of Education, Justice,
              Health and Human Services, and the Federal Emergency Management
              Administration, who can help local officials identify community needs, provide
              technical assistance in developing a plan to address those needs, and locate
              necessary financial and human resources.

       Establish Coordinated Federal Response to School Crises. Officials from the
       Departments of Education, Justice, HHS and from FEMA worked together to help
       communities impacted by this year's. shootings. Working together as part of Project
       SERV, these agencies will coordinate various federal crisis response efforts in order to
       avoid overlap and fill gaps in needed services.

       Help States and Communities Strengthen Their Ability to Respond to School Crises.
        Project SERV will work to strengthen the ability of each state's emergency management,
       education, community mental health and law enforcement officials to provide local
       school systems with information on appropriate response strategies, to assist districts with
       identifying existing resources, and to provide training for school officials on preventing
       and responding to school crises.



                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
       Administration efforts, Project SERV will broadly promote awareness of the need for
       strengthening school crisis prevention efforts and response planning among state and
       local officials and the public.

       Support Research and Evaluation. To help communities deal with future
       school-related crises, Project SERV will support research and evaluation on effective
       ways to prevent against, respond to and deal with the consequences of school-related
       homicides and other such incidents.

Building An Effective Partnership with Local Communities and States. In the immediate
aftermath of the school shootings, the Departments of Education, Justice and HHS worked
closely with officials from Pearl, Paducah, Jonesboro, and Springfield by providing crisis
response teams, victim assistance, and funds for added security and immediate counseling for
students, teachers and families. Following up on these tragic events, White House and agency
officials reviewed these efforts and in September met with officials and educators from each
community. As a result, we learned the communities could benefit from longer term,
coordinated and comprehensive federal assistance. The plan the President will announce is a
direct response to these lessons.




                                               2
                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

To help communities throughout the country promote a coordinated, comprehensive response to
school and youth violence, the President will launch a new Safe Schools -- Safe Communities
initiative designed to help cities develop and implement community-wide school safety plans. He
will also kick-off a partnership between the federal government and MTV to engage youth in
solutions to violence.

The Safe Schools -- Safe Communities Initiative

      A Community-Wide Response. Parents, principals, police and others should work
       together to prevent school crime and violence from ever taking hold in their
       communities. To help promote such coordinated, community-wide responses
       throughout the country, the President will launch "Safe Schools -- Safe Communities."
       Under this initiative, 10 cities will be eligible for at least $25 million in discretionary
       grants from the Departments of Education, Justice and Health and Human Services to
       develop and implement strategies with the following components:

               Formal school safety policies, including zero tolerance for guns and drugs, discipline,
               school uniforms, and truancy prevention;
               School security measures, such as metal detectors and police patrol of schools;
               Assessment and interventions for troubled youth, such as mental health counselors and
               alternative schools;
               Prevention, including mentoring for students; and
               After school programming for children and youth

      One-Stop Shopping. Under this initiative, communities adopting a comprehensive
       approach to school safety will no longer have to seek federal support for their efforts in a
       piece-meal fashion. Instead, eligible applicants will benefit from "one stop shopping" -- or a
       single application, through which a series of federal grants targeting youth violence can be
       accessed. Each site will be eligible for up to $3 million, depending on the size and needs
       of the community.

Getting Youth Involved in the Community Response

      MTV Partnership. The President will announce a partnership with MTV to engage youth
       in solutions to violence. He will announce that MTV, beginning in 1999, will launch a
       year-long media campaign -- "Fight For Your Rights: Take A Stand Against Youth Violence"
       -- designed to give young adults a voice in the national debate on school and youth violence.

      Providing Solutions for Youth. In partnership with the Department of Justice and
       Education, and the National Endowment for the Arts, MTV will create and distribute a Youth
       Action Guide that aims to engage youth in mentoring and other positive solutions to violence.
        The guide will be made available through a 1-800 number at the Justice Department and
       through MTV.
                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   He)t.~ Conversion

Many our nation's schools report difficulties with maintaining order and discipline. In the
1996-97 school year, 41 % of public schools reported moderate discipline problems and 16%
reported serious discipline problems. Among the most common discipline problems reported
include tardiness, truancy, fist fights, and student drug, alcohol and tobacco use. Moreover,
schools that had more serious discipline problems were more likely to report crime or violence.
That is why the President will announce a proposal to overhaul and strengthen the Safe and
Drug-Free Schools Program to ensure that that students have safe, disciplined and drug-free
environments for learning, instead of havens for disorder and crime.

Revamping Safe and Drug-Free Schools President Clinton will announce his plan for the
overhaul of the nearly $600 million Safe and Drug-Free Schools program to provide more
effective programs for the reduction of drugs and violence in schools, more accountability for
results and better targeting to those schools that need the most assistance.

      Increasing funding for effective plans and strengthening accountability. Under the
       proposal, federal funds will provide support to school districts with demonstrated need
       and a commitment to adopt a rigorous, comprehensive approach to drug and violence
       reduction and prevention.

      Creating incentives to develop comprehensive, and results-oriented plans. Districts will
       be expected to use relevant drug and violence data to develop a comprehensive plan -- in
       consultation with parents, teachers, students, law enforcement officials, mental heath
       providers and other members of the community-- to do the following:

               Adopt and enforce, clear and fair discipline polices, such as zero tolerance polices
               for guns and drugs, school unifonns, and closed campus policies, and parent
               notification and involvement.

               Secure schools and pathways through implementing measures such as metal
               detectors, and fonnal agreements with law enforcement or safety officials to patrol
               school grounds and pathways.

               Provide effective anti-drug and violence prevention programs, including programs
               that teach repsonsible decision-making, mentoring, mediation, or other acitvities
               aimed at changing behaviors; ensure that funded activities have demonstrated
               effectiveness in helping to create a drug-free' and safe learning environment.

               Collect data and report to the public results by providing annual report cards on
               the number and type of school-related drug and/or violence incidents.

               Assess and intervene for troubled youth through procedures to identify
               students for evaluation and counseling; training for teachers and staff; and
               providing linkages between district officials, mental health, and other

                                                                 A\ltM\ated Records Management System
                                                                 He1;~~wsion

               Connect to after-school activities for youth to extend the school day and/or
               develop links to other after-school programming, and help provide children
               with meaningful connections to responsible adults in the community.

              Develop plan for crisis management, such as a shooting on school grounds or drug
              overdoses. The plan will also address assistance for victims, contacts with parents,
              law enforcement, counseling, and communication with the media.

Taking on Bullying. Bu\1ying often interferes with learning, and when perpetrators go
unpunished, a climate of student fear can take over. Youths who are victimized by bu\1ies
occasiona\1y take drastic measures -- which can lead to violent behavior or weapons-carrying.

             Bu\1ying common among youth. Bu\1ying among children is genera\1y defined as
              intentional, repeated hurtful acts, words, or other behavior, such as threats or
              name cailing. It may be physical, verbal, emotional or sexual in nature. In one
              study of junior high and high school students, 88% of students reported having
              watched bu\1ying and 76% reported being a victim ofbu\1ying at school.

             New manual to combat bu\1ying. Today, the Education Department will release a
              manual prepared by the Department of Education to combat bu\1ying. The
              manual contains numerous strategies, resources, and innovative strategies to help
              teachers, school staff, students, parents and other community members to prevent
              and intervene with bu\1ying problems before they escalate into violent outbreaks.

Encouraging School Uniform Policies. School uniforms have been found to be a promising
strategy to reduce violence while promoting discipline and respect in school. Because of this,
the Clinton Administration has encouraged schools to consider adopting school uniform policies
by sharing with every school district a school uniforms manual prepared by the Department of
Education in consultation with local communities and the Department of Justice.

             Major crime reduction in Long Beach schools reported. Yesterday, the Long
              Beach, California Unified School District -- the first large urban school district in
              the United States to require school uniforms -- released data showing a 91 drop
              in K-8 school crime since implementing their policy in September 1994, including
              a 92 decline in weapons/look-alikes; 91 fewer robberies; and 62 less drugs.

             More schools adopting uniform policies. Since President Clinton announced his
              support for school uniforms in 1996, a growing number of schools have adopted
              policies including: New York City, Dade County, San Antonio, Houston,
              Chicago, and Boston.

                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


