RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-0CT-1998 22:55:17.00

SUBJECT:   Draft briefing and script

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=E1ena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emrnett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP     @   EOP [ 'OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D401MAIL425855683.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750434C070000010A02010000000205000000323E0000000200006EC2FEC7EEF49AEF52249D
[From the Podium]
- The Vice President makes remarks, introduces the President, and takes a seat at the table.
- The President makes remarks and then takes a seat at the table.
- The President moderates the discussion by calling on each individual to share their
  experiences. After each statement, the President, the Vice President, and the First Lady
     will be free to ask follow up questions.

[All panelists and the First Lady will be seated at the table during the opening remarks.]
Jamon Kent, Superintendent of Springfield Public Schools, Springfield, Oregon
Superintendent Kent has also served as a teacher and principal throughout his 26 years in
education. He lead the community-wide effort to promote school safety that has been ongoing
since before the shooting occurred, which includes creating alternative programs for at-risk
students and turn-around programs for students in adjudication or who have been expelled.
       POTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: When I visited your community after the shooting
       everyone there was struggling to cope with this terrible tragedy. There was so much
       that needed to be done, which is one of the reasons why I am proposing a federal
       response SER V team to help communities in a time of crisis. Do you feel this type of
       federal action would have helped your community?

       FLOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: How did you forge partnerships with the
       surrounding community before this tragedy? How did these partnerships allow you to
       better cope with this crisis?

      VPOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: Can you tell us about how the mental health
      community played a role in helping the community heal during this terrible tragedy?
      And how did you reestablish a feeling of safety and security for students when they
      returned to school this fall?

Police Commissioner Paul Evans, Boston, Massachusetts
Commissioner Evans led Boston's innovative Operation Ceasefirc, which has dramatically
reduced youth violence through a comprehensive community approach.

      POTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: You have incorporated the principles of
      community policing to the greatest extent possible. How have police officers adjusted
      to their role in crime prevention?

       VPOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: I know the faith community is also very involved
       in your efforts to reduce juvenile crime. Can you elaborate on their role?

       FLOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: Initially, did different parts of the community
       resist working together? How did you manage to develop these unique bonds in your
       community and what suggestion do you have for other cities?


Liberty Franklin, National Boys and Girls Club Youth ofthe Year, Everett, Washington

                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
She was raised by a single mother in a housing project with older brothers who were in and out
of jail. When she joined the Boys and Girls Club in the sixth grade she began to have an adult
mentor who helped her succeed in school and stay out of trouble. She is now a high school senior
with a 3.95 GPA working at Washington Mutual Bank to save money for college. She is
interested in becoming an Orthodontist and providing free care to low-income children.
         POTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: You see up close the issues confronting your
         peers. What more do you think adults should do to help young people?

       FLOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: How specifically has mentoring helped you
       and are you mentoring others now?

       VPOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: You have been very successful as a student
       and a leader within the Boys and Girls Club. Do you feel that your experience was
       unique, or do you feel that other students benefit equally?

Joanna Quintana Barroso, 3rd Grade Teacher, Coral Way Elementary, Miami, Florida
Joanna will speak about the successful anti-crime efforts at her school including school uniforms,
gun safety curriculum, DARE officers, and alternative classes for at-risk youth. She will talk
about the importance of reducing class size in order to identify troubled youth and for students to
learn well. She will also talk about the business efforts to encourage students to work hard
including Pizza Hut reader of the week awards which entitle students to a free meal and helps to
promote hard work.
        VPOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: The President has fought hard to reduce the size
        of classes nationwide to an average of 18. I understand your classes have over 30
       students in them. How do you think smaller classes would benefit your students?

       FLOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: Who do you find your students are most
       influenced by? Parents? Teachers? Media?

Thelton "Tony" Earles
Professor, Harvard School of Public Health
Conducted research on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods which found that
neighborhood cohesiveness and responsible adult interaction with children reduces juvenile
crime and delinquency.
       POTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: You have made a strong a strong case for the
       importance of adults taking responsibility to promote positive values in their
       community. What do you think the government and other'public figures in this
       country can do to encourage parents and other adults to become more involved in the
       lives of children?

       FLOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: What does your research show about
       community involvement in the schools and did you find that children learn more in
       schools where there is active parental involvement?

Mayor Deedee Corradini, President of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, St. Lake City, Utah


                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
recent Mayors Conference on School Safety in St. Lake City, which describes the unique role of
cities in preventing youth violence.
         POTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: I understand that you invited police chiefs to
         your conference to help contribute to the Mayors Action Plan. What role can mayors
         play in bringing together law enforcement and the education community.

       VPOTUS SUGGESTED QUESTION: Tell us what you think the most striking part of
       the Conference was?




                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


                WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE ON SCHOOL SAFETY

                             DATE:          October 15, 1998
                             LOCATION:      The East Room
                             BRIEFING TIME: 12:15 pm - 12:35 pm
                             EVENT TIME:    12:45 pm - 2:30 pm
                             FROM:          Bruce Reed

I.    PURPOSE

      To bring together a broad coalition of youth violence experts and advocates,
      educators, elected officials, law enforcement, and prevention and intervention
      practitioners -- as well as communities across the country through the 600 satellite sites
      -- to help them learn more about how they can make their own schools and communities
      safer.

II.   BACKGROUND

      Although schools are generally safer today than they were just a few years ago -- and
      statistics show that students are safer sitting in a classroom than walking down a street --
      there is still much more that we can do to improve school safety and security. In
      particular, the multiple shootings that took place in schools in Pearl, MS, Paducah, KY,
      Jonesboro, AK, and Springfield, OR, serve as painful reminders that no community is
      immune from senseless violence -- and that all communities must do their best to prevent
      such tragedies from ever occurring.

      At the conference, you will unveil the first Annual Report on School Crime and Safety,
      prepared by the Departments of Justice and Education as you directed in your radio
      address after the Paducah shooting in December. The report is intended to give parents,
      principals and policy makers a yearly snapshot of school crime, as well as to provide
      information on what practical steps they can take to make their schools safer. (*KEY
      FINDINGS OF THE REPORT ARE ATTACHED.]

      In your opening remarks you will announce the following new initiatives that address
      many of the problems identified in the Annual Report:

             (1) A New Federal Response for Violent Deaths in Schools.      You will propose
             a $12 million plan to create Project SERVE, a federal School Emergency
             Response to Violence effort, to help schools and local communities respond to


                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
             Arkansas, Paducah Kentucky, Pearl Mississippi and Springfield Oregon. Based on
             the experiences of these communities last year--and with input from local officials
             and educators in these and other communities-- the plan will enable the federal
             government to assist local communities in much the same way FEMA assists in
             response to natural and human-caused disasters.

             (2) Targeted Resources for Schools with Serious Crime Problems. To help
             give the estimated 10% of schools with serious crime problems the tools they
             need to put the security of our children first, you will announce a new $65 million
             initiative to hire 2,000 community police and School Resource Officers to work in
             schools -- and to train police, educators and other members of the community to
             help recognize the early warning signs of violence.

             (3) Reforms to Help Make All Schools Safe, Disciplined and Drug-Free. You
             will announce your plan for a significant overhaul of the nearly $600 million Safe
             and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program. Under this proposal,
             schools will be required to adopt rigorous, comprehensive school safety plans that
             include: tough, but fair, discipline policies; safe passage to and from schools;
             effective drug and violence policies; annual school safety report cards; links to after
             school programs; efforts to involve parents; and crisis management plans.

             (4) A Community-Wide Response to School Safety and Youth Violence. To
             help communities throughout the country promote a coordinated, comprehensive
             response to school safety, you will launch a new Safe Schools -- Safe
             Communities initiative designed to help 10 cities develop and implement
             community-wide school safety plans. A minimum of $25 million in discretionary
             grants from the Departments of Education, Justice and Health and Human Service
             -- or $1-3 million per site -- will be made available for this initiative.

             You will also kick-off an MTV-sponsored, year-long media campaign on school
             and youth violence. Working with the Departments of Education and Justice,
             and the National Endowment for the Arts, MTV will distribute a Youth Action
             Guide that aims to engage youth in solutions to violence. In an earlier panel, the
             First Lady introduced one of the MTV media campaign segments.


III.   PARTICIPANTS

       Briefing Participants:
       Bruce Reed/Elena Kagan
       Marsha Scott
       Melanne Verveer
       Michael Cohen
       Richard Socarides
                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-DumP Conversion
         Leanne Shimabukuro
         Neera Tanden

         Presidential Panel Participants:
         The Vice President
         The First Lady
         Jamon Kent, Superintendent of Springfield Public Schools, Springfield, Oregon
         Police Commissioner Paul Evans, Boston, Massachusetts
         Mayor Deedee Corradini, Pres. of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, St. Lake City, Utah
         Liberty Franklin, National Boys and Girls Club Youth of the Year, Everett, Washington
         Tony Earles, Professor Harvard School of Public Health
         Joanna Quintana Barroso, Third Grade Teacher, Coral Way Elementary, Miami, Florida

IV;      PRESS PLAN

         Open Press.

V.       SEQUENCE OF EVENTS

         - YOU will be announced into the room accompanied by the Vice President and the First
 Lady.
      - The Vice President makes remarks and introduces YOU.
      - YOU will make remarks.
      - YOU will make remarks and then take. your seat at the table.
      - YOU will then moderate the discussion by calling on each individual.
      - YOU, the Vice President, and the First Lady will have the option of asking follow up
 questions to each speaker.
       [*SUGGESTED SPEAKING ORDER AND QUESTIONS ATTACHED.]

VI.      REMARKS

         Provided by Speechwriting.

VII.     ATTACHMENTS

         - Annual Report and Summary of Key Findings.
         - Suggested Sequence of Events.
         - Conference Agenda




                                                             Automated Records Management System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

   Students less likely to be victimized but more likely to feel unsafe. Although the
    number of multiple homicide events at schools has increased since 1993 (from 2 to 6 --
    and with 4 times as many victims), the overall school crime rate has actually dropped
    (from 164 crimes per 1,000 students in 1993 to about 128 such crimes in 1996).
    However, the percentage of students reporting that they felt unsafe at or on their way to
    school has increased.

   Most schools safer than community at large. While the overall level of school and
    non-school crime is about the same (about 3 million crimes in each setting), students are
    more than twice as likely to experience serious violent crime while out of school. And
    the very worst violent victimizations -- murders and suicides -- rarely occur in or near
    schools. Fewer than 1% of the 7,357 thousand children who were murdered in 1992-93
    -- or 63 -- were killed at school.

   Serious crime and violence concentrated in a small percentage of schools. Only
    about 10% of public schools report serious or violent crimes to their local police
    departments. Nearly half -- or 47% -- of schools report less serious or non-violent
    crimes to police, and 43% report absolutely no crimes at all.

   Violence more likely in larger, urban schools and with older students. One third of
    large schools (1,000+ students) report serious violent crimes to police, compared with
    less than one tenth of small schools. Also urban schools are twice as likely as rural
    schools to report serious violent crimes, and middle and high schools are 4 times more
    likely than elementary schools to report such crimes ..

   Fist fights and theft the most common crimes. Overall, physical attacks and fights
    without weapons are the crimes most often reported to police by middle and high schools.
     Theft is the most common school crime overall. In 1996, less than 10% of crimes
    against students were of a serious or violent nature.

   Fewer weapons in schools. About 6% of high school seniors --less than in recent years
    -- are carrying firearms and other weapons to schools. Also, the percentage of seniors
    intentionally injured -- with or without weapons -- has not changed significantly over the
    past 20 years.

   Gang presence has nearly doubled. Between 1989 and 1995, the percentage of
    students reporting the presence of street gangs in their schools increased from 15% to
    28% -- including large increases at urban, suburban and rural schools.

   Violence and drugs linked. Students who reported being the victims of violent crimes
    at schools were more likely to report the availability of drugs at school. The presence of
    gangs and guns is also related to school crime and the victimization of students.

   Teachers often crime victims. On average, 3% of teachers are the victims of violent
    crimes, and nearly 5% are the victims of theft.
                                                      Automated Records Management Syst.f~'
                                                          Hex텱ump Conversion


