RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:15-0CT-1998 02:00:43.00

SUBJECT:   Class size negotiations

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Ernmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Together with Kennedy, Harkin, Clay,   Daschle and ED staff, I met with
staff from Goodling and Gorton's office on the outstanding class size
issues. The R's came with their own draft, and insisted we work off of
theirs. Much of their draft was lifted from the ED draft, which they had
gotten from ED earlier in the evening.   So we had a cornman starting point
to work from, and it was easy to reach agreement on the bill language
reflecting the points we had previously agreed to.

However, we were unable to resolve the outstanding issues, principally
because the Republicans were unwilling to make any of the concessions
Elena proposed at the end of the afternoon meeting.   Further, they were
clearly not interested in finding cornmon ground at the meeting; they
conceded early on that they had not agreed to any of our end-of
-the-afternoon proposals, and would not move from their positions at this
meeting. There was one area (see below) where they were open to bringing
back our idea and so we have the basis to communicate again in the
morning, and agreed to.  Otherwise, it is not clear how best for us to
proceed.

Here is where we are on an issue-by-issue basis, starting with the simple
stuff:

Private School Participation: We agreed to language on this.   It
essentially requires equitable participation for private school teachers
in professional development, and states that the private school
provisions in Title 6 now otherwise do not apply to this program.

Participation by BIA schools.  Daschle's staff yielded to Gorton on the
size of the set aside for BIA schools.   While the 1% setaside that Gorton
could live with is much lower than in other programs, no one on our side
felt strongly enought to fight--nor believed it would be possible to move
Gorton very far on this if we tried.

Reducing Class Sixe in the early grades.  Kennedy feels very strongly that
we not give up on our original focus on grades 1-3. We had suggested that
we could live with a priority for grades 1-3 (if adequately defined,
Kennedy could live with this), and we did this in three places in our
bill     the statement of purpose in the opening paragraph; the provision
that describes what local district's can spend the money on, and in the


"local flexibility trigger" that allows other uses of the funds once an
average class size of 18 is reached in grades 1-3     Their draft
contained none of these.

While they were initially unwilling to consider any of our language, or
possible modifications to it, vic ultimately did agree to take our
"trigger" proposal back to Goodling.  In our judgment, this is actually
the only provision with any teeth in it--if it is enacted into law it
would have the effect of getting local districts to work on grades 1-3
first.

We could probably still get a decent message about this being an
initiative aimed at grades 1-3 with new compromise language the Dems
agreed to after the meeting.  (i.e., requiring LEA's to give priority
consideration to grades 1-3 because of the research showing that the
impact of class size reducation is greatest in the early grades) .
However, we didn't think this ought to be in play until we hear back on
the trigger idea--and perhaps until one of you can get a better deal form
the Speaker.

Cap on Professional Development and Teacher Testing.  It was my
understanding from Elena that Gingrich had a agreed to a 10% cap on these
items together. However,  the Goodling draft proposed 10% for teacher
testing, and an additional 10% for professional development.  They claimed
that the Speaker had only been asked about professional development, and
therefore the additoinal 10% set-aside made sense.

We could easily live with a 10% cap on professional development, and an
additional 2% or so for testing. However, it did not seem like a good
idea to concede to Goodling's staff a point you had already won with the
Speaker. Let me know if you want me to try this one out; the Dems will be
ok with it.

State Administrative Funds. Our proposal is for .5% for state
administration.  Kennedy's staff has been very strong on this as is
Riley. The R's were unmoveable on this, and insisted on nothing on State
Administration.

In my judgment , Riley and Kennedy are not going to fallon their swords
on this--and we certainly shouldn't. Clay could care less; he's just
being a loyal team player.   While they both think that some state $ are
needed, they are digging in on this mainly because they don't want to be
hounded by the head of the state school superintendent's group, who has
been a staunch supporter of and good friend to both of them. And neither
wants to be the first to back off.  I've told Scott Fleming to talk to
Riley first thing in the morning, and explain that no one here is going to
fall hold this up over state administration.   I will follow up with Riley
as well.; he will be here for the school safety conference.

I think we should try to get Kennedy and Riley to converge on a
compromise--.025 % rather than .05%--which works out to roughly 50K per
state.   If we try this and the R's won't budge, both Kennedy and Riley
should find it a lot easier to drop this, and to let each other off the
hook.


Formula.  It is our understanding the there is agreement on the
distribution of funds to states (the higher of TItle 1 or Eisenhower for
each state), on an appropriations of an additional $100 million (bringing
the appropriations to $1.2 billion ), and that the within state formula


will be worked out sometime tomorrow at your level.


I'll check in first thing in the moring.


