RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO J )

CREATION DATE/TIME:14-0CT-1998 20:14:12.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 10/14/98 8:15pm

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR WHITE HOUSE SCHOOL SAFETY
THE EAST ROOM
October 15, 1998

           Acknowledgments:TK

         I want to start by JOlning the First Lady and Vice President Gore
in welcoming you to the White House.    The interest in this conference has
been remarkable, and I want to thank everyone who has helped to make it
happen.   As you just heard, thousands of people allover the country are
joining us by satellite, and weare cybercasting this event to thousands
more through our White House web page.   I know the First Lady had a very
interesting discussion this morning on the root causes of youth violence,
and I am looking forward to hearing from all of you about what we must do
to protect our children and make our schools safe.

        This is a time of great prosperity and even greater promise for
our nation, and for all of our people. We have the strongest economy in a
generation ... the first balanced budget and surplus in 29 years ... the
lowest unemployment in 29 years ... the lowest crime rate in 25 years.

        We should all be proud of the progress we are making   and the
future we are building. But when it comes to our childrenD,s safety, we
cannot afford to rest.

        Like all Americans, I was shocked and heartbroken to hear about
the tragic school shootings in Paducah, Springfield, Jonesboro, Edinoro,
and Pearl. Like all Americans, I am deeply disturbed by the sight of
metal detectors in school doorways ... by reports of gangs roving not on
city streets but in school hallways ... by the stark reality of schools so
unsafe that in some communities, children are actually afraid to go to
school.

        Our children canD,t learn if the threat of violence hangs over
their heads and closes their minds ... if teachers are more concerned with
maintaining discipline than teaching ... if a disruptive few can dominate


an entire classroom. At a time when we are doing everything we can to
strengthen our nation for the 21st Century, we cannot afford to let the
threat of violence in our schools and our communities stand between our
children and the education they need to make the most of their lives. We
must take action to prevent youth violence before it happens.

        For nearly six years, we have worked hard to make our schools
places of learning and discipline, not places of disrespect and fear.   We
strengthened and expanded the Safe and Drug Free Schools program. We have
supported policies that build order and respect, such as anti-truancy,
curfews, and school uniforms. We have enforced Zero Tolerance for guns in
our schools -- expelling more than 6,000 students who endangered their
classmates, their teachers, and themselves by bringing weapons into the
classroom. And my balanced budget more than quadruples our investment in
afterschool programs to keep our children in school, off the streets, and
out of danger.
        But to really do something about school violence, we must
understand the nature and magnitude of the problem. What drives young
people to commit acts of violence? What could possibly cause a teenager
to pick up a gun and open fire on his classmates?   How many of our
teachers spend more time maintaining order than teaching? Which of our
nationD,s schools need the most help? Finally, and most importantly, what
can we all do to prevent violence in our schools and communities and make
them safe for our children?

        Last December, I directed Education Secretary Riley and Attorney
General Reno to prepare the first annual report on school safety in
America that begins to answer these questions, and includes information
for schools to develop anti-violence plans.  I am pleased to announce that
this report is now ready, and we are shipping it to every school district
in the country.

        This report confirms the good news: most of our schools are safe.     But in
too many schools, teachers will tell you that when once the chief
discipline problems was cutting class, now it may be wearing gang colors
or dealing drugs.   In too many schools, students feel unsafe just walking
down the hall.   In too many of our schools, disrespect for authority and
intolerance of other students is on the rise.

        This is simply unacceptable. Our schools must be sanctuaries of
safety and civility. Today, I want to talk about the steps I believe we
must take to meet this challenge.

        First, in schools with the biggest violence problems, security must be
our top priority. We know what a difference community policing has made
allover the country.   Today, I am pleased to announce a new $65 million
initiative to help schools hire and train 2,000 new community police and
school resource officers. Just as community police officers walk the
beat, these officers will walk the hallways of our schools. They will
work closely with principals, teachers, and parents to develop
anti-violence and anti-drug plans based on individual schoolsD, actual
needs. Most important, they will get involved in students lives.
Community policing has helped make our streets safe -- it can help make
our schools safe, too.

        Second, we must help schools recognize the early warning signs of
violence -- and to respond to violence when it does strike. Last
September, we released an Early Warning Signs Guide to schools -- and it
is already being used by schools all around the country.   Today, I am
p+eased to announce that I will soon send to Congress my plan to create a


$12 million School Emergency Response to Violence, or Project SERVo This
plan is based on what people in communities that have suffered violent
tragedies in their schools tell us will work best.   Just as FEMA responds
to natural disasters, Project SERV will travel to where the trouble is,
and help communities respond quickly to school violence -- from helping
schools meet increased security needs to providing emergency and longer
term mental health crisis counseling for students and faculty and their
families.

        Let me say here that I am very proud of the work Tipper Gore is doing to
draw attention to the problem of mental illness. While children and
teenagers with mental illness are no more likely to commit violent crimes,
many young people who do strike out in violence are frequently troubled.
But all too often, families do not seek treatment for their children -- or
they seek it too late. Our administration has consistently increased
funding for childrenD,s mental health. Today, I would like to ask all of
you to join me and Tipper in committing ourselves to end the shame and
stigma of mental illness -- and help all young people lead healthy,
productive lives.

        Third, we must do more to make sure that young people are safe, not only
during school hours, but when they walk out the schoolhouse door. Today,
I am pleased to announce two new steps to meet that challenge. Our new
Safe schools -- Safe Communities initiative will award $25 million to help
ten targeted communities develop community-wide plans to reduce youth
violence and drug use in and out of school.  It will promote afterschool
programs, mentoring, and mental health services.

         I am also pleased to announce that we are undertaking a major
overhaul of the Safe and Drug Free Schools program.   Our revamped program
will ask more of schools -- but it will do more to make our schools safe,
disciplined, and drug-free. Among other things, it will require schools
to establish tough but fair discipline pOlicies ... to put in place proven
drug-prevention strategies ... and to issue yearly school safety report
cards to give parents and the public a measure of the their progress.

        These are the methods that have worked so well in cities like
Boston, where no young person was killed in more than two years.  If they
can work in Boston, they can work allover the country.

        Fourth, we must demand more from young people themselves. Given the
facts, given the resources, and given the encouragement, we know that
young people will do the right thing. This year, I was proud to launch an
unprecedented $2 billion media campaign that is reaching young people with
the powerful message that drugs are wrong, drugs are illegal, and drugs
can kill you.   Now we must reach them with another message: you have the
responsibility -- and you have the power -- to prevent youth violence.

        Today, I am pleased to announce that together with MTV, we are
launching a new campaign to encourage young people to become mentors and
help their peers resolve conflicts peacefully. This campaign, called
D&Fight for Your Rights: Take a Stand Against Youth Violence,D8will reach
millions of young people and help make our schools and our communities
safe.

        Above all, we must do more to teach our young people tolerance and
respect for one another.  As the recent tragedy in Wyoming makes all too
clear, violent crimes are often motivated by prejudice and hatred.   I have
directed the Department of EducationC:,s Office for Civil Rights to step up
its efforts to stop discrimination against students in our schools.   I


have also called on the Congress to pass federal hate crimes legislation
that would strengthen and expand the ability of the Justice Department to
prosecute hate crimes committed because of the victim's sexual
orientation, gender, or disability.   But laws can only do so much.
Ultimately, we must all take responsibility.    It is often said that
children have to be taught to hate -- it is up to us to teach them to
respect one another.
         Before we begin our discussion, I want to thank all of you for the work
you have done and will continue to do to help us build a stronger, safer
America.   And now, I will turn the conversation over to Jamonn Kent, the
Superintendent from the Springfield, Oregon public schools.

###
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 084 - FOLDER 003
[10/15/1998 - 1012011998]
