RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-0CT-1998 18:36:05.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly Report 10/16/98

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  Sarah may have one more health care item==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ======
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D29]MAIL430577092.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504308100000010A02010000000205000000384300000002000041F29804E75683CE4DD87B


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report


        Education -- Budget Deal: While your victory on class size reduction and your
other education initiatives was remarkable, a number of key pieces of your education
agenda remains unfinished. In addition to school modernization, there are two key areas
we will focus on in the near term. First, the final provision on national standards allows
some test development work to continue (while banning pilot testing or implementation),
and calls on NAGB and NAS to conduct additional studies in anticipation of possible
Congressional consideration of this issue when NAEP is reauthorized in the next Congress.
 Because the likelihood of ever getting full Congressional support is so slim, we will develop
a number of additional options for how to best continue to press for national standards.
Second, as we work with the Education Department on a proposal for the reauthorization
of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, we will ensure that the concepts in the
Education Opportunity Zones are fully reflected in that proposal and remain a central part
of our education agenda.

         Health Care -- Kennedy-Jeffords Legislation: Despite our efforts, the Work Incentives
Improvement Act (Kennedy-Jeffords) did not make into the final Omnibus budget appropriations
bill. This bipartisan legislation, that you endorsed at the commemoration of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) last July, enables people with disabilities to go back to work by providing
an option to buy into Medicaid and Medicare, as well as other pro-work initiatives. The
disability community believes this is the most significant legislation since the ADA. Although
this bill was on the list of top Administration priorities throughout the final budget negotiations
and received broad-based bipartisan support, it was rejected by Republicans because they did not
want to have significant health expansions and because they thought it was too late in the process
to approve such a significant piece of legislation. However, the disability community as well as
the AIDS community and others are extremely appreciative that the Administration fought so
hard to pass this legislation.

       Health Care -- AIDS Issues in the Budget: The Omnibus bill included significant new
funding for HIY /AIDS. In particular, it included $110 million for funding to address the critical
AIDS problem in the minority community. This increase, plus an additional $20 million that
HHS has agreed to allocate from existing funds, meets the Congressional Black Caucuses' full

                                                             A~ltecords Management System
                                                             .J.te}c_~~
which provides a range of treatment and services for people with HIV/AIDS, also received a
$250 million -- or nearly 30 percent increase. The AIDS community and the CSC are quite
pleased with this remarkable outcome. However, there is disappointment regarding the
inclusion in the final bill of a needle exchange provision that prevents the District of Columbia
from using their own funds for needle exchange programs. We strongly opposed this
provision because it strips federal funds from community-based agencies trying to stop the
spread of HIV through needle exchange programs.

         Health Care -- Race and Health in the Budget: The Congress has taken a critical
first step in investing in your multi-year proposal to eliminate racial health disparities in
six health areas, including HIV/AIDS, cancer, diabetes, and immunizations. As you know
some of these disparities are startling. For example, African Americans under the age of
65 have twice the rate of heart disease as whites, and Native Americans suffer from
diabetes at nearly three times the average rate. The budget gives sufficient funding to
finance the $80 million you included in your budget request, including new grants for
communities to develop new strategies to address these disparities.

       Health Care -- Historic Increases in Biomedical Research. The Congress agreed to
fund your proposal to increase biomedical research at the NIH with a $2 billion expansion
of NIH research funding --a 14-percent increase. This increase will enable scientists to
pursue a wide range of important new breakthroughs in critical diseases, from Aizheimers
to AIDS to genetic discoveries. In addition, the Centers for Disease Control also received
your requested increases for new research to improve prevention efforts, including fighting
emerging infectious diseases and combating new resistance to anti-biotics, and the Agency for
Health Care Policy Research (AHCPR) received your requested increases to improve quality
outcomes. For example, overuse of antibiotics has been shown to lead to resistance and cost as
much as $7.5 billion a year. AHCPR's development and dissemination of guidelines for the
appropriate use of antibiotics will result in better patient care and significant health care savings.

         Tobacco -- Medicaid Recoupment: During negotiations over the omnibus
appropriations bill, the Republican Leadership proposed including language which would have
waived our right to the federal share of state tobacco recoveries. They would not, however,
agree to conditions requiring states to spend a portion of the funds on a menu of items and the
language was therefore not included in the bill. We plan to tell the states and others that we are
willing to consider this issue next year, but only if the federal share of settlement funds to a
list of specified activities along the lines of the menu negotiated in the McCain bill and
preferably including tobacco control activities.

         Crime -- Prison Drug Testing/Treatment: In the budget agreement we succeeded in
including legislative language to allow states to use up to 10% of federal prison funds to
implement drug testing and treatment plans for prisoners and parolees. As you know, you called
for this change in law in a directive on coerced abstinence that you signed last year.

                                                  2
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                H··Dump Conversion
National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) will go on-line as planned at the
end of next month. While the final compromise does not allow the FBI to charge a user fee, it
appropriates 42 million dollars to pay for these checks and, more importantly it doe snot require
the immediate destruction of records. This latter provision would have delayed implementation
of the NICS by 6-8 months.

         Community Empowerment -- Final Budget Agreement: The final budget agreement
included almost all of the major initiatives proposed in your State of the Union and FY99
Budget. Some of the highlights include: 1) 50,000 new Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers; 2)
the first year funding for the Round II Empowerment Zones; 3) a 19 percent increase in the
Community Development Financial Institution Fund budget; 4) enactment of the landmark public
housing reform legislation; 5) extension of the Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) and tlie
Welfare-to-Work Tax Credit (WTWTC); 6) an 18 percent increase in homeless assistance; 7) a
33 percent expansion of HUD's Fair Housing programs that are part of your One America
Initiative; 8) full funding for EPA's Brownfield's program; 9) and the creation of a new program
to provide Individual Development Accounts (IDA) to empower individuals to save for a first
home, post secondary education, or to start a new business. The enactment of the IDA
legislation means that you have fulfilled, at some level, all of the promises made in Putting
People First in the area of community empowerment.

        The one initiative which Congress was unwilling to consider as part of the tax extenders
legislation was your proposal to expand the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC).
However, we believe that the ground work has been laid to secure Congressional approval next
year for the LIHTC and a longer extension of the WOTC and the WTWTC. Over the next
several week, DPC, NEC, and the Office of the Vice President will be finalizing a set of new
proposals for your FY2000 budget and State of the Union that will build on the victories we
achieved in this year's budget.

        Welfare Reform -- Teen Birth and Pregnancy Rates: Two recent reports show
continued good news regarding teen birth and pregnancy rates. CDC announced preliminary data
showing a 3 percent drop in the teen birth rate from 1996 to 1997, the sixth annual decline in a
row and a drop of 15 percent since 1991. The latest rate, for 1997, is 52.9 births per 1,000 girls
between 15 and 19 years old. Teen birth rates declined for all racial groups, though the rate of
decline for blacks was slightly less than for other groups. A new report from the Alan
Guttmacher Institute shows the teen pregnancy rate dropped nearly 13 percent from 1991 to 1995
and now stands at the lowest level since 1975, at 101 pregnancies per 1,000 15- to 19-year-old
girls. Researchers attribute the drop in pregnancy rates to a decline in sexual activity among
teens and improved use of contraceptives. The teen pregnancy data lag several years behind the
teen birth data because the pregnancy data depend on abortion data which take longer to collect.
In several months, CDC will produce its own estimate of the teen pregnancy rate which will



                                                3             Automated Records Management System
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
 will also contain teen pregnancy rates by race and ethnicity.




                                               4
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion


