RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP o[ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-0CT-1998 12:59:40.00

SUBJECT:   Working with ED

TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
As we discussed yesterday, there have been a number of instances in which
an extrordinary effort on our part was necessary in order to get the
Education Department to take steps which the President clearly wanted.

1. Giving NAGB rather than the Education Department authority to develop
national tests:   In a meeting with national experts shortly after the
President's national standards initiative was announced in the 1997 SOTU,
the President made clear that he thought that the national test should be
moved out of the Education Department and placed in NAGB's hands.   DPC
staff regularly reiterated this view to ED in the following weeks and
months.  The Education Department resisted moving in this direction until
Secretary Riley announced this as the Administration's position in
September '97, as the battle over national testing was coming to a head
and when it became clear that this step was necessary to save the tests.
I believe ED resistance to this move was rooted in several institutional
factors:
The statistical agency and leadership in ED had real doubts about NAGB's
technical capacity to handle this job effectively, and real concerns about
expanding NAGB's responsibility.   Since NAGB's creation a little more than
10 years ago, there has always been a somewhat uneasy relationship between
NAGB and the National Center for Education Statistics, as they try to
appropriately define their respective roles and shared responsibilities
for designing and conducting the National Assessment of Education
Progress. Further, NAGB has a small staff, with limited technical
capabilities.   Putting NAGB fully in charge of the tests and eliminating
any role for ED staff was a concern to those who have worked most closely
with NAGB.
ED leadership was concerned that, for a variety of reasons, NAGB would
slow down the schedule for developing and implementing the national tests.
ED was concerned that NAGB would lack the desire and the ability to keep
the test development work on the fast-track that ED had put it on, in
order to meet the President's goal of implementing the test in 1999. They
were right; NAGB delayed the timeline by a year, in addition to a
one-year delay caused by the Congress. (although I remain convinced that
if we had not taken this step, the tests would have been completely killed
by the Congress a year ago.   From this perspective, a delay is not so
bad.
ED and DPC held different views about when we should announce our intent
to place NAGB in charge of the tests.   Because of NAGB's carefully defined
statutory authority, it could assume full authority for the tests only if
it was given this authority by the Congress. DPC pressed to announce our
intent to seek Congressional authorization, and at the same time to make
NAGB an official advisory group by executive action--either by the
President or by the Secretary. Taking this step would have reinforced
our committment to ultimately give NAGB full responsibility for the
,.   ....    ..
            tests.  However, ED resisted this move, arguing that it would buy us
            little support in the Congress.

            Aggressively promoting the President's agenda of ending social promotions
            and intervening in failing schools.  Since the President challenged states
            and local school districts to take these steps in March 1996, DPC has been
            trying to get ED to advance this agenda through nonlegislative means, such
            as producing reports and guidebooks that could assist in the impleme
            ntation of these policies and give the President the hook to return to
            these issues. Ultimately, ED agreed to produce ~ guidebook on turing
            around failing schools (released last Spring and well received in the
            Education community) and on ending social promotions (to be completed
            later this Fall), but only after repeated requests and after we insisted
            on issueing Presidential directives to produce these guidebooks.   I
            believe that it has been so difficult to get ED's enthusiastic action on
            these issues for several reasons:
            Concerns about the policies themselves. Though Secretary Riley has always
            supported these policies on both substantive and political grounds, deeper
            in ED there has been scepticism to both of them.  Briefly, there has been
            concern that the message about taking over failing schools was too nega
            tive and the research to guide such actions to limited; opposition to
            ending social promotion has been routed in the view--supported by
            research--that having students repeat a grade can increase the odds of
            later school failure and dropping out.  It has taken some effort to
            convince people that the President's challenge is not simply to keep kids
            back, put to make sure that school systems take the necessary steps from
            the outset to ensure that kids get the extra help the need to meet
            standards and be promoted on time.
            Limited staff capacity. ED has only a small number of staff with the
            analytic skills and substantive knowledge to produce first-rate reports on
            these two issues--and its staff capacity to do this has been further
            depleted in recent years.  I am convinced that part of the problem here
            has been that there were simply not many people to turn a pr.oject like
            this over to--and those who could do it were already swamped with other
            high priority tasks.


