RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-0CT-1998 15:53:34.00

SUBJECT:     Native American budget wins

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This is    a document on Native American budget wins that OMB has approved.
I would    like to pass this out at the National Congress of American
Indians    conference. Could you review this by 4:30 as I am leaving to
catch a    plane to the conference at 5pm? Thanks

I am just waiting for signoff from Fred DuVal on the gaming paragraph.        ============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D74]MAIL448763391.226 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504375170000010A02010000000205000000D8670000000200009F91EE02E2E557D7C28CD2
65972434FF6A01321F7C06C2950096D8C82C579COE8C2B6FC281F4047BOCCE014B5BC8FA7EE33A
                      FOR NATIVE AMERICANS IN THE BUDGET,
                      BUT THERE Is STILL MORE WORK To Do
                                               October 20, 1998

The final FY99 budget represents a significant step forward for America, protecting the surplus until
Social Security is reformed, and putting in place critical investments in education and training, from
smaller class sizes to after-school care, and from summer jobs to college mentoring. While the final
budget is clearly a win for President Clinton and Vice President Gore, there is still more work to do to
prepare America for the 21st century. Unfortunately, Republicans blocked school modernization,
Patients Bill of Rights, comprehensive tobacco legislation, child care investments, and campaign finance
reform.

Budget Victories for Native Americans:
Saving Social Security First. The President's commitment to Save Social Security First held the
line against several Republican efforts to drain the surplus.

Investing in Education and Training. While House Republican tried to slash their education budget
by over $2 billion, President Clinton and Congressional Democrats delivered on their education agenda:
          More High-Quality Teachers With Smaller Class Sizes: $1.2 billion for the first year of the
          President's new initiative to hire 100,000 new teachers to reduce class size in the early grades to a
          national average of 18. Through smaller classes this initiative will help recruit high-quality
          teachers and will insure that students will receive more individual attention, a solid foundation in
          the basics, and greater discipline in the classroom.
                        $6 Million of the $1.2 Billion is for BIA-funded schools. The funds can used to
                        recruit, hire and train teachers in order to reduce class size in the early grades.

         BIA School Construction and Repair: The final budget provides $60 million to replace older,
         unsafe, and dilapidated schools on reservations in accordance with a Congressionally-approved
         priority list ofreplacement schools and would provide for much-needed health and safety-related
         repairs and improvements that together comprise a roughly $700 million backlog. In his FY1999
         budget, the President requested $87 million, which is a $33 million (61 %) increase over FY 1998,
         to support the Administration's initiative The House-passed bill would have provided only $59
         million, which was $28 million (32%) below the requested amount.

         Ensuring the Success of Public Schools and Colleges Serving Tribes. The final budget
         provides $574 million for the operation of elementary and secondary schools, tribally contrrolled
         community colleges, and assistance to Indian children attending public schools. This represents an
         increase of 16 millions from FY98. The funds can used to recruit, hire and train teachers in order
         to reduce class size in the early grades. These funds will assist the Nation's 30 tribal colleges,
         which provide 2-year degrees to over 25,000 students in 12 states. For the first time in his FY99
         budget, the President singled out tribal colleges for the time in his proposed budget for the Higher
         Education Act.

         After School Programs: $200 million to expand programs and serve a quarter of a million
         children.
         Child Literacy: $260 million for a ~ literacy initiative, con~~t&~~t~i!et~jlt System
         America Reads proposal.                                             C       .
                                                                     Hex-Dump onversiOn
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
         College Mentoring for Middle School Children: $120 million for GEAR-UP, a new mentoring
         initiative to help up to 100,000 low income middle school children prepare for college.
         ~dtK>mltf!~~~~r,b~gH~mm~\1JR811tmWaY,§8~?J, ~<fi8q~ldtt&¥~\IlC¥f&lIf\Wg &~M8~d'fur

         Child Care Quality: $182 million to improve the quality of child care for America's working
         families.
         Teacher Recruitment: $75 million for~ teacher quality programs including to recruit and
         prepare thousands of teachers to teach in high-poverty areas.
         Head Start: A $313 million increase to fund President's request of up to an additional 36,000
         slots for children and keeping on track towards one million children served by 2002.
         Indian Head Start: The final budget provides $134 million for Indian Head Start -- a $9 million
         increase over FY98.

Fighting Crime in Indian Country.               The President's budget included key increases for law
enforcement:

         Improves Law Enforcement in Indian Country. The final bill includes a $109 million increase
         -- for the Departments of Justice and Interior -- for the President's Indian Country Law Enforcement
         Initiative. The initiative will improve public safety for the 1.4 million residents on the
         approximately 56 million acres ofIndian lands. This funding will increase the number oflaw
         enforcement officers on Indian lands, provide more equipment, expand detention facilities, enhance
         juvenile crime prevention, and improve the effectiveness oftribal courts. Although violent crime
         has been declining nationally for several years, it has been on the rise in Indian country. At
         the same time, police service on Indian lands has been steadily shrinking. Recognizing these
         facts, the President made a major commitment to improve law enforcement in Indian country

Providing Health Care. President Clinton and Vice President Gore are committed to providing health
care to the Native American population. This budget moves forward on their vision to help realize this goal.


         Indian Health Service: Indian Health Services saw an increase of $140 million over FY98. This
         increase will assist in providing much-needed quality health care to Indian communities.

          Indian Health Service (IHS) Contract Support Costs. The House bill contained an .
          objectionable provision that would allocate contract support costs (e.g., indirect costs) to tribes that
          have contracted and compacted their health systems on a proportional basis. The Native American
          community and IHS objected to this provision because some tribes would have received less
          funding than they received in FY 1998. At the same time, the Congress agreed to add some
        . funding to contract support costs so that the amounts by which some tribes' payments are reduced
          is minimized. The Administration pursued compromise language, but at the last minute the House
          relented and removed the objectionable provision entirely.

Moving People from Welfare to Work and Empowering Communities. President Clinton
and Vice President Gore are committed to tapping the potential of America's urban and rural communities.
 This budget moves forward on their vision to help revitalize America's communities.

    50,000 Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers. President Clinton's FY 1999 Budget included $283
    million for 50,000 new vouchers exclusively for people who need housing assistance to make the
    transition from welfare to work. The original House bill included $100 million, while the Senate
    million for 50,000 welfare-to-work housing vouchers.
         $75 Million for Welfare-to-Work Transportation Funds. While the House and Senate
         provided $50 miIIion -- the minimum amount "guaranteed" in the transportation biII -- the final
         budget includes $75 miIIion for this competitive grant program. These funds wiII assist states and
         localities in developing flexible transportation alternatives, such as van services, to help former
         welfare recipients and other low income workers get to work.
         Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) Expansion. The Administration
         requested a major expansion of the CDFI program to continue building a national network of
         community development banks. The original House biII froze CDFI funding at $80 million, while
         the Senate cut funding to $55 million. The final budget increases CDFI funding from $80 million
         in FY98 to $95 million in FY99 -- a 19-percent increase.
         Flexible Funding for Empowerment Zones. President Clinton and Vice President Gore
         requested mandatory funding for second-round urban and rural Empowerment Zones. While the
         House and the Senate did not provide any funding, the final budget includes $60 million in this
         flexible discretionary funding for the next round of Empowerment Zones and new rural Enterprise
         Communities. Included in this funding is $10 million in discretionary funds for 5 rural Zones. This
         funding will allow the Zones to begin implementing their development strategies to bring jobs and
         investment to these disadvantaged areas. Also included is $5 milli<;m for 20 new rural Enterprise
         Communities with purposes similar to the round one Enterprise Communities. Tribes are eligible
         to receive funding.
         Indian Housing: The budget provides $620 million in block grants for Indian housing, which will
         serve 552 tribes.

Protecting Sovereignty and Promoting Economic Development. The Administration was
successful in negotiating to remove several riders on the Interior bill that would have seriously interfered
with tribal sovereignty and cut funding for Indian populations. The President's negotiators made protecting
tribal sovereignty and promoting economic development a priority:                                              i
                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                         .,
       Protecting Sovereignty: Worked out an agreement to remove from the bill an effort to prohibit the 1$
       promulgation of regulations for Class III gaming. The final bill permits these regulations to be   ~
       promulgated in six months, which the Administration is confident will protect Indian gaming.       ~
                                                                                                               ~ g

Much Work Still Left to Do:
In the waning days of the session, the President and Congressional Democrats prevailed in making critical '<:l
                                                                                                               1~  .~




investments to advance the President's comprehensive education agenda. Much work remains for the future~           ~
because Republicans in Congress killed, at least for now, critical priorities, including:                  B
                                                                                                           ~       ~
x      School Modernization. Beginning with his State of the Union address, the President fought all year
       to modernize our schools. His fully paid for tax credits would have leveraged nearly $22 billion in
       bonds to build and renovate schools. In the final days of the budget negotiations, Republicans in
       Congress refused to even meet on the critical issue of school construction.

      Patients Bill of Rights. President Clinton repeatedly urged the Congress to pass a strong,
      enforceable patients' bill of rights that would assure Americans the quality health care they need.
      Congressional Republicans killed this year's effort to pass a Patients Bill of Rights.

      Comprehensive Tobacco Legislation. This year, President Clinton made passage oflegislation to
      reduce youth smoking a top priority, in order to stop kids from smoking before they start through a
      significant price increase, measures to prevent tobacco companies from marketing to children, and
politicians instead of parents, and killed this year's effort to pass bipartisan comprehensive tobacco
legislation to reduce youth smoking.

Campaign Finance Reform. At the beginning of the year, the President made passage of bipartisan,
comprehensive campaign finance reform a priority for his Administration. After months of delay, the
House of Representatives overcame defenders of the status quo and passed the Shay-Meehan bill.
However, the Senate Republicans killed this historic legislation.

Child Care Initiative. In his State of the Union, the President proposed an historic child care
initiative to make child care better, safer and more affordable for America's working families. The
President's proposal included $7.5 billion over 5 years for child care subsidies for low-income
working families and tax credits to help 3 million working families pay for child care. The
Republicans refused to support these critical investments.




                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


