RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-NOV-1998 17:24:41.00

SUBJECT:   Final Briefing

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Roger V. Salazar ( CN=Roger V. Salazar/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D7)MAIL484176404.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043A0060000010A020100000002050000004C390000000200003811FE8681715FEFE3741E
AB00953FC133A19B547B6A54C9CCE2165816D492709605C123B22D9D53D8EB6479B5540CDB01EO


                       PATIENTS BILL OF RIGHTS CEREMONY

                             DATE:                 November 2, 1998
                             LOCATION:             Rose Garden
                             BRIEFING TIME:        12:15 pm - 12:55 pm
                             EVENT:                1:00 pm - 2:00 pm
                             FROM:                 Bruce Reed/Chris Jennings


I.    PURPOSE

      To urge voters to elect a Congress that supports increasing patient protections, and
      to release a report detailing actions the federal government has taken to implement
      a Patients Bill of Rights while the Republican Leadership stalled on this issue.

II.   BACKGROUND

      This is an opportunity for you to urge voters to elect a Congress that shares your
      commitment to passing a strong enforceable Patients' Bill of Rights next year. You
      should emphasize that while the Republican Leadership stalled on the patients' bill of
      rights, the Administration has been doing everything possible to implement these
      protections in Federal health plans. To that end, you will be releasing a new report from
      the Vice President documenting action that the Federal government is taking within its
      authority to implement the Patients' Bill of Rights in the health plans it administers or
      oversees. In your remarks, you should make the following points:

      Criticize the Republican Leadership for allowing Congress to adjourn without
      passing a strong Patients' Bill of Rights. For a full year, you have been calling on the
      Congress to pass a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights. For months, the
      Republican Leadership used every possible stall tactic to thwart the patients' bill of
      rights. When the Republican Leadership finally did introduce a bill, their proposal
      contained more loopholes than patient protections. It did not contain critical protections,
      such as access to specialists, and offered false promises, such as an appeals process that
      left the decisions in the hands of HMO accountants. In fact, Senator Lott would not even
      allow an up or down vote to be held on this issue.

      Urge Voters to Choose A Congress Committed to Passing A Strong Enforceable
      Patients' Bill of Rights. You should reiterate your strong commitment to passing a
      Patients' Bill of Rights in the next Congress and urge Americans to go to the polls

                                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
include enforceable patient protections, such as access to specialists, coverage of
emergency room services when and where the need arises, continuity of care protections,
an internal and independent external appeals process to appeal decisions made by HMO
accountants, and protections to assure that HMOs are held accountable when patients are
harmed or injured due to a health plans' decisions.

Announce the Release of a New Report From the Vice President That Highlights the
Administration Is Doing Everything Possible to Implement Patient Protections. In
February, you directed Medicare, Medicaid, the Federal Employee Health Benefits
Program, the Department of Defense Military Health Program, and the Veteran's Health
Program -- which serve over 85 million Americans -- to, where possible, come into
compliance with the Patients' Bill of Rights outlined by the President's Quality
Commission. Today, the Vice President released a report highlighting that these agencies
have taken all the action within their statutory authority to implement patient protections.
 As a result, the Federal health plans are now, or soon will be, in virtual compliance with
the Patients' Bill of Rights. The report documents that:

           The 285 participating health plans, covering nine million Federal employees
           and their dependents, have been directed to implement new patient protections
           this year. OPM which oversees the Federal Health Employees
           Benefits Program (FEHBP) serving nine million Federal employees
           and dependents, has directed their 285 participating health plans to
           come·into compliance with the Patients' Bill of Rights. Through
           their annual call letter, OPM has specifically requested that plans
           implement new protections including access to specialists, continuity
           of care, disclosure of financial incentives, and access to emergency
           room services. Finally, OPM has issue new regulations to prevent
           "gag clauses." OPM is also sending information to beneficiaries to
           assure they are fully aware of their new patient protections.

           The 39 million Medicare beneficiaries are benefitting from critical
           patient protections. Building on Medicare's commitment to providing
           essential patient protections, HHS published an Interim Final rule in June
           that includes a series of new patient protections for Medicare beneficiaries.
             When this rule is fully implemented, Medicare will be virtually in
           compliance with the Patients' Bill of Rights, including new protections
           such as access to emergency services when and where the need arises,
           patient participation in treatment decisions, and access to specialists.

           The 38 million Medicaid beneficiaries are being assured essential
           protections in the Patients' Bill of Rights. In September, HCFA
           published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) adding new
           patients protections for Medicaid beneficiaries, such as access to specialists

                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
              compliance with the Patients' Bill of Rights, where possible.

              Over eight million Americans will receive the protections in the
              patients' bill of rights by the end of this year as a result of the new
              policy directive assured by the Defense Department's Military Health
              System (MHS). In response to your directive, DoD issued "The
              Patients' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities in the Military Health
              System," a major policy directive to all participants in the MHS.
              This directive outlined new protections for the over 8 million
              beneficiaries served by MHS, including access to appropriate
              specialists for women's health needs and chronic illnesses and rights
              for the full discussion of treatment options and of financial incentives.
               With this directive, which will be fully implemented by the end of
              this year, DoD will now be in compliance with the Patients' Bill of
              Rights.

              Over three million veterans are or will soon be assured virtually all
              patient protections. In July, the Department of Veteran Affairs
              (DV A) issued an Information Memorandum to participating health
              providers announcing its intention to have an external appeals process
              in place by the end of the year. Similarly, DV A established a task
              force to make recommendations as to how best implement
              information disclosure requirements consistent with Commission's
              recommendations and has developed a new brochure to provide
              beneficiaries the necessary information. With the implementation of
              these new protections DV A is virtually in compliance with the
              Patients' Bill of Rights.

              The 125 million Americans covered by ERISA still are not assured
              critical patient protections because the Department of Labor does not
              have the authority to implement them without legislation. DoL
              oversees the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA),
              governing approximately 2.5 million private sector health plans, that
              cover about 125 million Americans, issued new regulation to
              implement an expedited internal appeals process and information
              disclosure requirements. However, DoL's report underscores unless
              Congress passes Federal legislation, they do not have the authority to
              implement most patient protections.

III.   PARTICIPANTS

       Briefing Participants:
       Bruce Reed
       Chris Jennings
                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

      Program Participants:
      YOU
      Beverly Malone, President of the American Nurses Association
      Dr. Robert Weinmann, advocate of HMO reform
      Frances Jennings, victim of HMO abuse. Her husband was delayed two months              for a reft

      To be greeted before event:
      Secretary Alexis Herman, Department of Labor
      Director Janice LaChance, Office of Personnel Management
      Deputy Secretary Gober, Veterans Administration
      Gerald McEntee, President of AFSCME
      Bill Lucy, Secretary Treasurer of AFSCME
      Linda Chavez-Thompson, Executive Vice-President of the AFL-CIO

IV.   PRESS PLAN

      Open Press.

V.    SEQUENCE OF EVENTS

      - YOU will be announced onto the stage accompanied by program participants.
      - Beverly Malone will make remarks and introduce Dr. Robert Weinmann.
      - Dr. Robert Weinmann will make remarks and introduce Frances Jennings.
      - Frances Jennings will make remarks and introduce YOU.
      - YOU will make remarks, work a ropeline, and then depart.

VI.   REMARKS

      Provided by Speechwriting.




                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion


