RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-NOV-1998 22:33:51.00

SUBJECT:   Gun Shows Paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Christa Robinson   CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
BR/EK:

Below is the draft paper for tomorrow.  I've sent the EO/memo to Phil for
final clearance, as well as to the agency hacks for one last review.  I
understand final press paper is due by 12 noon.   jose iii

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D76]MAIL45010790B.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750430C050000010A020100000002050000006115000000020000623FB806413601F9EA8711
1802EEF713A146EA837EA4F5091DOE8B29CFDD9577077265C2E31607FDC2720609B09DD5AC4B05

                                       N9vember 6, 1998


MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY
                   ATTORNEY GENERAL

Subject        Preventing firearms sales to prohibited purchasers

Since 1993, my Administration has worked hand-in-hand with law enforcement agencies and the
communities they serve to rid our neighborhoods of gangs, guns and drugs -- and by doing so to
reduce crime and the fear of crime throughout the country. Our strategy is working. Through
the historic 1994 Crime Act, we have given communities the tools and resources they need to
help drive down the crime rate for six years in a row, to its lowest point in a generation.
Keeping guns out of the hands of criminals through Brady background checks has also been a
key part of this strategy. Over the past 5 years, Brady background checks have helped prevent a
quarter of a million handgun sales to felons, fugitives, domestic violence abusers, and other
prohibited purchasers -- saving countless lives and preventing needless injuries.

On November 30, 1998, the permanent provisions of the Brady Law will take effect, and the
Department of Justice will implement the National Instant Criminal Background Check System
(NICS). The NICS will allow law enforcement officials access to a more inclusive set of records
than is now available and will-- for the first time -- extend the Brady Law's background check
requirement to long guns and firearms transfers at pawnshops. Under the NICS, the overall number
of background checks conducted before the purchase of a firearm will increase from an estimated 4
million annually to as many as 12 million.

We can, however, take additional steps to strengthen the Brady Law and keep our streets safe from
gun-carrying criminals. Under current law, firearms can be -- and an untold number are -- bought
and sold entirely without background checks, at the estimated 5,000 private gun shows that take place
across the country. This loophole makes gun shows prime targets for criminals and gun traffickers,
and we have good reason to believe that firearms sold in this way have been used in serious crimes.
In addition, the failure to do background checks at gun shows often thwarts needed law enforcement
efforts to trace firearms. Just days ago, Florida voters overwhelmingly passed a ballot initiative
designed to facilitate background checks at gun shows. It is now time for the federal government to
take appropriate action, on a national basis, to close this loophole in the law.

Therefore, I request that, within 60 days, you recommend to me what actions our Administration can
take -- including proposed legislation -- to ensure that firearms sales at gun shows are not exempt
from Brady background checks or other provisions of our federal gun laws.




                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                        Belt-Dump Conversion
                                 Questions and Answers
                                   November 7,1998



Gun Shows


Q:   How many guns are sold at gun shows?

A:   Since gun shows are largely unregulated and most gun show participants are not required
     to keep records of sales, ATF does not have an estimate of the number of firearms sold.
     However, the National Association of Arms Shows estimates that there are more than 100
     gun shows every weekend (5,200 shows annually); that more than 5 million people attend
     these shows; and that they generate billions of dollars in sales.


Q.   Who sells guns at gun shows? Why are they essentially unregulated?

A.   Gun shows are events where private citizens as well as federally-licensed gun dealers can
     buy and sell firearms and related paraphernalia. These shows are usually held o"n
     weekends in auditoriums, fairgrounds, school gyms, and other outlets in almost every
     state in the nation.

     In 1986, a law was passed which enabled federally-licensed gun dealers to sell firearms at
     gun shows for the first time. Licensed dealers are required to conduct background
     checks and keep other appropriate records for firearms sold at gun shows. However, the
     same law permitted "hobbyists" (individuals without federal firearms licenses) to sell
     their personal collections at gun shows without similar requirements. The result was to
     expand the opportunities for private citizens to buy and sell firearms at gun shows, and
     raise the threshold for what constitutes being engaged in the business of selling firearms,
     which requires a federal firearms license (FFL).


Q.   How do you know that guns purchased at gun shows are used in crimes?

A.   While guns sold at gun shows are difficult -- if not impossible -- to trace, ATF has
     conducted numerous investigations where firearms have been obtained by criminals at
     gun shows. A Justice Department survey of prison inmates indicated that 30 percent of
     the guns they used in crimes were purchased at gun stores -- but that the remaining 70
     percent were obtained in secondary gun markets, like gun shows. In addition, there is a
     wide range of anecdotal evidence indicating that criminals, juveniles, and other prohibited
     purchasers are obtaining their guns at gun shows and using them to commit crimes.



                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
     Blagojevich, which essentially imposes the same requirements on nonlicensed gun
     show participants as those on federally-licensed gun dealers?

A.   Today's directive calls on the Secretary and Attorney General to develop
     recommendations to ensure that criminals cannot exploit guns shows to arm themselves.
     They certainly will be looking at legislative proposals as part of this review. Until we
     receive their recommendations in the next 60 days, it would be premature to announce
     that we will be supporting any specific legislation.


BradylNICS


Q:   Last week, didn't the Justice Department express some concern over the National
     Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) being able to handle all of the
     background checks during the holiday season -- traditionally big months for gun
     sales?

A:   We do not have any reason to believe that the FBI will be unable to handle the workload
     during the busy holiday season. While there are significantly more guns sold during the
     October - December time period, the NICS is being prepared to handle the full load. The
     FBI has been training hundreds of staff, everything is on schedule, and the Attorney
     General is confident that the FBI can handle demands placed on the NICS once it comes
     online.


Q:   How will background checks under the NICS be paid for? Didn't Congress pass a
     prohibition on passing the cost of the check along to the consumer?

A:   This summer, the Senate passed a provision that would have prohibited the FBI from
     charging the same fee for Brady background checks as it does for other checks, such as
     those for child care and elder care workers. The Administration strongly opposed that
     provision, particularly since no alternative source of funding was identified at the time.
     Since then, however, the final appropriations bill included over $40 million to pay for the
     NICS' first year of operation.

     It is also worth noting that, as originally passed, this Senate provision would have
     required the immediate destruction of all Brady records -- and effectively delayed
     implementation of the NICS by as much as 6 months. Due to the President's strong
     opposition, this language was struck from the final appropriations bill.




                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  Helt~1mnp ConvelSion
                                      November 7, 1998

In his radio address to the nation, President Clinton will direct the Secretary of the Treasury and
Attorney General to recommend, within 60 days, what actions the Administration can take to
ensure that firearms sold at gun shows are not exempt from Brady background checks or other
federal gun laws.

Closing the Gun Show Loophole

·.     Gun shows: A haven for criminals and gun traffickers. Every year, about 5 million
       people attend an estimated 5,000 gun shows that take place in convention centers, school
       gyms, and on fairgrounds across the country. Under current law, firearms can be -- and
       an untold number are -- bought and sold entirely without background checks at these
       shows. This loophole makes gun shows prime targets for criminals and gun traffickers,
       and often thwarts needed law enforcement efforts to trace firearms used in crimes.

·      Following Florida's lead. This week, Florida voters overwhelmingly passed a
       statewide ballot initiative requiring sellers at gun shows to adhere to the same standards
       as properly licensed gun dealers. Specifically, the initiative allows counties to require
       criminal history background checks and minimum waiting periods prior to firearms sales
       at gun shows and on other public property. In his radio address, the President will call
       on the Treasury Secretary and the Attorney General to recommend to him, within 60 days,
       the appropriate actions to take to close this loophole on the national level.

Strengthening the Bradv Law

·      Final Brady provisions taking effect. After nearly 5 years of working with law
       enforcement agencies, last week the Attorney General certified that the FBI's National
       Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) is set to take effect on November 30,
       1998, as required by the Brady Law. The NICS will allow law enforcement officials
       access to a more inclusive set of records than is now available -- including information on
       criminal aliens, drug users, and persons subject to domestic violence restraining orders.
       Under the NICS, federally-licensed gun dealers will be required to call a state
       point-of-contact or FBI representative through an 800 number, and relay a prospective
       gun purchaser's information. For the vast majority of cases, the sale will be approved
       within minutes. Where there are discrepancies, the FBI will have up to 3 days to clarify
       a record, and approve or deny the gun sale.

·      Millions more firearms sales to be covered. As of November 30th, the Brady Law will
       be strengthened in 2 additional ways: (1) purchases of all firearms, not just handguns, will
       be subject to Brady background checks; and (2) pawnshop redemptions, which are 4
       times as likely to involve a prohibited purchaser, will be subject to background checks for
       the first time. Overall, it is estimated that the number of background checks conducted
       nationally will increase from about 4 million to between 10 and 12 million.

                                                                    Automated Records Management System.
                                                                    ~mnp Conversiou


