RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-NOV-1998 10:09:21.00

SUBJECT:   Complete Weekly Report 11/6/98

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
There are no education or immigration items this week.==================== ATTACHMEN
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D51]MAIL464750011.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043D20F0000010A02010000000205000000E62D0000000200004157ED7BCA15D51D924064
4C38BEFB4DD8D4D6395E7A4DOAA427971EE97E4588C469A5EE1D39924F5965DBFDB6D706320D47


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Bruce Reed
               Elena Kagan

RE:            DPC Weekly Report


         Health Care -- Post-Election Status of Patients' Bill of Rights: This week's election
has virtually assured us a working majority in the House for a strong enforceable patients' bill of
rights. Last summer, the Dingell-Ganske legislation lost by a 212-217 vote. Of the 210
Demo«rats who supported this legislation, 189 are returning to the House as are nine of the ten
Republicans and the one Independent. . In addition, almost every one of the 22 newly-elected
Democrats campaigned on this issue and we expect most if not all of them to support a strong
bill. As a result, before even counting any Republicans who might alter their position as a result
of how strong this issue played in the campaign (we believe there may be five or more), at least
220 Members would be likely supporters oflegislation very similar to the Dingell-Ganske bill.
On the Senate side, we believe that it may be possible to get as many as 50 votes on a bill that is
a slightly strengthened version of the Graham-Chafee legislation, that includes virtually all of the
protections advocated by your Quality Commission and is viewed by Congressman Dingell's
staff as a very strong bill. In addition to the 45 Democrats who would support the final
legislation, we would expect Senators Chafee and Spector and possibly Snowe, Collins, Jeffords,
Voinivich and Bunning to support it. Although there are a number of outstanding issues, the
primary roadblock to a compromise is the state enforcement provision in the Dingell-Ganske bill.
 There is even relatively good news there because some of the trade unions are strongly insisting
on a less controversial enforcement approach that has the dual benefit of being more attractive to
moderate Republicans.

        Health Care -- Requiring Prescription Contraceptive Benefits for Federal
Employees: On Friday, the Office of Personnel Management issued a benefits directive letter
that required approximately 280 health plans in FEHBP to adjust their benefit packages to ensure
that FDA approved, prescription contraceptive options are covered. This requirement, which
was strongly advocated by Congresswoman Lowey and numerous advocacy groups, was included
in the omnibus appropriations act only after strong intervention by the White House. It will
become effective for this fall's open enrollment period for plans available in January of 1999.
Congresswoman Lowey indicated her interest in using this letter to remind the women's rights
groups of the essential role you played in securing this benefit.


                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
Massachusetts: We continue to work with Senator Kennedy, Congressman McGovern, and
other members of the Massachusetts delegation to find a viable solution to ensure that a
Medicare HMO in Massachusetts, who is providing a comprehensive drug benefit, will not be
forced to drop out of the program. This particular plan incorrectly believed it needed to comply
with a State law that requires a comprehensive drug benefit. As a consequence, it finds itself at
an extraordinary competitive disadvantage with plans offering less generous benefits and is now
facing such a financial drain on its resources that it will withdraw from the program in the
absence of relief. As you recall, Senator Kennedy requested that we support a provision in the
budget that would provide statutory authority to address this matter without excessively harming
Medicare beneficiaries. Unfortunately, the Republican leadership rebuffed our efforts and we
were forced to consider administrative action as an alternative. As we review these options, we
are attempting to avoid establishing a precedent that would make us vulnerable to other States
desiring to decrease benefits offered to beneficiaries while alleviating the excessive burden
placed on plans desiring to provide a comprehensive drug benefit. Our hope is that HHS can
help strike this balance and we are urging them to do so in close collaboration with Senator
Kennedy and the rest of the Massachusetts delegation.

        Welfare Reform -- Welfare Indicators Report: HHS is transmitting to the Hill the
second annual report on Indicators of Welfare Dependence. This report was required by the
Welfare Indicators Act of 1994 and reflects the recommendations of a bipartisan Advisory Board.
 Similar to last year, the report defines welfare dependence as the proportion of families who
receive more than half of their annual income from AFDC/TANF, Food Stamps, and/or SSI
which is not associated with work activities. However, data is not yet available that breaks out
what portion of assistance is related to a work requirement. The latest available data from 1994
showed that 6 percent of the total population received more than half their income from AFDC,
Food Stamps or SSI but this does not reflect the large caseload reductions over the past few years
or the increase in welfare recipients who are involved in work. The.report also provides data on
a wide range of risk factors and predictors of welfare receipt including poverty, employment,
disability, education and health conditions, intergenerational dependence, marital status, and teen
births.

         Children and Families -- Task Force on Violence Against Abort~on Provider~: On
Monday, November 9, the Attorney General will announce the formation of a task force to
address violence committed against abortion providers. The task force will be led by the Civil
Rights Division and will consist of attorneys from both that division and the Criminal Division;
it will also include investigators from the FBI, ATF and the U.S. Marshals Service. The task
force will coordinate the Department of Justice's activities regarding the investigation and
prosecution of acts of violence against abortion providers. It will also make recommendations
to clinics and providers regarding security, and provide training to federal, state and local law
enforcement personnel.



                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                2                Hex-Dump Conversion


