RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul D. Glastris ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-NOV-1998 13:49:06.00

SUBJECT:   two policy ideas, reworked

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Mike, Bruce, Elena:

I very much appreciate how open you've been to the policy ideas I've been
sending in.  I also appreciate the honest criticism you've given them.
With those criticisms in mind, I have reworked the following two ideas,
which I still believe have merit:

1-How to improve minority college success rate, and keep elite colleges
diverse, the Army way: The Clinton administration will continue to support
the right of colleges and universities to take race into account for
admissions purposes. And rightly so, because itO,s clear from
studies--including the new book by Derek Bok and William Bowen--that div
ersity works.  But there are two problems.   First, minority college
students complete third studies at lower-than-average rates. Second,
courts and ballot measures have chipped away at the legal basis of
race-conscious admissions policies, and will probably continue to do so.
        WhatO,s needed is a second front for affirmative action--a way of
creating a supply of minority students who will graduate college at.higher
rates and whose test scores and academic performance are high enough that
they can be admitted to elite schools without racial preferences. Such a
system already exist in the U.S. military. The Army, for instance, has a
larger proportion of blacks in its upper ranks than almost any other large
institution in America.  ItO,s secret: The U.S. Military Academic Preparato
ry School (USMAPS) in New Jersey.   Every year, USMAPS accepts hundreds of
promising but academically ill-prepared minority high school graduates.
These
 cadets go through a grueling 10-month course of training in reading,
math, military discipline, and good study habits. Cadets who make it
through go on to West Point, their SAT scores having risen 110 points
higher than when they entered USMAPS.   Just as important, USMAPS cadets
graduate from West Point at the same or higher rate than their West Point
classmates who didnO,t go through USMAPS (by contrast, blacks at elite
civilian colleges graduate at substantially lower rates than whites) .
Action: The POTUS should empanel a commission of military generals and
elite college presidents to explore the possibility of adapting the USMAPS
model to civilian higher education.

2-Report cards for public schools:
        Picking a school can be the most important choice a parent will
ever make for a child.  Yet parents today do so with little solid
information. Most rely on word-of-mouth. If theyD,re lucky, their local
school district will provide SAT scores, teacher-to-pupil ratios,


spending-per-student, and other data on individual schools. But these
numbers are not universally available. Moreover, they are proxies for
school quality. They measure inputs and norms, not actual performance.
Though not wholly unreliable, these measures fail to capture the things
parents care most about (or should care about): how much actual learning
goes on in the school, and how well-prepared are its graduates for the
world beyond that school?
         In his State of the Union address, the President should announce
as one of his major education goals that every public school in America
should be graded, just as every student is graded, so that parents can
make more informed choices when picking schools for their children. We
are already planning to advance a variation of this idea as part of our
proposed reauthorization of the elementary and secondary school act:
Having school districts issue O&report cards08 on individual schools.    So
raising the idea in the SOTU in a general way makes sense.
        It would also leave open the possibility of proposing more federal
action that we are currently contemplating. Obviously we would need to
debate what those further actions, if any, might be. But in addition to
requiring school districts to grade their own schools, we should consider
having the federal government collect data on the performance of
individual schools, so that objective rating systems could be developed.
Specifically, the Department of Education should collect, on a nationwide
but voluntary basis, one or more of the following three new sets of data:
        I-student achievement tests broken down to' the school level.  The
federal government already has a reliable measuring rod in the National
Assessment of Educational Progress.   Broader use of the NAEB would be
expensive and controversial. But it would work.
        2-graduation rates for every high school. Currently each state
calculates graduation rates differently and the data they gather is
incomplete.   Federal standards would make the information much more
reliable and comparable
        3-data tracking studentsO, achievements 3-to-5 years after
graduation (job, income, further education, etc).
          ItO,s important to note that Washington would merely be providing
data that would make rating systems possible. The federal government
would not be doing the actual rating of schools.   That job is better left
to school districts, to private organizations such as newsmagazines, and
to education reform groups.   Each of these organizations would be free to
weigh the data differently and to throw other criteria into the mix, such
as SAT scores or extracurricular programs. The point is, without the
federal government providing some or all of the above data, no rating
system can work (which explains why no one has tried to put one together) .
        However far we want to go, the basic notion of requiring school
report cards is a good one.   It would empower parents to make better, more
informed choices. More than that, it would be a powerful engine for
school reform. Numerous experts have noted that the vast majority of
parents have the Lake Wobegon view that their kidsO, schools are above
average. This system might help shake off that complacency.    Experts have
also noted that the mere act of grading institutions causes managers of
those institutions to make improvements.
        The more rigorous the grading we require, the stiffed the
opposition we can expect from conservative Republicans and liberal
Democrats and the Black and Hispanic Caucuses.   But we are bound to face
this kind of opposition on a number of fronts--for instance, our efforts
to ban social promotion, or any new efforts we might make for national
tests and standards. Grading public schools merely provides further
rationale for those other efforts.    Republicans will probably object tha't
this idea means more federal spending and federal intrusion into state and
local education matters.   If fact, measuring school performance is less
intrusive than other policies, such as setting high academic standards


(and the measurement system can probably be done on a voluntary basis) .
But just as the standards debate highlighted an internal contradiction in
conservative ideology (you cannot be for local control and high
standards), this debate will highlight another (you cannot be for parental
~&choiceC8 in education but against giving parents the information they
need to make those choices wisely) .


