RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TlME:12-NOV-1998 15:09:18.00

SUBJECT:     Bill Signing Draft

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paul E. Begala ( CN=Paul E. Begala/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 Draft 11/12/98 3:00pm

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR CRIME BILL SIGNINGS
THE OLD EXECUTIVE OFFICE BUILDING
November 13, 1998

           Acknowledgments: AG Reno; Sen. Dewine; Rep. Stupak; NAPO; real people Tk

        I want to begin by thanking [TK] for their service, and for
sharing their stories here with us today.  They remind us why we have all
worked so hard to pass the laws I am going to sign in a few moments. These
laws will help us to honor the memory of law enforcement officers who gave
their lives to protect us -- by helping prevent the kind of gun-related
crime that took their lives, and by supporting the families they leave
behind.

        These two bills also show more clearly than ever how much we can
accomplish when Democrats and Republicans stand together to meet the great
challenges facing our nation as we prepare to enter the 21st Century.

         Think back for a moment to the way things were six years ago.
Crime was on the rise, tearing at the very fabric of our lives.   The
plague of gangs and guns and drugs swept through our streets: ravaging our
communities, terrorizing our families, even turning playgrounds into
battlegrounds.   There were times when we thought nothing we could do would
ever turn back the rising tide of crime.

        I first ran for President because I wanted to build an America
where responsibility and respect for public order were not a distant hope,
but a way of life.  And since I took office, working together with law
enforcement, we have begun to build that America.

        Together, we have put in place a comprehensive anti-crime strategy
based on more community policing, tougher penalties, and better prevention
-- a tough, smart plan designed to support police officers and give them
the tools they need to do their jobs. We are ahead of schedule and under
budget in meeting our goal of putting 100,000 police on the street. We
have gone after gangs and drugs with the full authority of the federal
law.  And the Brady Law has now prevented nearly a quarter million felons,
fugitives and stalkers from buying firearms.


        Today, our strategy is showing remarkable results.  Crime rates
have fallen to a 25-year low -- robbery, assault, and murder is down, all
over America. And in less dramatic ways -- fewer broken windows, less
graffiti, cleaner streets -- it is clear that respect for the law is on
the rise. As strong as the threat of rising crime has been, the American
people have proved stronger.

         We must never forget that this victory was won with the valor and
too often the very lives of our bravest fellow citizens. We must never
forget that police officers put on their uniforms, put on their badges,
and go to work, every day, knowing they expose themselves to grave danger
to keep us safe.

        Officer Bradley Arn served on the police force of Saint Joseph Missouri
for the past seven years.   He was a D&copD,s cop.DB He patrolled the
streets by day while working his way through college by night. More than
anything else, he warited to make a better life for his wife, and his two
year old twin daughters.   On Tuesday he answered a distress call: a career
criminal with a semi-automatic gun was terrorizing pedestrians. He
responded to the call, and was brutally gunned down. According to the
police, the murderer had a deadly goal: he D&wanted to hurt people in
black and white cars, wearing dark blue uniforms.DB Only the bravery of a
fellow officer stopped the shooting spree.

        Every year, too many police officers like Bradley Arn make the
ultimate sacrifice to keep us safe.  I believe we must do more than build
monuments to honor their memories -- we must take action -- action to
prevent more needless, tragic deaths, action to continue the work these
brave men and women gave their lives to do, and above all, action to help
the families they leave behind.

        Two years ago, we acted to provide college scholarships to the families
of slain federal officers. Last year, I vowed to make those same
scholarships available to the families of state and local law enforcement
officers, and all public safety personnel. Today, I am proud to sign into
law new legislation which honors that promise.  From now on, the families
of public safety officers who lose their lives in the line of duty will be
able to apply for nearly $5,000 a year to pay for college tuition.

        With this step, we will honor law enforcement and help hundreds of
families like the Arns to realize their loved onesD, dreams of a better
life.  Families like [story TKJ .

        I am very proud to be announcing these new scholarships -- but· I
would be much prouder to announce that we did not need to award even one.
That is why we must redouble our efforts to prevent the kind of violent
crimes that endanger police officers every day.  And nothing threatens the
safety of our police officers or our communities more than criminals armed
with weapons.  In fact, most police officers who lose their lives in the
line of duty die from gun shot wounds.

        For several years now, criminals who have used guns to commit
their crimes have been subject to stiff, mandatory penalties. Today, we
are going one step further.  To protect our families and our police
officers, I am signing a bill that will add 5 years of hard time to the
sentences of criminals who even possess firearms when they commit
drug-related or violent crimes.  Brandishing that firearm will draw an
extra seven years -- firing it, another ten.  And if you are convicted for
a second time, youD,ll spend another quarter century in jail.


        This Veterans Day, as I have for the past five years, I laid a
wreath on the tomb of the unknown men and women who gave their lives in
service to their country. Today, I am proud to stand here with so many of
the law enforcement officers who are prepared to make the same sacrifice
every day -- and I am proud to take these steps together to build a
stronger, safer America for the 21st Century.

       And now, ID,d like to ask [TK) to join me as I sign these bills into law.
.
ARMS Email System
            "




