RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-NOV-1998 20:56:37.00

SUBJECT:   H-2A outline for Tues. mtg.

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is the summary of ideas that we developed for Tuesday's H-2A
meeting.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D46)MAIL450435024.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504370040000010A02010000000205000000DB490000000200009CE14D780051B9B79CIOA2
4E6401AA3A129EF197E3879AADDE5DDIF5B52CD6611472A91B054232DIEE864399C35B422968C4

Recruitment

I.    America's Agricultural Labor Network -- AgNet

      The majority of farm workers find employment through a kinship/friendship network.
      One problem with this method is that it spawns and reinforces illegal migration to the
      U.S.; another is that it is highly inefficient in a geographically diffuse labor market. The
      Department of Labor could serve as an information broker by developing a system that
      allows growers to find workers and workers to find employment opportunities that meet
      their needs (e.g., location, duration, type of crop, etc.). This would benefit growers and
      workers by having an efficient alternative mechanism to match workers with employment
      opportunities. AgNet would be based on America's Job Bank" but would be a separate
      web site devoted to the agriculture industry.

2.    Employment Verification Pilots

      INS has indicated that their existing employer verification pilot program could be adapted
      to allow for effective participation by H-2A growers. The INS could conduct more
      aggressive outreach to growers to encourage them to participate in the pilot program.

             Is there something that we can offer growers as a trade for participation in the
              pilot?

3.    Farm Labor Contractor Certification Program

      Frequently, Farm Labor contractors (FLCs) are inexperienced, poorly educated, not aware
      of applicable laws and regulations, and lacking in business know-how.

      We could require FLCs to satisfactorily complete a Wage and Hour administered course
      to ensure minimum competency levels for FLCs knowledge of applicable laws and
      regulations. These courses could also serve to enhance the FLCs's business skills.
      Successful completion of the course would be a prerequisite to initial issuance and/or
      renewal of a FLC registration card. The course would include instruction on how to
      properly comply with MSPA, FLSA, H-2A, OSHA filed sanitation, FICAIFUDA, EPA
      pesticide worker protection standards, and other labor standards as appropriate.

      DOL has estimated the cost of the program to be approximately $500K per year. We
      could, of course, charge a fee to each FLC to defray much of this cost.




                                                                                 ds Management System
                                                                 Automated Recor
                                                                 Hex-Dump conversion

      The Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service and the Rural
      Business-Cooperative Service staff, along with the Farmworker Coordinator and
      farm worker organizations, could conduct a feasibility study to research and design
      "farmworker harvesting" cooperatives. Such a cooperative would be designed to match
      the job skills of agricultural workers with employers as an alternative to the system of
      farm labor contractors. The cooperative would serve the functions of recruitment,
      employment, and transportation of farmworkers. The cooperative could also provide job
      training for individuals interested in learning skilled agricultural techniques.

Transportation and Housing

5.    Pilot Programs -- Transportation and Housing

      The Department of Labor could conduct pilot programs on transportation subsidies
      without any legislative change (i.e., creative ways to structure subsidizing transportation
      costs for migrant farmworkers, including H-2A workers).

      However, there is limited latitude to conduct housing demonstrations without a statutory
      change. Under the H-2A statute, the employer must either furnish housing owned or
      controlled by him or, in the alternative, provide housing that the employer has secured on
      the open rental market. We could try to obtain legislative authorization for pilots in
      housing.

6.    Housing Regulation Reform

      The current housing standard used by DOL in administering the Migrant and Seasonal
      Worker Protection Act is the OSHA "temporary labor camp" standard (used for housing
      built after 1980). DOL could revisit this standard and reevaluate whether it correctly
      balances the protection of workers with the needs of this industry. Given that adoption
      of this standard was a regulatory decision not a statutory mandate, DOL has the discretion
      to revise the standard.

7.    HUD-funded Housing for Migrant Workers

      HUD does not currently have a specific program for migrant housing, nor did it request
      one as part of the FY 2000 agency request. However, there are a number of areas within
      HUD that could be evaluated as possible funding sources for additional migrant housing
      including the Community Development Block Grant, the HOME program, the Office of
      Rural Housing and Economic Development, and the Colonias initiative.




                                               2

      USDA currently provides fann labor housing loans, grants, and rental assistance to
      fanners. In the FY 2000 agency request, USDA essentially requested to double the
      funding levels for these programs. The requested increase would roughly equate to 570
      more housing units (estimated between 2,280 and 3,420 more migrants housed depending
      on the type of unit -- family or single). However, according to USDA, H-2A workers are
      not eligible to reside in housing funded through this program. USDA is looking further
      into this issue.

9.    Transportation Subsidies

      The Department of Transportation does not currently have a specific program for migrant
      transportation, nor did it request one as part of the FY 2000 agency request. Two
      programs that were previously evaluated for this purpose were Access to Jobs and the
      Fonnula Program for Other than Urban Areas. It may be possible to stretch Access to
      Jobs for use of transporting migrant workers. Localities could use funds from the
      Fonnula Program for helping migrants with their transportation needs, but it is unlikely
      that the locality would chose to use their dollars for this purpose without an additional
      incentive.

      Ifwe are able to generate funds from FICAIFUDA equivalent payments by growers (see
      below), we could use that money to fund pilot programs that subsidize migrant worker
      transportation.

FICAIFUDA

10.   Growers to pay the equivalent FICAIFUDA taxes for H-2A workers

      We could require growers to pay the equivalent ofFICAIFUDA taxes and put the amount
      in a fund to pay for transportation and/or housing subsidies for migrant fannworkers.

      This would generate approximately $12-$15 million per year.

Enforcement

11.   Transfer from ETA to Wage & Hour

      The Department of Labor is in the process of transferring authority for administering the
      H-2A program from the Education and Training Administration (ETA) to the Wage &
      Hour Administration. We could give the completion of this change a date certain.




                                              3

      DOL has a number of initiatives in FY 1999 targeted at domestic child labor in the
      agriculture industry. The funds are targeted at increasing enforcement (specifically, the
      "Salad Bowl" initiative -- targeting lettuce, tomatoes, onions, cucumbers), improving data
      collection in the National Agricultural Worker Survey, and training migrant workers to be
      child care providers. In FY 2000, DOL requested to enhance and continue these
      enforcement initiatives.

      We could consider a more substantial increase in these enforcement areas, a more general
      increase in base funding for enforcement, or an increase in other crop or geographic
      specific areas.

13.   Enhanced protections for U.S. workers

      We could explore whether there are statutory or regulatory changes to existing worker
      protection statutes that could be implemented to better protect the rights of farm workers.
       The following are examples of gaps in existing laws:

            FSLA exemption from minimum wage
             The FSLA contains a number of specific agriculture exemptions from the
             minimum wage requirement. The primary exemption applies to growers who do
             not use at least 500 man-days of agricultural labor in any calendar year. There
             are no reliable figures for the number of workers affected by this exemption or the
             number of workers who, even if subject to the exemption, are paid less than the
             minimum wage. But it is not uncommon for employers to assert this exemption
             as a defense in minimum wage cases.

            FLSA exemption from overtime
             Most farmworkers are completely exempt from the FLSA overtime provisions. It
             is very common for farm workers to work in excess of 40 hours during a
             workweek but they have no claim to overtime for those hours. Some states --
             such as California and Washington -- provide limited overtime coverage to
             farmworkers.

            FLSA exemption from child labor protections
             Children who work on farms may work at younger ages, in more hazardous tasks,
             and for longer hours than children in other industries. For instance, children over
             16 years old can work in any task in agriculture, whereas 16 and 17 year olds in
             other industries are prohibited from working in tasks deemed by DOL to be too
             dangerous.




                                               4
         If the work is defined as "agricultural labor" under the FLSA, it is exempt from
         coverage under the NLRA. Therefore, virtually all non-processing tasks in
         agriculture are outside the protections of the NLRA. However, some states --
         notably California -- have enacted protections for farm workers seeking to
         organize. These state protections may, in some areas, be more protective than the
         NLRA.

          Workplace health and safety
           OSHA protections for farmworkers are much less extensive than similar
           protections for other workers (for example, ladder work is much less regulated in
           agriculture than in other industries) and covers fewer employers.

                  Since 1975, OSHA has been precluded from regulating health and safety
                  on farms that employ fewer than 11 workers on any day during the year.
                  Many farms are therefore beyond the reach of any OSHA standard,
                  including field sanitation. However, under the Migrant and Seasonal
                  Agriculture Worker Protection Act (MSPA), temporary work camp
                  housing standards -- that mirror OSHA standards -- apply even if the
                  OSHA standards do not apply because of the 10 or fewer employees
                  exemption.

                  Farm work is one of the few industries in which workers are not entitled to
                  specific information about the use of toxic substances in the workplace.
                  OSHA does not have statutory authority to require a hazardous
                  communication standard for pesticides and the EPA -- which has the
                  authority -- has failed to issue such a standard.

          State Worker's Compensation

           Many major agriculture states -- such as North Carolina, Georgia, and Texas --
           exclude farmworkers from workers' compensation coverage. The only recourse
           for an injured farmworker in these states is the slow, expensive, and uncertain tort
           law system. The consequence is that farmworkers are unable to get the
           immediate medical and rehabilitative care and wage replacement available under
           the State-administered workers compensation system.

          lJnemployrnentlnsurance

           Some states either exclude farmworkers from unemployment insurance coverage
           or impose such stringent requirements on coverage that farmworkers are
           effectively excluded.



                                             5



                  Protection against retaliation

                   We could propose to amend MSPA and the Pesticide Act to provide protection
                   against retaliation.

    Wages

    14.     Wage reform

            After extensive study and consideration, there does not seem much that we could do on
            the wage front that would more accurately reflect our goals of requiring a fair wage (for
            both growers and farmworkers) and providing some compensation in the wage for the
            presence of undocumented farmworkers in the workforce. (See materials handed out by
            Ceci Rouse).

    Research

    15.     Funds for mechanization research

            The USDA could sponsor research into the possibilities for mechanization in the crops
            now dependent on H-2A or undocumented workers (fruits, vegetables, and tobacco).
            See paper by CEA (Elise Golan).

    Childcare

    16.     Access to childcare

            One of the barriers to employment for U.S. farmworkers is the lack ofchild care. Lack
            of proper facilities is a big problem in rural areas, and most child care programs do not
            provide funds for capital expenditures (though block grant funds may be available for
            Head Start).

                  Funds could be allocated for the construction and/or renovation of child care
                   facilities in rural areas.

                  Also, tax incentives could be made available for farmers who provide child care
                   for their workers.

                  Possible creation of a set-aside within existing child care centers for the children
                   of migrant workers.




                                                     6


     18.   Certification v. Attestation

           We could consider moving -- for some employers -- away from a certification model and
           to an attestation model as the gateway to H-2A participation. Thus, an employer who
           has demonstrated compliance with the program requirements in year X would only have
           to attest to the same conditions existing in year X+ 1 in order for that employer to have
           access to H-2A workers.




                                                   7


