         RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

         CREATOR: Cynthia A, Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

         CREATION DATE/TIME:16-NOV-1998 18:54:08.00

         SUBJECT:   Jeff Tietz called me noting a problem in the settlement

         TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/bU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TEXT:
         As I noted in my earlier email regarding the state settlement, if federal
         tobacco related legislation is enacted before 11/30/2002, then each
         original participating manufacturer shall receive a dollar for dollar
         offset for all amounts paid by such manufacturer pursuant to such
         legislation and actually made available to such setting state.   Such an
         offset would only apply to federal funds to states that are (1)
         unrestricted or (2) restricted "to any form of health care or to any use
         related to tobacco (including, but not limited to', tobacco education,
         cessation, control, or enforcement.)"

         Jeff sees a problem I hadn't noticed -- would this provide tobacco
         companies with an offset for any federal funds to states for health
         spending, whether tobacco related or not, that are paid for by tobacco tax
         funds? I had read this as "any form of health care ... related to tobacco"
         but he is reading it as "to any form of health care / or to any use
         related to tobacco."

         He's urging us to get the AGs to get the language clarified, which sounds
         like a good idea to me. What do you think?


         The entire text of the provision is as below:

                        X. EFFECT OF FEDERAL LEGISLATION

                        (a) If federal tobacco-related legislation is enacted on or
                        before November 30, 2002, and if such legislation provides
                        for payment(s) by any Original Participating Manufacturer
                        (whether by settlement payment, tax or any other means), all
                        or part of which are actually made available to a Settling
                        State ("Federal Funds"), each Original Participating
                        Manufacturer shall receive a continuing dollar-for-dollar
                        offset for any and all amounts that are paid by such
         Original
                        Participating Manufacturer pursuant to such legislation and
                        actually made available to such Settling State (except as
                        described in subsections (b) and (c) below).
                             Such offset shall be applied against the applicable
         Original
                        Participating Manufacturer's share (determined as described
                        in step E of clause- Seventh" of subsection IXO))of such
                        Settling State's Allocated Payment, up to the full amount of
.
                 such Original participating Manufacturer's share of such
                 Allocated Payment (as such share had been reduced by
                 adjustment, if any, pursuant to the NPM Adjustment and has
                 been reduced by offset, if any, pursuant to the offset for
                 miscalculated or disputed payments) .
                      Such offset shall be made against such Original
                 Participating Manufacturer's share of the first Allocated
                 Payment due after such Federal Funds are first available for
                 receipt by such Settling State.
                      In the event that such offset would in any given year
                 exceed such Original Participating Manufacturer's share of
                 such Allocated Payment: (1) the offset to which such
    Original
                 Participating Manufacturer is entitled under this section in
                 such year shall be the full amount of such Original
                 Participating Manufacturer's share of such Allocated
                 Payment, and (2) all amounts not offset by reason of
                 subsection (1) shall carry forward and be offset in the
                 following year(s) until all such amounts have been offset.
                       (b) The offset described in subsection (a) shall apply
    only
                 to that portion of Federal Funds, if any, that are either
                 unrestricted as to their use, or restricted to any form of
    health
                 care or to any use related to tobacco (including, but not
                 limited to, tobacco education, cessation, control or
                 enforcement) .


