RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-NOV-1998 17:17:56.00

SUBJECT:   Revised Schedule Memo

TO: Elena Kagan    CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Revised memo without air safety announcements, which Tom and I are still
working on.  Sorry, but it seems silly to wait any longer for it. Let me
know if you need me to turn this in tonight.
Here's a summary for us to keep track ->          .
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D48]MAIL48544512P.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043E0050000010A02010000000205000000215A00000002000048CC44AADC808142605EFA

I.   Tentatively Scheduled:
November 22 FBI Crime Statistics
November 24 Adoption Registry
December 1 School Modernization and Class Size Meeting with Members of Congress.
December 3 Bipartisan Meeting on Patients Bill of Rights.
December 10 Campaign Finance Reform Event
December 11 Car Seat Announcement
December 17 Dangerous Toys Initiative
December 21 FDA Regulation on Over The Counter Drugs Labeling.
December 22- Drunk Driving Announcement

II.     Pre-State of the Union Budget Items:
- Superbug Initiative
- Asthma Initiative
- Bioterrorism Initiative
- Nationwide Crackdown on Food Safety
- Expansion of Values-Based Crime Prevention Initiative

III.     Other Options for December:
- Labor Department Amicus Brief to Supreme Court Regarding Health Insurance Remedies
- "Zero Tolerance" for Drugs in Prisons
- Homelessness Assistance Grants
- World AIDS Day
- Title IX Executive Order
- Family Report
- Work Participation Rates
- Welfare to Work Housing Vouchers
- Food Stamp Fraud Directives




                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dwnp Conversion


MEMORANDUM FOR DOUG SOSNIK AND PAUL BEGALA

        CC:               ANN LEWIS
                          STEPHANIE STREETT

FROM:                      BRUCE REED

SUBJECT:                   POSSIBLE POLICY ANNOUNCEMENTS


Following is a list of possible DPC announcements that reflects our discussions at the end oflast
week.

NOVEMBER:
November 22 FBI Crime Statistics
            The final 1997 FBI Unified Crime Report data will be released on Sunday,
            November 22, demonstrating further that crime has decreased dramatically under
            the President's watch. The President should issue a written statement on that
            Sunday. (Ready)

November 24 Adoption Registry
            The President could join the First Lady in calling for an Internet-based
            national registry of children in foster care waiting to be adopted.
            Prospective adoptive parents will be able to visit the site and meet these
            waiting children. The registry will cost between $1-2 million and will be
            funded through the Adoption Opportunities Grants, which are a part of the
            President's Adoption 2002 Initiative -- an effort to double the number of
            children adopted from the public child welfare system by the 2002.
            November is National Adoption Month, and it is exactly one-year since the
            President signed the landmark Adoption and Safe Families Act. (The First
            Lady is planning to make this announcement on November 24.)

DECEMBER:
December 1 School Modernization and Class Size Meeting with Members of Congress.
           The President could meet with democratic Members of Congress to discuss the
           importance of working together on enacting school modernization and expanding
           the effort to reduce class size. This would be an opportunity to highlight the
           united commitment among Members of Congress and the President on school
               the funding going out to states in the coming months on class size and other
               initiatives that passed in the last budget.

December 3 Bipartisan Meeting on Patients Bill of Rights.
           After the Republican leadership completes its meetings on committee
           assignments in December, the President could host a bipartisan meeting with
           members of Congress committed to passing a strong, enforceable patients'
           bill of rights. At this meeting, all sides would affirm they are confident that
           they could pass this bill next year and that all issues, including those
           associated with enforcement, could be resolved. This meeting would be held
           to specifically illustrate the momentum this legislation now has and the
           inevitability of its passage. (December 3 or date when most Republican
           Members could attend.)

December 10 Campaign Finance Reform Event
            The President could host a White House meeting of bipartisan sponsors of
            Campaign Finance Reform Legislation, which would include Senators McCain
            and Feingold and Representatives Shays and Meehan. The purpose of the event
            would be to underscore the President's commitment to enact bipartisan campaign
            finance reform by next year. The President could highlight examples of
            excessive campaign spending throughout the country in this past election.
            (Depends on Members schedules.)

December 11 Car Seat Announcement
or 17       The President would announce the final Department of Transportation rule for
            universal child safety seats. Under the new rule, every seat would be required to
            fit in every car the same way -- eliminating the current confusion caused by the
            existence of 100 varieties of child seats and 300 different types of passenger
            vehicles. The National Highway Transportation Safety Administration estimates
            that 80 percent of the children strapped into safety seats are at risk because those
            seats are improperly connected. Approximately 600 children younger than 5
            years old are killed and more than 70,000 are injured in vehicle crashes every
            year. The new rule would make it easier for parents to use child safety seats
            properly and encourage greater use of child safety seats. (Ready
            mid-December.)

December 17 Dangerous Toys Initiative
            The President could announce the list of 15 toys and child items that have been
            officially recalled due to safety hazards they present. The President would call on
            parents to remove the toys from their homes before the holidays as part of
            Consumer Product Safety Commission's "Toy Recall Round-up."
            (If the President is unable to do this event before Christmas, it could be a
            good option for the First Lady or Vice President.)
            In concert with or soon after Jane Henney is sworn in as the next FDA
            Commissioner, we could hold an event around the release of a final
            regulation requiring all over the counter drugs to be labeled in a user
            friendly manner. HHS and OMB would have to be pushed aggressively to
            finalize work on this regulation, but it could be ready late in December. Such
            an announcement would have the support of the pharmaceutical community
            as well as consumers, and would represent an important breakthrough for
            those in need to readable, easy to understand usage and compliance
            information for important medications. (Late December.)

December 22- Drunk Driving Announcement
31           The President could meet with leaders of the highway safety community (MADD,
             SADD, etc.) and sign the Presidential Proclamation declaring December, 1988
             Drunk and Drugged Driving Prevention Month. The President may also be able
             to announce the availability of Department of Justice grants of $12 million to
             states to combat underage drinking. The President could tape a Public Service
             Announcement warning against drunk driving during the holidays that can be
             released at this event in addition to new PSAs the Department of Transportation
             about the importance of seat belts. (Anytime in December. The Department
             of Transportation is holding a press conference on Drunk and Drugged
             Driving Prevention on December 18.)

There are several smaller initiatives that we may want to consider rolling out prior to the
State of the Union that would depend on budget decisions. These options include:
             Superbug Initiative
              Recent reports have indicated that resistance to anti-biotics is becoming a
              major public health crisis, causing prolonged illnesses and even death. For
              example, pneumonia, which impact over 500,000 Americans each year, is
              becoming resistance to most antibiotics and staph, the most common
              hospital-based infection, is now only responding to the strongest drug
              available and some people are even starting to show resistance to this drug.
              Experts believe that this critical public health problem is on track to affect
              more and more viruses. To reduce this problem, the President could: (1)
              launch a new budget initiative to enable experts to obtain critical information
              about which viruses are likely to become resistant and why; (2) launch a
              major education campaign to inform health providers and professionals
              about how to prescribe drugs more appropriately and increase the use of
              vaccines to reduce the likelihood that diseases will become resistant; and (3)
              fund community-based demonstrations to examine how best to implement
              prevention efforts. (Pending budget decision.)                                 .

             Asthma Initiative
              The President could announce a concerted fight against asthma, which has
              become a national epidemic impacting the lives of 15 million Americans. The


        initial goals of this program will be to halt the increase in asthma, reduce by half
        the number of children who die or suffer activity limitations because of this
        disease, and limit the disproportionate impact of asthma on minority communities.
          The President could announce new FY2000 budget proposals to expand
        programs that have had demonstrated success on a pilot basis in preventing,
        managing, and understanding asthma. The President could also release an
        interagency report on best practices and strategies to address asthma. (Requires
        budget decision.)

       Bioterrorism Initiative.
        The President could announce a new proposal to detect and manage bioterrorism.
        Bioterrorism is becoming an increasing threat that has the potential to injure or
        kill millions of Americans through deadly diseases, such as smallpox.         While
        law enforcement and intelligence agencies seek to thwart these kinds of attacks,
        when prevention fails, we need a system in place that is prepared to manage and
        minimize the public health consequences. The President's initiative would equip
        the nation's public health system to both detect and respond to this potential
        problem. This initiative would: train epidemic intelligence officers who can
        coordinate with state health departments and other intelligence officers to identify
        and respond to attacks; develop a Metropolitan Medical Response System, a mass
        casualty emergency response system, that includes primary care, emergency
        transportation, and decontamination abilities that will be critical to save lives in
        the event of an attack; create and maintain a stockpile of pharmaceuticals, that
        would be critical in the event of a bioterrorist attack that could expose hundreds of
        thousands of Americans to a disease. Current stockpiles contain many inactive
        antibiotics and are inadequate to address a major outbreak. The President's
        initiative would improve research to develop new vaccines and antibiotics that
        will can be used in the event of an attack. (Pending budget decision.)

       Nationwide Crackdown on Food Safety
        The President could announce a new $87 million budget proposal to
        crackdown on food safety nationally and a proposed legislative package to
        give authority to USDA to issue recalls of unsafe food and impose civil fines.
        In addition, the President would urge states to adopt his model food code for
        retailers, providing incentives and disincentives for states to adopt to the
        code. (Ready, depending on budget decisions.)

       Expansion of Values-Based Crime Prevention Initiative
        Recognizing the important role that civic, community, and faith-based
        organizations can play in reducing crime, this past July the President announced a
        $2.2 million in grants available for 16 community-based collaboratives, including
        religiously-affiliated organizations, to target youth violence, gangs, truancy, and
        other juvenile problems by promoting common-sense values and responsibility.
        To build on this effort, the President could commit to a series of new grants to
        support values-based crime prevention efforts, and urge Congress to endorse and


                  increase federal funding for such programs. The President could also highlight
                  the efforts of Rev. Eugene Rivers of Boston, who inspired the President to
                  develop this initiative and has organized a National 10-Point Leadership
                  Foundation to mobilize 1,000 black churches in 40 cities to help at-risk kids in the
                  50 worst neighborhoods. (Pending budget decisions.)

    Following is a list of policy announcements that are under development. We are preparing to
    have these announcements ready for message openings that arise in December.

                 Labor Department Amicus Brief to Supreme Court Regarding Health
                  Insurance Remedies. Within the next two weeks, the Department of Labor will
                  be filing an amicus brief to the Supreme Court that argues that the Employee
                  Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) does not preempt State insurance laws
                  providing remedies to consumers who wish to sue insurers who have taken actions
                  that have caused them harm. This brief would effectively overturn a previous
                  Reagan Administration Labor Department provision that argued that ERISA did
                  preempt State insurance law in this area. The President could announce that this
                  brief is being filed and use it to reinforce our position in the Hill debate
                  surrounding enforcement provisions of the Patients Bill of Rights.

                 "Zero Tolerance" for Drugs in Prisons
                  The recently passed omnibus appropriations bill includes an important provision
                  that would allow states to use up to 10% of their prison funds to drug test and, if
                  necessary, treat prisoners and parolees. This policy change, which the President
                  called for in a directive to the Attorney General last January, was strongly
                  opposed by Republicans and represents another victory for the President in the
                  recent budget battle. To highlight this accomplishment, the President could join
                  the Attorney General, General McCaffrey and perhaps group of Governors in
                  issuing new guidelines to ensure that the states use their funds to promote this
                  new "zero tolerance" policy. (Ready mid December)

                 Fighting HomeIessness. On December 20, a number of homeless organizations
                  hold events throughout the country (including in D.C.) to highlight the problem of
                  homelessness. The President could announce $700 million in HUD Homeless
                  Assistance Grants that will be granted to 300 communities and states to help
                  homeless individuals find jobs and achieve self-sufficiency. Individuals who
                  have benefited from this initiative and graduated to self-sufficiency could
                  participate in this event. (December 20th)

                 World AIDS Day
                  The President would commemorate the 10th anniversary of World AIDS Day by
                  meeting with youth peer educators from HIV prevention programs, HIV positive
                  youth, and involved parents, and then signing the World AIDS Day Proclamation.
                   The President may also be able to announce new policy initiatives at this time.
                  World AIDS Day is sponsored by the World Health Organization and this year's
     recent years, there has been a significant shift in the demographics of the AIDS
     epidemic, with new infections in youth rising dramatically. Today, one out of
     every four new infections in the United States is an adolescent. Every hour
     another two teenagers are infected. To commemorate World AIDS Day, the
     President has a unique opportunity to call on parents, teachers, governments,
     churches, businesses, and young people themselves to build a healthy future for
     our youth. (World AIDS Day is December 1, 1998)

    Title IX Executive Order
     The President could sign an executive order as early as next week prohibiting
     discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin,or sex in education
     programs conducted by the federal government. This includes schools operated
     by the Defense Department for military dependents, schools operated by the
     Department of the Interior for Native Americans, and numerous training and
     educational programs run by federal departments. This is a follow up to an
     Executive Memorandum the President issued last year asking the Department of
     Justice to lead an effort to identify all federally-conducted education programs and
     to recommend appropriate action to end discrimination. (Ready)

     Family Report
      The President could announce the findings of a new report by the CEA detailing
      changes in the last thirty years in family life. The report will show the increased
      numbers of women in the workplace, and detail the diminished amount of time
    . families have to spend with their children. (Ready mid December)

   Work Participation Rates
    The President could visit a welfare-to-work program and announce: (1) new state
    work participation rates, showing that almost all states are meeting the welfare
    law's single-parent requirements, but some are failing to meet the law's separate
    two-parent requirement; (2) new caseload data showing continuing declines; and
    (3) new data on the number of people who were on welfare in 1997 and working
    in March 1998. (Ready in mid December.)

   Welfare to Work Housing Vouchers
    The Congress approved in the VNHUD appropriations bill full funding for the
    President's request for 50,000 welfare-to-work housing vouchers. The President
    could hold an event announcing the opening of the first competition for these
    vouchers. This is the first time ever that housing vouchers will be linked to
    welfare reform, and represents an improvement in the way welfare, employment,
    and housing agencies can work together. (Ready mid December.)

    Food Stamp Fraud Directives
    The President could sign three directives to crack down on food stamp fraud: (1)
    The President would direct the Social Security Administration to share its death
are immediately removed from the rolls; (2) The President would direct USDA to
develop a plan to create an interstate matching system to ensure Food Stamp
recipients are not receiving benefits in multiple states; and (3) The President
would direct Treasury to collect (through offset offederal payments and other
means) unpaid fines owed by retailers that have violated Food Stamp rules, such
as exchanging Food Stamps for cash. The first two directives will build on the
Lugar legislation that passed at the end of the session. (Ready)


