RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TlME:19-NOV-1998 18:22:31.00

 SUBJECT:   Irish Deportees

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I attended a meeting this afternoon in Minyon's office re: the immigration
status of Irish nationals who have been convicted and served sentences in
Ireland and/or Northern Ireland for terrorism. As you may know, under the
INA, a person who has been convicted of an 'aggravated felony' is
deportable and is not eligible to become a legal permanent resident in the
U.S. The 1996 Immigration Act significantly broadened this category to
include, among other offenses, crimes of violence, theft or burglary for w
hich the term of imprisonment is at least 1 year.   In addition, the 1996
Act eliminated the provision of the INA that had existed pre-1996 that
gave the AG some discretion in this area.   Under current law, the AG does
not have discretion to allow someone with a conviction as a aggravated
felon to avoid deportation or. become a legal permanent resident.

  There are currently nine Irish nationals (that the NSC knows of) living in
  the U.S. who are facing deportation. All of them have been convicted of
  terrorist acts and have served time in Northern Irish prisons. They have
. since moved to the U.S. and lived as illegal aliens.  Last fall, at the re
  commendation of the Secretary of State, the AG ordered a temporary stay of
  deportation for six of these Irish nationals.  NSC and State advocated
  this as a step to build confidence in and support for the peace process
  among Irish-Americans·.

The chief concerns about doing anything for this group is that we have
been very tough with illegal aliens in general and criminal aliens in
particular; any deviation from that for the Irish (and not, say, for the
Palestinians, Salvadorans, Liberians, etc.) would likely engender cries of
our being soft on criminal aliens or -- more likely -- showing favoritism
to White immigrants.  However, NSC maintains that doing something to help
these nine would be very important to the Irish-American community.

Minyon is going to convene a meeting (perhaps, next week) to determine
whether we want to try to do anything that could provide relief for this
group.   NSC is preparing a short paper discussing the issue and possible
options.

julie


