RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-NOV-1998 12:36:06.00

SUBJECT:   TPS for Hondurans

TO: Elena Kagan    CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
At a meeting this morning in Maria's office it was decided:

The AG will announce TPS for Honduras and Nicaragua in early December.
DOJ is going to get back with us to confirm an exact date (checking on
what works with the AG's schedule). A representative from the State Dept.
will accompany the AG for the announcement (to better respond to questions
re: conditions on the ground in the region, including the differences that
exist among the 4 affected countries that warrant TPS for Honduras and
Nicaragua and not for EI Salavador and Guatemala) .

This annoucement will not be coupled with an announcement re: our support
for legislation that would achieve parity (amnesty similar to that
obtained by Cubans and Nicaraguans in NACARA) for Guatemalans,
Salvadorans, and a small group of Hondurans.  INS felt strongly that
coupling the two would likely promote a lot of confusion on the ground
(with Central Americans themselves, as well as with INS officers in the
field).  Also, DOJ felt that we needed more time to work the Hill re:
parity before announcing our support (if we really want this legislation
to pass next session).

The week prior to the TP~ announcement, we will conduct a series of
low-key meetings with immigrant advocates and selected Members to discuss
why TPS is warranted for these two countries and not the other two, and
will signal our commitment (consistent with the President's statements to
the Hispanic Caucus last August) to parity for Salvadorans, Guatemalans
and a small group of Hondurans. Jim Dobbins from NSC will have similar
conversations with the Ambassadors of the four affected countries.  The
object of this effort is to attempt to blunt some of the criticism that we
are likley to get for providing TPS for two of the four countries affected
by Mitch.  DOJ and INS are working on parity legislation that should be
ready for our review soon.

State is also drafting a paper that outlines why TPS was lifted for the
Dominican Republic and Haiti (in order to be prepared for questions that
compare the current situations in these countries). They have already
asked the embassies of Haiti and DR for their views.

State will work with DOJ on comprehensive q&a for this announcement.


