RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-NOV-1998 08:31:43.00

SUBJECT:     Paper for VP's WTW Event

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
VP Press Release (may have changed slightly since this)


Q&A


Latest Welfare Reform accomplishments document


We got good commitments from Cabinet Secretaries/officials to amplify
release of grants Cuomo doing interviews for Chicago papers, HUD Dep Sec
doing Texas; Alzarez doing Hispanic press; Slater doing release in Miami;
USDA Dep Sec and Undersecs doing rural grants in CA, ME, MO and Gary, IN;
GSA release in Denver; ED dep sec doing Bennett College in NC.

Profile of grants (also included in final Q&A) :

Q:         What do these new grants look like and where are they going?

A:      The 75 grants cover a wide range of geographic areas, target
populations, challenges, and partners:
 69 single site grants and 6 multi-site grants
 44 states -- single-site grants in 41 states, with multi-site grants in
another 3 states
 41 are in Empowerment Zones/Enterprise Communities
 46 urban areas (61%), 11 rural areas (15%), and 18 areas (24%) that
include urban and rural communities
 43 serve non-custodial parents (some focus exclusively on this
population, but most serve a mix of non-custodial and custodial parents)
 26 emphasize transportation
 19 focus on child care
 41 focus on serving public housing residents
 16 serve people with learning and other disabilities
 34 provide substance abuse services
 9 focus on non-traditional occupations for women
 7 feature microenterprise development
 5 include labor organizations
 2 Historically Black Colleges and Universities, 1 Hispanic Association of
Colleges and Universities, and 1 tribal college


 3 focus on Native Americans
 3 feature a community saturation strategy
 2 focus on homeless individuals
 2 grantees are faith-based organizations (with other grantees partnering
with faith and community based organizations)
 Approximately half are going to private organizations and half to public
organizations.==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D34]MAIL42428042V.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504324050000010A02010000000205000000D91500000002000070AC719865927DA4E15BOD
B6951F3B8D75CBDOEOFC6CB394BE4DEE22F4D5712F91A73858D7127E274DD003A66F4B3F8D0490
                     REFORMING WELFARE


    On August 22, 1996, President Clinton signed the Personal Responsibility and
    Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, fulfilling his longtime commitment to 'end
    welfare as we know it. ' As the President said upon signing, "... this legislation
    provides an historic opportunity to end welfare as we know it and transform our
    broken welfare system by promoting thefundamental values of work,
    responsibility, and family. ..


              TRANSFORMING THE BROKEN WELFARE SYSTEM

   Overhauling the Welfare System with the Personal Responsibility Act: In 1996, the
    President signed a bipartisan welfare plan that is dramatically changing the nation's
    welfare system into one that requires work in exchange for time-limited assistance. The
    law contains strong work requirements, performance bonuses to reward states for moving
    welfare recipients into jobs and reducing illegitimacy, state maintenance of effort
    requirements, comprehensive child support enforcement, and supports for families
    moving from welfare to 'work -- including increased funding for child care. State
    strategies are making a real difference in the success of welfare reform, specifically in
    job placement, child care and transportation.

    Law Builds on the Administration's Welfare Reform Strategy: Even before the
    Personal Responsibility Act became law, many states were well on their way to changing
    their welfare programs to jobs programs. By granting Federal waivers, the Clinton
    Administration allowed 43 states -- more than all previous Administrations combined --
    to require work, time-limit assistance, make work pay, improve child support
    enforcement, and encourage parental responsibility. The vast majority of states have
    chosen to continue or build on their welfare demonstration projects approved by the
    Clinton Administration.

    Largest Decline in the Welfare Rolls in History: The President has announced that
    we've met -- two years ahead of schedule -- the challenge he made in last year's State of
    the Union to move two million more Americans off of welfare by the year 2000. The
    latest caseload numbers, released in August, show that welfare caseloads fell by 5.7
    million since President Clinton took office and 3.8 million since he signed the welfare
    reform law. The new figures, from June 1998, show 8.4 million people on welfare, a
    drop of more than 41 percent from January 1993. This historic decline occurred in
    response to the Administration's grants of Federal waivers to 43 states, the provisions of
    the new welfare reform law, and the strong economy.



                                                            Automated Records Management system
                                           - 1-             Hex-DumP conversion

   Two Years Later, Millions a/Welfare Recipients are Working: In August 1998, the President
    released the First Annual Report to Congress on the Temporary Assistance for Needy
    Families program showing a dramatic increase in the number of welfare recipients who
    have gone to work since he signed the welfare law in August 1996. Data from the
    Census Bureau's Current Population Survey show that the rate of employment of
    individuals on welfare in one year who were working in the following year increased by
    nearly 30 percent between 1996 and 1997. As a result, 1.7 million adults on welfare in
    1996 were working in March 1997.

    Mobilizing the Business Community: At the President's urging, the Welfare to Work
    Partnership was launched in May 1997 to lead the national business effort to hire people
    from the welfare rolls. Founded with 105 participating businesses, the Partnership grew
    to 5,000 within one year, and now includes over 7,000 businesses. In 1997, just 3,200 of
    these businesses hired 135,000 welfare recipients and the President has challenged them
    to double their efforts to 270,000 in the next year. The Partnership provides technical
    assistance and support to businesses around the country, including: a toll-free number, a
    web site, a quarterly newsletter, and a "Blueprint for Business" hiring manual. The
    Partnership also published The Road to Retention, a report of companies that have found
    higher retention rates for former welfare recipients for other new hires, and strategies they
    used to achieve this success.

   Connecting Small Businesses with New Workers: The Small Business Administration
    is addressing the unique and vital role of small businesses who employ over one-half of
    the private workforce, by helping small businesses throughout the country connect with
    job training organizations and job-ready welfare recipients. In addition, SBA provides
    training and assistance to welfare recipients who wish to start their own businesses.
    SBA provides assistance to businesses through its 1-800-U-ASK-SBA number, as well
    through its network of small business and women's business centers, one-stop capital
    shops, district offices, and its home page.

   Mobilizing Civic, Religious and Non-profit Groups: The Vice President created the
    Welfare to Work Coalition to Sustain Success, a coalition of national civic, service, and
    faith-based groups committed to helping former welfare recipients succeed in the
    workforce. _Working in partnership with public agencies and employers, Coalition
    members provide mentoring, job training, child care, transportation, and other support to
    help these new workers with the transition to self sufficiency. Charter membt;rs of the
    Coalition include: Alpha Kappa Alpha, the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, the Baptist
    Joint Committee, Goodwill, Salvation Army, the United Way, Women's Missionary
    Union, the YMCA, the YWCA, and other civic and faith-based groups.

   Doing Our Fair Share with the Federal Government's Hiring Initiative: Under the
    Clinton Administration, the Federal workforce is the smallest it has been in thirty years.
    Yet, this Administration also believes that the Federal government, as the nation's largest
    employer, must lead by example. The President asked the Vice President to oversee the

                                            -2-
    directly hire at least 10,000 welfare recipients in the next four years. Already, the federal
    government has hired nearly 8,500 welfare recipients, 80 percent of its planned hires.
    As a part of this effort, the White House pledged to hire six welfare recipients and has
    already exceeded this goal.

   $3 Billion to Help Move More People from Welfare to Work: Because of the
    President's leadership, the 1997 Balanced Budget Act included the total funding
    requested by the President for the creation of his $3 billion welfare to work fund. This
    program will help states and local communities move long-term welfare recipients, and
    certain non-custodial parents, into lasting, unsubsidized jobs. These funds can be used for
    job creation, job placement and job retention efforts, including wage subsidies to private
    employers and other critical post-employment support services. The Department of
    Labor provides oversight but most of the dollars will be placed, through the Private
    Industry Councils, in the hands of the localities who are on the front lines of the welfare
    reform effort. In addition, 25 percent of the funds are awarded by the Department of
    Labor on a competitive basis to support innovative welfare to work projects. The
    President announced the first round of 49 competitive grants in May, and the Vice
    President announced the second round of75 competitive grants in November.

   Tax Credits for Employers: The Welfare to Work Tax Credit, enacted in the 1997
    Balanced Budget Act, provides a credit equal to 35 percent of the first $10,000 in wages
    in the first year of employment, and 50 percent of the first $10,000 in wages in the second
    year, to encourage the hiring and retention ofJong term welfare recipients. This credit
    complements the Work Opportunity Tax Credit, which provides a credit of up to $2,400
    for the first year of wages for eight groups of job seekers. The President's proposed to
    extend both credits in his FY 1999 budget and the Omnibus Budget Act includes an
    extension through June 30, 1999.

   Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers: In his FY 1999 budget, the President proposed
    $283 million for 50,000 new housing vouchers for welfare recipients who need housing
    assistance to get or keep a job, and Congress approved full funding for this new initiative.
    Families will these housing vouchers to move closer to a new job, to reduce a long
    commute, or to secure more stable housing to eliminate emergencies that keep them from
    getting to work every day on time. Nearly all of these vouchers will be awarded to
    communities on a competitive basis, to communities who create cooperative efforts
    among their housing, welfare and employment agencies to assure the most effective use
    of this flexible new tool to help people make the transition from welfare to work.

   WeIfare-to-Work Transportation: One of the biggest barriers facing people who
    move from welfare to work -- in cities and in rural areas -- is finding transportation to get
    to jobs, training programs and child care centers. Few welfare recipients own cars.
    Existing mass transit does not provide adequate links to many suburban jobs at all, or
    within a reasonable commute time. In addition, many entry level jobs require evening or
    weekend hours that are poorly served by existing transit routes. To help those on welfare
    get to work, President Clinton proposed a $100 million a year welfare to work

                                            -3-
    Act for the 21st Century (TEA-21) authorizes $750 million over five years for the
    President's initiative and reverse commute grants. Of this amount, $50 million is
    guaranteed funding in FY 1999, rising to $150 million in 2003. The Omnibus Budget Act
    includes $75 million for this program in FY 1999 and applications are due to the
    Department of Transportation by December 31, 1998. The Job Access competitive grants
    will assist states and localities in developing flexible transportation alternatives, such as
    van services, for welfare recipients and other low income workers.

   Eliminating Anti-Work and Anti-Family Rules that Denied Families Health Coverage: In
    August 1998, the President eliminated a vestige of the old welfare system by announcing
    that the Department of Health and Human Services will revise its regulations to allow all
    states to provide Medicaid coverage to working, two-parent families who meet State
    income eligibility. Under the old welfare regulations, adults in two-parent families who
    worked more than 100 hours per month could not receive Medicaid regardless of income
    level, while there were no such restrictions on single-parent families. Because these
    regulations provided disincentives to marriage and full-time work, the Administration
    allowed a number of states to waive this rule. The new regulation eliminates this rule for
    all States, providing health coverage for more than 130,000 working families to help
    them stay employed and off welfare.


                   PROMOTING PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

   Enforcing Child Support -- 68% Increase in Collections: The Clinton Administration
    collected a record $13.4 billion in child support in 1997 through tougher enforcement, an
    increase of $5.4 billion, or 68% since 1992. Not only are collections up, but the number
    offamilies that are actually receiving child support has also increased. In 1997, the
    number of child support cases with collections rose to 4.2 million, an increase of 48%
    from 2.8 million in 1992. In addition, a new collection system proposed by the President
    in 1994 and enacted as part of the 1996 welfare reform law located one million
    delinquent parents in its first nine months of operation. This National Directory of New
    Hires helps track parents across state lines by enabling child support officials to match
    records of delinquent parerlts with wage records from throughout the nation.
    Approximately one-third of all child support cases involve parents living in different
    states. In June 1998, the President signed the Deadbeat Parents Punishment Act, a law
    based on his 1996 proposal for tougher penalties for parents who repeatedly fail to
    support children living in another state or who flee across state lines to avoid supporting
    them. This new law creates two new felonies, with penalties of up to two years in
    prison, for egregious child support evaders who travel across state or country lines to
    evade child support obligations, or who have an unpaid obligation to a child living in
    another state that is more than $10,000 or has remained unpaid for more than two years.

    Increasing Parental Responsibility: The President's unprecedented and sustained
    campaign to ensure parents financially support their children is working. Paternity
    establishment, often the crucial first step in child support cases, has dramatically


                                            - 4-
    begun in 1994 by the Clinton AdministratiQn. In 1997, the number of paternities
    established or acknowledged rose to a record 1.3 million, two and a halftimes the 1992
    figure of 512,000. In addition to tougher enforcement including a strong partnership
    with states, President Clinton has taken executive action including: directing the Treasury
    Department to collect past-due child support from Federal payments including Federal
    income tax refunds and employee salaries, and taking steps to deny Federal loans to any
    delinquent parents. The welfare reform law contains tough child support measures that
    President Clinton has long supported including: the national new hire reporting system;
    streamlined paternity establishment; uniform interstate child support laws; computerized
    state-wide collections; and tough new penalties. These five measures are projected to
    increase child support collections by an additional $24 billion over the next ten years.

   Breaking the Cycle of Dependency -- Preventing Teen Pregnancy: Significant
    components of the President's comprehensive effort to reduce teen pregnancy became law
    when the President signed the 1996 Personal Responsibility Act. The law requires
    unmarried minor parents to stay in school and live at home or in a supervised setting;
    encourages "second chance homes" to provide teen parents with the skills and support
    they need; and provides $50 million a year in new funding for state abstinence education
    activities. Since 1993, the Clinton Administration has supported innovative and
    promising teen pregnancy prevention strategies, including working with boys and young
    men on pregnancy prevention strategies. The National Campaign to Prevent Teen
    Pregnancy, a private nonprofit organization, was formed in response to the President's
    1995 State of the Union. In 1997, the President announced the National Strategy to
    Prevent Teen Pregnancy, mandated in the welfare reform law. The first annual report on
    this Strategy reported that HHS-supported programs already reach at least 31 percent or
    1,4 70 communities in the United States. Notably, data shows we are making progress in
    reducing teen pregnancy -- teen births have fallen six years in a row, by 15 percent from
    1991 to 1997. And, teen pregnancy rates are at their lowest level in 20 years.




                                           -5-

The President made a commitment to fix several provisions in the welfare reform law that had
nothing to do with moving people from welfare to work. In 1997, the President fought for and
ultimately was successful in ensuring that the Balanced Budget Act protects the most vulnerable.
 In 1998, the President continued to reverse unfair cuts in benefits to legal immigrants.

      Restoring Food Stamp Benefits for Legal Immigrants: In June 1998, the President
       signed the Agricultural Research Act into law, which restores food stamp benefits to
       250,000 elderly, disabled, and other needy legal immigrants, including 75,000 children,
       who lawfully resided in the U.S. as of August 22, 1996 and lost assistance as a result of
       cuts in the 1996 welfare law that had nothing to do with welfare reform. It restores
       benefits to Hmong immigrants from Laos who aided our country during the Vietnam War
       and extends the period during which refugees and asylees may qualify for Food Stamps
       while they ~wait citizenship. This law funds a significant part of the President's 1999
       budget proposal to restore food stamp benefits to 730,000 legal immigrants, but the
       President's budget proposal would go further by covering families with children
       regardless of the date they entered the U.S. This restoration builds on the President's
       success last year in restoring SSI and Medicaid to 420,000 legal immigrants whose
       benefits were also terminated in welfare reform (see below). In addition, in late October
       the President signed into law a bill which will ensure that thousands of elderly and
       disabled legal immigrants who are dependent on SSI and Medicaid will continue to
       receive such services.

      Protects Legal Immigrants Who Become Disabled and Those Currently Receiving
       Benefits: The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 restored $11.5 billion in SSI and Medicaid
       benefits for legal immigrants whose benefits were also terminated in welfare reform.
       This law protects those immigrants now receiving assistance, ensuring that they will not
       be turned out of their apartments or nursing homes or otherwise left destitute. And for
       immigrants already here but not receiving benefits, the BBA does not change the rules
       retroactively. Immigrants in the country as of August 22, 1996 but not receiving benefits
       at that time who subsequently become disabled will also be fully eligible for SSI and
       Medicaid benefits.

      Protects Children by Keeping the Medicaid Guarantee: The BBA preserved the
       Federal guarantee of Medicaid coverage for the vulnerable populations who depend on it,
       and contains additional investments to extend coverage to uninsured children. It also
       ensures that 30,000 disabled children losing SSI because of the new tighter eligibility
       criteria keep their Medicaid coverage.

      Helps People Who Want to Work but Can't Find a Job:      The Balanced Budget Act
       (BBA), as amended by the Agricultural Research Act, also restored $1.3 billion in food
       stamp cuts. The welfare reform law restricted food stamps for able-bodied childless
       adults to only 3 out of every 36 months, unless they were working. This move ignored
       the fact that finding a job often takes time. The BBA provided funds for work slots and
       food stamp benefits to help those who are willing to work but, through no fault of their


                                              -6-
15 percent of the food stamp recipients (70,000 individuals monthly) who would
otherwise be denied benefits as a result of the "3 in 36" limit.
                                                                             11118/98




                                     - 7-
                                   November 20, 1998

Q:   What did the Vice President announce today?

A:   Vice President Gore announced $273 million for 75 federal Welfare-to-Work grants to
     fund innovative local projects to help people move from welfare to work and retain good
     jobs. The projects -- run by local governments as well as business, labor, educational,
     and other groups -- will address the need for jobs, child care, transportation, basic skills,
     English proficiency, substance abuse, mental health and other issues faced by some
     individuals moving from welfare to work. The grants, which come from $3 billion in
     Welfare-to-Work funds that the President won in the 1997 Balanced Budget Act, will go
     to communities in 44 states, with 61 percent for urban areas, 15 percent for rural areas,
     and 24 percent for areas that include both urban and rural communities.

Q:   Do you think welfare reform is a success? What is the Administration doing to
     ensure that welfare recipients get jobs and don't just get ~ut off by time limits?

A:   Since the President signed the Welfare Reform law in August 1996, caseloads have fallen
     dramatically and are now at the lowest level in 29 years and an increasing number of
     welfare recipients are going to work. To ensure the success of this historic effort, the
     Administration has:
            Encouraged the business community to hire from the welfare rolls, launching the
             Welfare to Work Partnership, which now has over 7,000 business members;
           Mobilized the civic, religious and non-profit community through the Vice
            President's Coalition to Sustain Success;
            Committed to hire our fair share of welfare recipients into the federal government
             -- at least 10,000 welfare recipients by the 2000 -- and under the Vice President's
             leadership and the commitment of Cabinet Secretaries, we're already over 80% of
            the way to this goal;
           Fought successfully to provide $3 billion for the Welfare to Work grants for those
             communities and individuals who might need additional help to make the
            transition to work (some of these grants are being announced today);
            Encouraged states to use all available resources -- T ANF, Welfare-to-Work, and
             state funds -- to provide all families on the welfare rolls with the opportunity for
            work and self-sufficiency.
            Expanded and extended tax credits for employers who hire long term welfare
            recipients and other disadvantaged individuals;
            Obtained $283 million in FY 1999 for 50,000 new welfare-to-work housing
            vouchers to help families who need housing in order to get or keep a job;
           Enacted $75 million in FY 1999 for transportation grants to local communities
            who develop innovative ways to expand transportation options for families
            moving from welfare to work and other low income workers;
           Increased child support collection by 68 percent since 1992;
            Signed into law just at the end of this Congress a new Individual Development
            Account program to help low income families save for a first home, higher
            education, or to start a new business.



                                              -1-

Q:    What is the Welfare-to-Work Program?

A:    The grants announced today are part of the $3 billion Welfare-to-Work program the
      Administration fought for in the 1997 Balanced Budget Act to help states and
      communities move long term welfare recipients, and certain non-custodial parents, into
      lasting unsubsidized jobs. These funds are administered by the Department of Labor.
      Seventy-five percent of the $3 billion Welfare-to-Work funds are distributed by
      formula to the states, and in turn to local communities, based on their share of
      individuals receiving welfare and individuals living in poverty. In addition 25
      percent of funds are available on a competitive basis to innovative programs. In
      May, the President announced the first round of Welfare to Work competitive
      grants--49 grants totaling nearly $200 million (subsequently, 2 of these split into
      separate grants, so there are now 51 1st round grantees). Today the Vice President
      in announcing the second round -- 75 grants totaling over $250 million.

Q:   What do these new grants look like and where are they going?

A:   The 75 grants cover a wide range of geographic areas, target populations, challenges, and
     partners:
            69 single site grants and 6 multi-site grants
            44 states -- single-site grants in 41 states, with multi-site grants in another 3 states
            41 are in Empowerment Zones/Enterprise Communities
            46 urban areas (61 %),11 rural areas (15%), and 18 areas (24%) that include urban
             and rural communities
            43 serve non-custodial parents (some focus exclusively on this population, but
             most serve a mix of non-custodial and custodial parents)
            26 emphasize transportation
            19 focus on child care
            41 focus on serving public housing residents
            16 serve people with learning and other disabilities
            34 provide substance abuse services
            9 focus on non-traditional occupations for women
            7 feature microenterprise development
            5 include labor organizations
            2 Historically Black Colleges and Universities, 1 Hispanic Association of
             Colleges and Universities, and 1 tribal college
            3 focus on Native Americans
            3 feature a community saturation strategy
            2 focus on homeless individuals
            2 grantees are faith-based organizations (with other grantees partnering with faith
             and community based organizations)
            Approximately half are going to private organizations and half to public
             organizations.


                                               -2-
     benefited?

A.   The first round of competitive grants represent 51 innovative laboratories. Through the
     operation of these projects we are learning how transportation, child care, substance
     abuse treatment, and other activities can best be integrated into creative community
     strategies for changing welfare checks into pay checks. Through these grants we are also
     learning what works best for serving noncustodial fathers, individuals with disabilities,
     public housing residents and people requiring treatment for substance abuse in order to be
     employed. The first round grants are still in their early stages. The task of using
     welfare-to-work dollars as "glue" for building new community partnerships for bringing
     together a variety of existing federal, state and local programs takes time. DOL expects
     to serve over 49,000 people through these round 1 grants.

Q:   Why aren't more people being served?

A.   Individuals who are eligible to be served by Welfare-to-Work grants (whether state
     formula or local competitive grants) are the most difficult to employ recipients of
     Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). These are individuals who have no
     high school diploma or GED, who have a poor work history, who have low reading and
     math levels, who require substance abuse treatment, who have been receiving T ANF for
     at least 30 months, exhausted their benefits or who have characteristics predictive oflong
     term welfare dependence. The purpose of the program is to have these individuals not
     only get a job, but to also receive the services they need to retain it and move upward into
     self-sufficiency. This kind of intervention requires time and close attention even after an
     individual is already placed into a job.

Q:   What's the difference between these grants and formula grants?

A:   DOL is finding that State formula grants (85% of which must be passed down to the local
     level) are generally broad in their scope. Competitive grants, on the other hand, tend to
     focus on a particular population (such as noncustodial fathers), or theme (transportation,
     child care, rural services, technology etc.). To receive a formula grant a State must
     match every $2 offederal funding with $1 of its own. Competitive grants do not require
     match so it is easier for a local community to step forward and take a risk with
     innovation.

Q:   How many applications did the Department of Labor receive for WtW competitive
     grants, and how many were funded?

A:   In Round # 1 there were 621 applicants, of which 220 were deemed to be in the
     "competitive range" when scored against the criteria. Ofthese, 51 awards were made.
     In Round # 2 there were 680 applicant, of which 340 were in the "competitive range"
     and 75 are being announced today. Of those 75 successful Round # 2 applicants, 25
     were in the competitive range in Round # 1 but were not funded.




                                             -3-

A:    Yes. For example, 25 applicants that were not successful in Round # 1 reapplied under
      Round # 2 and will receive awards. When an applicant is not successful, he/she receives
      a letter from DOL outlining the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal. During the
      next competition, the Department will hold technical assistance "bidder's conferences" to
      provide potential applicants with lessons learned from previous applications and to
      cover a number of other topics to assure that all who may wish to apply--inc1uding
      community-based organizations and others who are not familiar with federal grant
      requirements-- have the best information possible in order to submit a strong application.

Q:    What criteria was used to select the winners?

A:    The grant applications were judged using the following criteria: (1) Relative need for
      assistance, (2) Innovation, (3) Outcomes, (4) Local Collaboration and Sustainability, and
      (5) Demonstrated Capacity.

Q:    How many more competitions will there be and when will the next one begin?

A:    The next competition will begin in late January of 1999. There may be one additional
      competition after that.

Q:    Why didn't all states accept Welfare-to-Work formula funds in FY 1998?

A:    In FY 1998, six states (OH, ID, MS, UT, SD,WY) chose not to use these funds to help
      find jobs for hard-to-employ, long-term welfare recipients in areas with- high
      concentrations of poverty, such as Cleveland, Toledo and Youngstown. States that did
      not apply in FY '98 may apply in FY '99 as well. In addition, the fact that the
      Department of Labor received over 1,300 competitive grant applications from public and
      private organizations, indicates the high level of interest in and need for these resources.

Vice President's Welfare to Work Coalition to Sustain Success

Q:    What is the Coalition?

A:    In May 1997, the Vice President launched the Welfare-to-Work Coalition to Sustain
      Success, a coalition of several dozen national civic, service, and faith-based organizations
      that work with state and local agencies and employers to help those moving from welfare
      to work succeed on the job. This will be the sixth issues forum the Vice President has
      convened with the Coalition to help them share successful. Charter members of the
      Coalition include such groups as the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, the Baptist Joint
      Committee, Goodwill, Salvation Army,.the United Way, the YMCA, the YWCA, the
      Women's Missionary Union, who provide mentoring, job training, child care,
      transportation, and other support to get and keep good jobs.




                                               -4-
      Work Partnership?

A:    The Coalition, launched by the Vice President in May 1997, consists of national
      civic, service, and faith-based organizations whose local chapters work closely with
      public sector agencies and employers to help individuals making the transition from
      welfare to work succeed on the job. The Partnership, launched by the President in
      May 1997, is a private organization consisting of thousands of businesses (currently
      7,000) who have pledged to hire at least one welfare recipient.

Federal Welfare to Work Hiring

Q:    How many welfare recipients has the federal government hired?

A:    According to the Office of Personnel Management, the federal government has hired
      8,462 welfare recipients since April 1997 when the federal hiring initiative was launched.
       This is 80 percent of our goal of 10,000 hires by the year 2000. As a part of this
      effort, the White House pledged to hire six welfare recipients and has already hired
      eight.

Q:    How were the hiring goals set -- were the agencies assigned quotas?

A:    Each agency was asked to develop a goal that made sense given the nature of its
      workforce and its hiring needs. We established an overall federal commitment of
      10,000 hires as the federal government's fair share of helping fulfill the President's
      pledge to move 2 million people off welfare by the year 2000 (The Federal
      government is approximately 1.5 percent of the nation's workforce. To meet its
      portion of the President's challenge to move 2 million people off welfare by the year
      2000 -- which amounts to moving about 700,000 adults into the workforce -- the
      Federal government ought to hire about 10,000 welfare recipients.)

Q:    How can you hire welfare recipients when government is downsizing and budgets
      are tight? Are you creating special preferences for welfare recipients?

A:    It is true that the government is downsizing.  Since the President took office, he has
      actually shrunk the Federal government to its smallest size in three decades.
      However, downsizing does not mean there are no jobs to fill. As in any
      organization, there is a natural amount of turnover in jobs at all levels. The
      Federal agencies have committed to reaching out specifically to the welfare
      population to fill those positions. We are not creating any preference such as the
      one that exists for veterans. We are encouraging the departments to use existing
      hiring authorities, including programs that allow departments to cut through red
      tape and hire entry-level workers quickly and easily. We are also encouraging
      outreach efforts to our federal contractors, grantees and partners.




                                             -5-

A:    Different agencies have pursued different strategies and they are continually
      sharing information to learn from each other about what works. Most federal
      agencies have responded enthusiastically to this challenge, are on target to meet or
      exceed their hiring goals, and have been rewarded with productive and enthusiastic
      new workers. In April, the Vice President prepared a first annual report for the
      President, in which he identified keys to success including: leadership, recruitment,
      retention, and leveraging networks of contractors and partners to encourage them
      to join the federal agencies in this effort. The Department of Commerce set a goal
      of 4,180, with most of these hires related to the 2000 Census and planned for 1998
      and 1999. They are already at 48% of their goal.

Welfare Caseloads

Q:    You say caseloads are at their lowest in 29 years. How many people are on the rolls?

A:    The latest caseload numbers, released in August, show that welfare caseloads fell
      by 5.7 million since President Clinton took office and 3.8 million since he signed the
      welfare reform law. The new figures, from June 1998, show 8.4 million people on
      welfare, a drop of more than 41 percent from January 1993. This historic decline
      occurred in response to the Administration's grants of Federal waivers to 43 states, the
      provisions ofthe new welfare reform law, and the strong economy.

      The latest data from the Census Bureau shows that the percentage of people who
      were on welfare in one year and working the following year increased by 28% from
      March 1996 to March 1998 (from 26.5% to 33.8%).




                                              -6-
      increasing numbers on the welfare rolls as caseloads decline. What are you doing
      to address this issue?

A:    We believe these trends merit close attention. Further analysis reveals that much of the
      disparity reflects changes in the population as a whole--specifically, population growth
      explains nearly two-thirds of the difference in caseload decline between Hispanics and
      whites and nearly half the difference between blacks and whites. In addition, minorities
      are more likely to be on welfare in the first place, and more likely to end up as long-term
      recipients once they go on the rolls. They tend to have lower educational levels,
      marriage rates, and larger families than whites, and are more than twice as likely to live in
      central cities and areas of concentrated poverty. This is exactly why the President
      fought for and won the $3 billion Welfare-to-Work grants which states and cities
      can use to create job opportunities for welfare recipients, particularly targeted at
      hard-to-employ individuals in high poverty areas, some of which are being
      announced today. Our initiatives on we1fare-to-work transportation and
      welfare-to-work housing vouchers will also help people in isolated areas get to where the
      jobs are.

Benefits for Legal Immigrants

Q:    When the President signed the welfare reform law he pledged to fix the cuts to legal
      immigrants. Has he fulfilled this promise?

A:    The President believes that legal immigrants should have the same opportunity, and bear
      the same responsibility, as other members of society. Upon signing the 1996. welfare
      law, he pledged to work toward reversing the unfair cuts in benefits to legal immigrants
      that Congress had added to the bill that had nothing to do with moving people from
      welfare to work and under his leadership many of these cuts have been restored. As part
      oflast year's Balanced Budget Act (BBA), Medicaid and Supplemental Security Income
      (SSI) were restored to hundreds of thousands of disabled and elderly legal immigrants.
      The Agriculture Research bill, which the President signed into law in June, restored Food
      Stamp benefits to vulnerable groups oflegal immigrants. And, the bill he signed on
      October 28th will ensure that thousands of elderly and disabled legal immigrants can
      continue to receive SSI and Medicaid.

Welfare Reform in New York City

Q:    Is it true as reported in The New York Times that the U.S. has launched an inquiry
      into whether the application procedures in New York City's job centers violate
      federal Medicaid and Food Stamp law?

A:    The Department of Health and Human Services and the U.S. Department of Agriculture
      are requesting information from city and state officials about Medicaid and Food Stamp
      application procedures to ensure that these federally guaranteed programs serve all
      qualified applicants, as required by federal law. This information-gathering process is
      currently at its earliest stages. As you may know, during the consideration of welfare
      reform legislation, the President insisted on maintaining the federal Medicaid and Food


                                               -7-
guarantee remains in place.




                                      -8-

                                   Office of the Vice President


For Immediate Release:                                                                Contact:
Friday, November 20,1998                                                              (202)
456-7035

                  VICE PRESIDENT GORE ANNOUNCES $273 MILLION

                    IN WELFARE-TO-WORK COMPETITIVE GRANTS

     Event Marks the Sixth Meeting of His Welfare to Work Coalition to Sustain Success

        WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Vice President Gore announced today the awarding of $273
million for 75 federal Welfare-to-Work Competitive grants to fund innovative local projects
helping people move from welfare to work and retain good jobs.

        The projects -- run by local governments as well as business, labor, educational, and other
groups -- will address the need for jobs, child care, transportation, basic skills, and English
proficiency as well as substance abuse and mental health issues that some individuals face as
they move from welfare to work. The grants, which come from $3 billion in Welfare-to-Work
funds that the President won in the 1997 Balanced Budget Act, will go to communities in 44
states, with 61 percent for urban areas, 15 percent for rural areas, and 24 percent for areas that
include both urban and rural communities.

       "I congratulate these communities for helping welfare recipients across this country move
off welfare into good jobs -- this is civic commitment at its best," Vice President Gore said.

       "For our country to continue to prosper," he added, "we must continue to work with our
communities to help our long-term welfare recipients break the cycle of dependency and become
productive workers, creating a brighter future for themselves and their families,"Gore said at a
town hall meeting where he was joined by Labor Secretary Alexis Herman, Health and Human
Services Secretary Donna Shalala, employers, former welfare recipients, grant recipients, and
members of the Vice President's Welfare to Work Coalition to Sustain Success -- a broad-based
group of non-profit, faith-based, and civic organizations helping families move from welfare to
work through mentoring and other critical support services.

       Today's town hall meeting marked the Vice President's sixth event with his
Welfare-to-Work Coalition to Sustain Success, which he launched in May 1997 to help those
moving from welfare to work succeed on the job. Charter members include the Boys and Girls
Clubs of America, the Baptist Joint Committee, Goodwill, Salvation Army, the United Way, the
YMCA, the YWCA, Women's Missionary Union and Women and Community Service.

        With the President leading efforts to reform welfare, caseloads have fallen dramatically
and are at their lowest level in 29 years. To build on this success, the President and Vice
President have led a multi-faceted effort that includes participation by the private, non-profit, and
religious communities and the federal government.
federal government hires at least 10,000 former welfare recipients; the government is 80 percent
of the way toward reaching its goal.

                                              ###


