RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-NOv-1998 15:10:43.00

SUBJECT:   ESEA item for weekly

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
As you requested:

ESEA Reauthorization.  DPC staff met with Education Department staff to
review the DepartmentD,s progress in developing an ESEA reauthorization
proposal. EducationD,s approach overall is to maintain the fundamental
focus throughout ESEA programs on helping students reach high standards
and, for the most part, to maintain the current programs (though they and
we are unsure how best to deal with Goals 2000).   Some small programs are
likely to be consolidated, and Education is developing proposals to expand
the role of Title 1 in providing preschool programs, and to create a new
emphasis on improving high school education in ESEA. DPC is working with
Education to ensure that the reauthorization proposal provides stronger
accountability for results and more effective interventions for low
performance than current law, more vigorously promotes public school
choice, and more effectively ensures that program funds are used to
support educational practices that work. We are also working to ensure
that positions you have previously taken on strengthening bilingual
education and the Safe and Drug Free Schools Program are fully
incorporated into the reauthorization proposal. Together with the
Education Department we are developing a strategy to place a greater and
more effective emphasis on improving the quality of teaching, especially
in high poverty schools, though we are not yet clear on how best to
achieve this. DPC, OMB and Education believe.it is important to transmit
a proposal to Congress shortly after the next session begins. To
accomplish this, Education will have to significantly speed up its work.
To help move this along, we will provide ED with detailed proposals on key
issues,  review Education?s progress again the week after Thanksgiving,
and establish a process for completing major policy decisions by the end
of this year.


