RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Oiana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPO 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-MAY-1997 19:43:59.00

SUBJECT:   Summit followup

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a (lengthy) inventory of current ideas on how to follow up on the
Summit.  It isn't as digested as it should be, but I figure it is better
to lay it out to get us thinking.  FYI, Steve Silverman needs to give
Sylvia/Erskine a reaction to EliO,s ideas; he says he will share any memo
with me before forwarding it to her.  I am assuming we will work up our
own list and share it when we're ready.  Let me know when/if you want to
sit down on this, or email me your reaction.

A basic question is how much to strike out on our own with events that
reinforce our message vs. work with the Summit/50lc3 structure.
Inevitably we have to decide how involved to be with Powell. We could bow
out and wish him well (particularly given the legal constraints on our
involvement with the 50lc3). But it probably makes sense to strike a
balance and stay involved, since our dealings with him in the Summit went
fairly well, and the President is so identified with the Summit.

Steve Silverman and I had lunch yesterday with Col. Bill Smullen
(PowellO,s guy), Stuart Shapiro, Ken Allen (Points of Light), and
Gomperts. All of them will stay involved, but the focus now shifts to
Rick Little. They invited us to a meeting with Rick next week, and Steve
and I think we should go -- although we have to figure out what we want
out of it. Rick is now setting targets for the 5 resources and figuring
out how to track whether they achieve their goal of 2 million.

The ideal outcome, of course, would be for Powell to reinforce our
service/AmeriCorps message in some way. That is why events playing up our
new 50,000 slots are best.  Eli suggests helping Powell see that
reauthorization of AmeriCorps is critical, but IO,m not sure how we pull
that one off. The best hope for this would probably be a variation on
GompertsO, idea -- dedicating the 50,000 new slots as some kind of army to
do PowellO,s work.

AmeriCorps/Service ideas
We will do our letter to nonprofits/religious groups pushing the 50,000
AmeriCorps expansion.  In addition, the PresidentO,s note that we ("and
Colin") should reach out to religious groups and publicize CampoloO,s
efforts raises the idea that we could launch CampoloO,s program.  This
would be especially nice if it has an AmeriCorps component.

I need to learn more from Campolo about the status of his program.   The
President writes about CampoloO,s program as if it already has young
people signed up, but I donO,t think it does yet.  His coalition has 6
religious organizations, but I donO,t know how broadly representative of
the faith community they are.  I'll work with Flo McAfee on this.  If
Campolo wants AmeriCorps scholarships, the Corporation will first have to


put it through their competitive grant process.

Other possibilities:
If the budget agreement really gets us the new America Reads AmeriCorps
people, we could try to highlight our success there in some way.
We could highlight Teach for America, now that we know itO,s ours.
The President expressed interest in an invitation to CityYearO,s annual
conference in Rhode Island in June.   CityYear members are all AmeriCorps.
We could see if they wanted to do any scholarship-only awards.   I hear
they are goofy, but he likes them.
You mentioned the partnering service-learning initiative that got that NY
Times story.   RifkinO,s next step is a retreat in June to hammer out how
they get to their announced goals (700 coaches, 10,000 schools) in terms
of organization.   Maybe there is an event after that retreat.
The Corporation is launching this "Leader Schools" program -- another
announcement at Penn State last year.   These are awards to recognize
schools with exemplary service learning programs, with Ted Sizer figuring
out how to identify them.   Susan Stroud wants to make them resources for
other schools.   I need to figure out event opportunities here.
On high school service scholars, we could revive our combination
awards/Elks/Moose idea.   The Corp. says they have made progress, but I
donO,t know the particulars yet.
We keep saying there is an opportunity to do something with seniors; we
have to figure out what this might be.

Summit-related Ideas
Most of EliO,s ideas piggy-back more directly onto the Summit.   I like his
idea of asking the non-profit to report to us quarterly.   ItO,s a way of
staying connected without taking direct responsibility for its work (which
we donO,t have anyway).  They may not welcome such a mandate, but if we
ask for it I assume they have to do it.   (I'll check with counsel here.)

Some of his other ideas seem too Summit-oriented to me, and not so related
to service -- bringing in CEOO,s to report on progress since the Summit,
or convening a conference on one or more of the 5 goals. On the other
hand, the President said in a note on the weekly that we should "consider
doing a more extensive followup, e.g., tied to juvenile justice
initiative, try to get other cities to follow Boston, etc."   (Leanne tells
me this refers to BostonO,s work on juveniles that he learned about at the
kick-off to our juvenile bill -- active churches, a comprehensive network
of providers to provide services to juveniles.)  This sounds to me like a
focus on two summit goals (mentoring and a safe place), so maybe we could
do something with Powell here.

Related to that, Ray Chambers has become convinced that the way to deliver
the 5 resources is through the schools.  He is pushing RifkinO,s
Partnering Initiative to playa role in this, but Rifkin is not anxious
to.  Chambers is also pushing the idea of community coaches in each
school, with some sort of brainstorming meeting at the Corporation next
week. We could use this to reinforce our Communities in Schools proposal
in the budget, and afterschool programs generally.

I doubt Powell would agree to add welfare to work as a 6th goal, as Eli
suggests.

Finally, I have to work with the federal agencies to make sure they
actually follow through on their commitments.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 010 - FOLDER -004


[05/09/1997 - 0511211997]


