RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-DEC-1998 11:08:29.00

SUBJECT:   Last Year's Goal's Memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D15]MAIL45906493T.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504307050000010A02010000000205000000E02900000002000084485DCAC1D7E5307D070A

MEMORANDUM FOR ERSKINE BOWLES

FROM:                     BRUCE REED

SUBJECT:                  DOMESTIC POLICY COUNCIL GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

       The central mission of the Domestic Policy Council is to advance the President's
domestic agenda. The following memo outlines our goals and objectives in carrying out the
domestic priorities that the President set forward in this year's State of the Union.

OVERALL GOAL: Education. Develop and implement, in concert with other White House
offices and the Department of Education, a strategy to carry out the President's 1O-point plan.

GOAL: Education. Develop and implement policies to achieve high educational standards
nationwide and improved student performance to meet those standards.

       Objectives:
       -Work with Education Department to persuade twenty-plus states this year to agree to
       administer the President's national tests in 1999.
       -Build support in the parent, business, and education communities for the President's
       testing initiative.
       -Work to improve the quality ofteaching by promoting the work of the National Board
       for Professional Teaching Standards; encouraging states and local school districts to
       adopt policies to place a master teacher in every school; and highlighting successful
       efforts at the state and local level.
       -Continue efforts, in coordination with America Reads, to recruit 100,000 college
       students to be reading tutors, expand the Department of Education's summer reading
       initiative, and promote proven approaches to reading instruction.
       -Work to increase the number of states with charter schools legislation.

GOAL: Education. Work toward passage oflegislation and appropriations to implement the
President's education agenda.

       Objectives:
       -Introduce legislation on school construction, America Reads, and HOPE scholarships
       and related tax proposals; identify bipartisan support for each proposal.
       -Assist in mobilizing constituencies for these proposals, such as securing an endorsement
       letter from hundreds of college Presidents.
       -Assist in developing and implementing a communications strategy showing how each

                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

       legislative proposal will improve the lives of students, families, and communities.

GOAL: Welfare. Develop policies that will assist in moving people from welfare to work.

       Objectives:
       -Work toward enactment ofa $3 billion fund to help states and cities find and create jobs
       for welfare recipients and enhanced tax credits to encourage companies to hire them.
       -Assist in conducting an extensive outreach campaign asking companies, nonprofits, the
       faith community, and government agencies to hire welfare recipients.
       -Oversee implementation of the new welfare law to ensure that the Administration does
       everything in its power, through executive action and guidance, to help states move
       people from welfare to work.

GOAL: Welfare. Develop and implement policies to ensure that welfare reform promotes
family and responsibility.

       Objectives:
       -Fulfill the President's commitment to restore certain budget cuts, involving legal
       immigrants and food stamps, included in the welfare law but unrelated to welfare reform.
       -Work with HHS in assisting states to ensure strict enforcement of child support rules.
       -Develop and implement new teenage pregnancy prevention and statutory rape initiatives.

GOAL: Crime. Enact the President's Anti-Gang & Youth Violence Act of 1997.

       Objectives:
       -Organize events highlighting main provisions in President's legislation -- involving, for
       example, handgun safety locks, anti-gang prosecutors, and after-school programs.
       -Draft directives, executive orders, and letters in furtherance of the bill's objectives.
       -Lead working group meetings with bipartisan Congressional delegation and
       Administration officials to ensure enactment of President's main priorities.

GOAL: Drugs. Promote and secure full funding for the President's 1997 Drug Control Strategy.

       Objectives:
       -Work closely with ONDCP on National Anti-Drug Media Campaign and organize
       Presidential event to kick off anti-drug advertisements.
       -Work to ensure full funding for President's drug strategy in appropriations process.

GOAL: Health Care. Work toward achieving bipartisan consensus on and enactment of
Medicare, Medicaid, health coverage, and quality reforms.

       Objectives:
       - Continue close coordination of policy development and strategy with HHS, Treasury,

                                                       Automated Records f..·fanagement System
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

       Labor and all relevant divisions within the White House.
       -Identify opportunities for executive actions that further the President's health care
       agenda, particularly in relation to quality and coverage initiatives.
       -Develop collaborative relationships with Congress and the governors to promote our
       health care agenda.
       -Work with representatives of consumers, providers, insurers / health plans, business, and
       labor, as well as academics, health economists, and foundations to disseminate and
       validate the President's positions on health care.
       -Refine and implement communications strategy to highlight the President's
       accomplishments, educate the public on current proposals, and generate support for
       legislative and executive initiatives.

GOAL: 0-3 Initiative. Promote efforts to enhance development in the earliest years of life.

       Objectives:
       -Engage in a broad-based review of policy affecting our youngest children and develop
       new initiatives, involving both executive and legislative action, to support these children.
       -Organize, in coordination with other White House offices, a White House Conference on
       early learning that will examine current scientific research and its practical applications
       for parenting; explore how different sectors of society can support our youngest children;
       and highlight Administration accomplishments and initiatives.

GOAL: Service. Work with other offices in the White House to ensure that the Presidents'
Service Summit advances the goals of service and voluntarism, while enhancing the AmeriCorps
program.

       Objectives:
       -Work with other White House offices to ensure that we participate in all important
       decisions about the structure and content ofthe Summit.
       -Develop events highlighting service and voluntarism to prepare the way for the Summit.
       -Develop policies and identify federal government "commitments" for the President to
       announce in his speech at the Summit.

GOAL: Executive Action. Help the President use all the powers of his office to advance his
agenda, with or without help from Congress.

       Objectives:
       -Develop Executive Orders and Memoranda in the priority issues outlined above, as well
       as in other important issues, such as consumer safety, technology, family, and the
       environment.
       -Vet proposals for executive action on domestic policy coming from agencies and other
       White House offices to make sure that they advance the President's long-term agenda.


                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


