RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-DEC-1998 15:55:07.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  political Reform -- Gore Commission: As a result of our conversation in
the Oval Office, Paul Weinstein of the DPC talked with co-chair Norm
Ornstein to discuss the Gore Report.   He relayed your serious concerns
about the proposed reports recommendations regarding free television time
for candidates for political office.   Ornstein indicated he was very
familiar with your views on the subject.   In response to your concerns,
there is a voluntary commitment by the broadcasters to provide five
minutes of free TV for political discourse between 5:00 pm and 11:35 pm
over the last thirty days of a campaign. While Ornstein agrees with us
that the report does not go as far as it should, he feels he has pushed
the broadcasting industry as far as he can without destroying the
consensus of Commission members.   More importantly,   he believes the
commitment of broadcasters to voluntary free TV time will and shOUld be
seen as a major victory -- he has indicated to us that Paul Taylor is
pleased with the commitment of the broadcasters.     We believe you should i
ssue a statement on December 18, when the report is released, praising the
broadcaster's commitment, challenging them to act in a timely manner, and
reminding them that we will use our authority to implement the agreement
if they do not. Ornstein would like to work with the Administration and
Senator McCain -- Ornstein has gotten agreement from Senator McCain to
hold hearings on the report -- to insure broadcaster fulfillment of this
voluntary commitment. Although the report falls short on the education f
ront, we have taken the lead on making certain that public broadcasting
will thrive in the digital era with your proposal for $400 million to help
PBS transition to digital television.   In addition, the Commission report
will include a critical reporting requirement on broadcasters that
effectively strengthens the three hour rule agreement you secured from
them in 1996. (ELENA: I put my name because I would like to get a little
credit for the work I have done on this.   Bruce concurs.)


