RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-DEC-1998 08:59:22.00

SUBJECT:     food safety

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
 Here is a brief summary of the budget situation that Cliff Gabriel and I
put together.

The goal of the initiative is to work towards integrating federal, state,
and local public health agencies into a coherent national system with
improved surveillance and inspections including expanded coverage of
imported food.

FDA

u          The FDA request is for $48.9 million over the FY99 request.

The majority of FDAD,s request ($25.6 million) would go toward expansion
of their inspection and compliance capability. FDAD,s inspection program
is viewed widely as deficient, with most plants only being inspected once
every seven to ten years.   HHS estimates that a combination of the
improved federal and local inspections and our risk-based approach will
reduce the inspection cycle so that high-risk operations will be inspected
once a year.   The FY2000 increment would be on top of $24.5 million
appropriated for this purpose in FY99.   FDA will enter into contracts and
partnerships so that states will follow FDA guidelines and procedures.
Much of the focus will also be placed on assuring the safety of imported
food.  GAO and the NAS have identified this as a major weakness in FDAD,s
programs.    FDA will increase the number of international inspections from
100 to 250 and will conduct evaluations of foreign food production
systems. Other important activities include continuing HACCP
implementation and field visits to foreign countries related to the
GAPs/GMPs for fresh fruits and vegetables.

FDA will send $9.0 million for improved surveillance activities. Given
the fact that FDA relies on monitoring and surveillance (not continuous
inspection like FSIS) this request is reasonable.  In particular, FDA will
focus its efforts on improving its traceback capabilities.

FDA also requested $6.9 million for research programs and $2.7 for risk
assessment.  Risk assessment is a critical tool for priority setting and
determining proper interventions.  However, data supporting good
quantitative risk assessment activities are very weak. This money will be
used to improve FDAD,s risk assessment capabilities as well as support
other aspects of FDAD,s regulatory programsD*e.g., pathogen detection.

FDA is asking for $4.7 million in new education funding.     If FDA is ever


going to be successful, they will need to find ways to better educate
state regulators, industry (HACCP implementation), and the public.

FSIS

u       User fees are the main problem

The biggest problem associated with the FSIS budget is its continued
reliance on user fees.  Proposed as part of our original deficit reduction
package, these fees are widely criticized by Congress and consumer
groups. The FY2000 request currently contains a $473 million cut in
discretionary spending for FSIS to be compensated for by user fees, which
everyone knows will not happen. This is on top of a flat budget when the
agency is trying to implement extensive HACCP reforms.  FSIS has very
little discretionary money, since most is tied up in inspector salaries
and other fixed costs.

CDC

U       The CDC request is for $18 million over the FY99 request.  The
goal is to create a national system that provides comprehensive data on
the occurrence of food-borne illness that can be used by agencies at every
level to combat food-borne illness.

The majority of the investment ($12.8 million) is targeted toward
surveillance activities, specifically expanding the scope of FoodNet and
the capacity of PulseNet to better capture pathogen DNA fingerprints of
both E. coli 0157:H7 and Salmonella enteritidis and include more state
health departments in the network.  This expanded surveillance network is
the heart of our nationD,s food-borne disease early warning system. The
current surveillance system does not provide adequate coverage of the US
population.

An additional $3.0 million is targeted to applied research.  The applied
research that CDC conducts is vital to their epidemiology and surveillance
work.  In particular, CDC will focus on developing methods to identify and
subtype hard to identify pathogens.
