RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-DEC-199B 19:40:39.00

SUBJECT:   draft potus memo re: Central Americans

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is the draft that Scott and I have worked on. We would like to get
it to the President by the end of the day tomorrow.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D74]MAIL47216424Z.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043ECOB0000010A02010000000205000000312B000000020000F36AEA9ABD99F3669F5B02
4FBOEFC7CEA3BF99AC5BA151E3BF4ACD0010DBD69DF642A69B6BFB2CC662BF32F7C66BDFA2BFBF
                                                                          Automated Recores ~fanagement System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
        MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT


        FROM:          MARIA ECHAVESTE
                       SANDY BERGER
                       BRUCE REED

        RE:            IMMIGRATION RESPONSE TO HURRICANE MITCH


        Background:

        In the wake of Hurricane Mitch, one of the key issues that has been raised by the Presidents of
        Central America as well as many immigration advocacy groups in the United States is what to do
        about Central Americans who are without legal status in the United States. In early November,
        the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) temporarily stayed removals of all nationals
        from Honduras, Nicaragua, EI Salvador, and Guatemala. At your request, that delay was
        extended until January 7, 1999. However, given the long-term economic devastation and social
        destruction left by Hurricane Mitch, a more systematic approach to the treatment of nationals of
        those countries in the United States without lawful status is required.

        Temporary Protected Status:

        One possibility is a grant of Temporary Protected Status (TPS). The Attorney General has
        authority to grant TPS for 6 to 18 months to nationals of a country if she finds that there has
        been an environmental disaster in that country rendering it temporarily unable to adequately
        handle the return of its nationals. Persons who qualify for TPS are not subject to removal and
        are eligible for permission to work in the United States during the time period designated by the
        Attorney General.

        The Department of State has evaluated conditions in Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador, and
        Guatemala and recommends that the Attorney General grant TPS only to nationals from
        Honduras and Nicaragua. The Department of Justice (DOJ) agrees that TPS would be
        appropriate for nationals of these countries. We recommend that the Attorney General grant
        TPS to nationals from Honduras and Nicaragua for a period of one year. At the end of that
        one year period, the designation can be renewed.

        The effect of Hurricane Mitch on conditions in El Salvador and Guatemala does not appear to
        warrant a TPS designation for nationals of those countries. More than 90 percent of the deaths
        and displacement caused by Mitch occurred in Honduras and Nicaragua. Moreover, while the
        econol1lic and infrastructure damage in EI Salvador and Guatemala has been serious, it is not .

                                                        1




                                          2

Because Mitch had serious effects on El Salvador and Guatemala and because we are interested in
providing a coordinated response to all four affected countries, we believe we must also provide
something for Salvadorans and Guatemalans in the United States.

As you recall, the Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA), enacted
in late 1997, authorized virtually automatic permanent status for Nicaraguans and Cubans living
in the United States, while providing Salvadorans and Guatemalans with only an opportunity to
be considered under the more lenient (pre-1996 Act) rules for suspension of deportation (a form
of immigration relief leading to permanent status). Hondurans were excluded altogether from
this legislation. In your signing statement to the NACARA legislation, you noted that the
Administration would seek to overcome disparities created by the legislation through the
implementation process. The Hispanic Caucus and many Central American advocates have
urged the Attorney General to adopt regulations that would achieve parity among all Central
American groups. While DO] has recently proposed regulations that would greatly improve the
chances for Salvadorans and Guatemalans seeking to obtain permanent status, the regulations still
do not provide the sort of guarantee of permanent status enjoyed by Nicaraguans and Cubans.
Though DO] has committed to ensuring that immigration officers take the effects of Mitch into
account when adjudicating suspension claims under NACARA, there would still be no assurance
that a Salvadoran or Guatemalan with a meritorious claim would obtain permanent status.

During the last session of Congress, Rep. Gutierrez sponsored legislation that would have
provided amnesty to Salvadorans, Guatemalans, and Hondurans equivalent to that obtained by
the Nicaraguans and Cubans in NACARA. We did not support that legislation because we
have generally not favored grants of amnesty. However, given (1) that similarly situated
Haitians were granted amnesty in the last session, and (2) the changed circumstances brought on
by Hurricane Mitch, we recommend that we commit to working with Congress to pass
legislation that provides amnesty for Salvadorans and Guatemalans covered by NACARA, as well
as a small group of similarly situated Hondurans. Though legislation of this kind would not
provide relief for all nationals of El Salvador and Guatemala living in the United States, it would
help a significant number -- approximately 300,000 out of an estimated 500,000 -- and would be
consistent with your commitment to achieving parity for all similarly situated individuals covered
byNACARA.

In addition to seeking parity through legislation, we should also consider providing a further
extension of the current stays of deportation for Salvadorans and Guatemalans generally or
granting Deferred Enforced Departure (DED) to those covered by the proposed legislation.
This would help allay' the perception that Salvadorans and Guatemalans are receiving second-class
treatment in our immigration policy response to Mitch, and would ensure that individuals are not
subject to deportation while we seek permanent relief for them.

                                                3



    Timing:

    Because we recommend a TPS designation for nationals of two of the four Central American
    countries affected by Mitch, we strongly recommend delaying this announcement until after the
    visit by the four Central American presidents at the end of this week. We also recommend that
    when we do make the TPS announcement, we put it in the context of the broader relief that we
    are providing to people from the region. Finally, we strongly recommend delaying announcing
    our intention to seek parity legislation until after we have had more of an opportunity to consult
    with the Hill. We have received indications that some members, including some key
    Republican members, may also be interested in pursuing legislative relief for Salvadorans and
    Guatemalans -- a premature announcement of our intention to seek 'parity legislation might
    negatively prejudice our chances of getting the legislation passed.




                                                    4


