RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-DEC-1998 11:29:32.00

SUBJECT:   Revised Event Proposal Memo for Noon Planning Meeting

TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I revised this according to staff recommendations.  Laura can make any
edits so that this can be submitted to scheduling sometime today.    (I
will be at the Medicare Event and will be late to the noon meeting.)
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D48]MAIL434805142.326 to ASCII,
 The fOllowing is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BF050000010A02010000000205000000DF450000000200006976BCBA4E202DE3218BDC
3BF1E75C2A8EA913103D2238CEEOAC5A38C3509226COEF4CC3B2EEC656B1C4B5BEOB44A2C2A107


MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

CC:                      ANN LEWIS
                         STEPHANIE STREETT

FROM:                     BRUCE REED

SUBJECT:                  DPC ANNOUNCEMENTS

Following is a list of possible DPC announcements through the month of January.

Ready         Drunk Driving Announcement
              The President could meet with leaders of the highway safety community (MADD,
              SADD, etc.) to announce the availability of Department of Justice grants of$12
              million to states to combat underage drinking, and release public service
              announcements warning against drunk driving during the holidays and reminding
              drivers of the importance of seat belts. (Ready)

Ready         Fighting Homelessness
              A number of homeless organizations hold events throughout the country
              (including in D.C.) on December 20 to highlight the problem of homeless ness.
              The President could announce $700 million in HUD Homeless Assistance Grants
              that will be granted to 300 communities and states to help homeless individuals
              find jobs and achieve self-sufficiency. Individuals who have benefited from this
              initiative and graduated to self-sufficiency could participate in this event.
              (December 20 or can be held. Possible for the President's shelter visit on
              December 22.)

Ready         Campaign Finance Reform Event
              The President could host a White House meeting of bipartisan sponsors of
              campaign finance reform legislation, which would include Senators McCain and
              Feingold and Representatives Shays and Meehan. The purpose of the event
              would be to underscore the President's commitment to enact bipartisan campaign
              finance reform by next year. The President could highlight examples of
              excessive campaign spending throughout the country in this past election.
              (Depends on Members schedules.)



                                                            Automated Records t-.!anagement System
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
             The President could sign an executive order as early as next week prohibiting
             discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, or sex in education
             programs conducted by the federal government. This includes schools operated
             by the Defense Department for military dependents, schools operated by the
             Department of the Interior for Native Americans, and numerous training and
             educational programs run by federal departments. This is a follow up to an
             Executive Memorandum the President issued last year asking the Department of
             Justice to lead an effort to identify all federally-conducted education programs and
             to recommend appropriate action to end discrimination. (Ready)

Mid. Jan     Gun Show Recommendations
             The President can announce his support for Administrative actions and legislation
             to crack down on the sale of guns at gun shows. The Attorney General and
             Treasury Secretary will submit their report of recommendations for cracking down
             on gun shows to the President by January 7. The President could hold an event
             where he announces new Administrative actions that follow the recommendations
             in the report and his support for legislation to combat the sale of guns at gun
             shows. (Ready Mid January, or could hold until early February and
             combine it with a Treasury report on gun tracing and a new announcement
             in support of increased gun prosecutions.)

Mid Jan.     "Zero Tolerance" for Drugs in Prisons
             The recently passed omnibus appropriations bill includes an important provision
             that would allow states to use up to 10 percent of their prison funds to test and, if
             necessary, treat prisoners and parolees for drug use. To highlight this
             accomplishment, the President could join the Attorney General, General
             McCaffrey, and a group of Governors in issuing new guidelines to ensure that
             states use their funds effectively to promote this new "zero tolerance" policy.
             (Ready mid January.)

Mid Jan.     FDA Regulation on Over-the-Counter Drug Labeling
             The President could announce the release of a final regulation requiring all
             over-the-counter drugs to bear easily readable and comprehensible labels.
             We would have to push HHS and OMB hard to announce this regulation in
             December, but we might be able to get it done by the end of the month.
             Such an announcement would have the support of both the pharmaceutical
             community and consumer groups, which would portray it as an important
             accomplishment. (Ready Mid January.)

Mid Jan.     Mentoring Event
             The First Lady is planning to do an event on mentoring that the President could
             join. The President would announce: (1) $15 million in new Department of


                                               2
                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
           Mentoring Programs, which is a report to Congress on why mentoring works and
           how best to establish successful programs; and (3) a new PSA Campaign
           promoting mentoring and encouraging people to become mentors. The PSA
           campaign will run on most major networks. (Ready by January 14.)

Mid Jan.   Work Participation Rates and Welfare to Work Initiatives
           The President could visit a welfare-to-work program or make an announcement
           from the White House on: (1) new state work participation rates, showing that
           almost all states are meeting the welfare law's single-parent requirements,
           although some are failing to meet the law's separate two-parent requirement
           (these rates, for July - September 1997, are the first available under the new
           welfare reform law) ; (2) new caseload data showing continuing declines; and (3)
           new data on the number of people who were on welfare in 1997 and working in
           March 1998. This event could also be used to: (4) preview Welfare-to-Work
           reauthorization, including Responsible Fatherhood Grants; (5) release first report
           to Congress on Welfare-to-Work (due in January); and (6) announce the
           availability of funds for the third round ofWtW Competitive grants. (Mid
           January.)

Mid Jan.   Announce availability of funds for Welfare-to-Work Housing Vouchers and
                    IDAs: The Congress approved in the V NHUD appropriations biII full
           funding for the President's request for 50,000 welfare-to-work housing vouchers.
           The President could hold an event announcing the opening of the first competition
           for these vouchers and unveiling his proposal to fund even more in his FY '00
           budget (currently, budget has 25,000 more). These are the first housing vouchers
           ever to be linked to welfare reform; they wiII improve the way welfare,
           employment, and housing agencies work together. In addition, the Human
           Services Reauthorization biII signed by the President in late October included a
           five-year, $125 million demonstration program to establish Individual
           Development Accounts to help low income families save for a first home,
           education and training, or to start a new business. HHS is required to announce
           the first grant competition by January 27th. The President could announce the
           availability of funds and appear with individuals who have used IDAs under the
           current authority in the welfare reform law or in demonstrations funded by the
           Ford Foundation. (Mid-late January, no later than January 27.)

Mid Jan.   Tobacco -- Cessation
           The President could issue a directive to the Office of Personnel Management
           requiring enhanced coverage for federal employees of smoking cessation
           services, either by raising coverage limits (now only $100 for most fee for
           service plans) or waiving deductible and co payments. At the same time, he
           could unveil his plans to provide improved smoking cessation services to


                                            3
                                                               Automated Records lI-!:magement System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
               part of a comprehensive anti-tobacco plan to increase military readiness.
               (Ready by Mid Jan. and could be held until later in the month.)

Late Jan.     Car Seat Announcement
              The President could announce the final Department of Transportation rule for
              universal child safety seats. Under the new rule, every seat would be required to
              fit in every car the same way -- eliminating the current confusion caused by the
              existence of 100 kinds of child seats and 300 kinds of passenger vehicles. The
              National Highway Transportation Safety Administration estimates that 80 percent
              of the children strapped into safety seats are at risk because seats are improperly
              connected. Approximately 600 children under 5 years old are killed and more
              than 70,000 are injured in vehicle crashes every year. The new rule would make
              it easier for parents to use child safety seats properly and encourage greater use of
              child safety seats. (Probably ready by late January.)

Late January Family Report
             The President could announce the findings of a new report by the CEA detailing
             changes in the last thirty years in family life. The report will show the increased
             number of women in the workplace, and detail the diminished amount of time
             families have to spend with their children. (Ready late January.)

There are several relatively small budget initiatives that we may want to roll out prior to
the State of the Union. These options include:

             Superbug Initiative
              Resistance to antibiotics is becoming a public health crisis, causing prolonged
              illnesses and even death. A new initiative, costing about $25 million each
              year, could address this problem through: (1) a major outreach and
              education campaign involving hospitals, health professionals, and managed
              care organizations; and (2) new research and surveillance efforts to
              understand where and why antibiotic resistance occurs and to develop
              effective responses. (Pending budget decision.)

             Asthma Initiative
              The President could announce a concerted fight against asthma, which has
              become a national epidemic affecting the lives of 15 million Americans. The
              principal goal of this program would be to reduce by half the number of children
              who die or suffer activity limitations because of this disease. The new FY2000
              budget proposal would expand existing pilot programs that have had
              demonstrated success in preventing, managing, and understanding asthma. The
              President could also release an interagency report on best practices and strategies
              to address asthma. (Requires budget decision.)

                                                4
                                                               Automated Records Mnnagement System
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
    The President could announce a new proposal to detect and manage bioterrorism.
    Bioterrorism is becoming an increasing threat that has the potential to injure or
    kill millions of Americans through deadly diseases, such as smallpox. The
    President's initiative would equip the nation's public health system to detect and
    respond to this potential problem. This initiative would: train epidemic
    intelligence officers who can coordinate with state health departments to identify
    and respond to attacks; develop a mass casualty emergency response system that
    includes primary care, emergency transportation, and decontamination abilities;
    create and maintain a stockpile of pharmaceuticals; and improve research to
    develop new vaccines and antibiotics to be used in the event of an attack.
    (Pending budget decision.)

   Nationwide Crackdown on Food Safety
    The President could announce a proposed budget initiative that would
    highlight safety standards and enforcement. Included in this initiative are
    (1) a repackaged and somewhat modified legislative proposal giving the FDA
    and USDA additional enforcent powers ~, mandatory recalls and civil
    penalties); (2) additional food-specific regulations and/or guidelines ~, for
    certain fruits and vegtables); and (3) more extensive adoption of our model
    codes for restaurants and food service workers. In addition, we will focus
    on improving coordination with state and local agencies that regulate food
    safety in order to develop a wholly integrated national inspection system.
    (Ready, depending on budget decisions.)

   Expansion of Values-Based Crime Prevention Initiative
    Recognizing the important role that civic, community, and faith-based
    organizations can play in reducing crime, the President announced last July grants
    for community-based collaboratives, including religiously-affiliated organizations,
    to target youth violence, gangs, truancy, and other juvenile problems by promoting
    common-sense values and responsibility. To build on this effort, the President
    could commit to a series of new grants to support values-based crime prevention
    efforts, and urge Congress to endorse and increase federal funding for such
    programs. The President could also highlight the efforts of Rev. Eugene Rivers
    of Boston, who inspired the President to develop this initiative and has organized
    a Nationall0-Point Leadership Foundation to mobilize 1,000 black churches in
    40 cities to help at-risk kids in the 50 worst neighborhoods. (Pending budget
    decisions.)




                                     5
                                                 Automated Recores Management System
                                                 Hex-Dump Conycrsicn


