RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-DEC-1998 01:11:25.00

SUBJECT:     fraud paper

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D39]MAIL42976704C.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043AE070000010A020100000002050000002737000000020000852C846EA1C47F6CD30518
4B47C6013C2683E8E627EEBB799DD9F828C6COC31EFCBD21FAE8B741F5B349381AF44BB5084E02
       UPCOMING BUDGET AND ANNOUNCES NEW EXECUTIVE ACTIONS TO FIGHT ABUSE
                                   December 7, 1998

Today, President Clinton announced new additional steps to fight waste, fraud and abuse in the Medicare program,
building on the Administration's longstanding efforts in this area. The President unveiled an anti-fraud abuse, and
waste legislative package that will save Medicare over $2 billion. He also announced new steps to crack down on
fraud, including new efforts to make Medicare contractors more accountable. Today in an event with the
Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration (HCF A), the HHS Inspector General, Senator Tom
Harkin, and the Older Women's League, the President:

ANNOUNCED NEW LEGISLATIVE PACKAGE THAT WILL SAVE MEDICARE OVER $2 BILLION BY
COMBATING FRAUD, WASTE, AND ABUSE. President Clinton will send Congress a comprehensive
legislative package to fight waste, fraud and abuse in the Medicare program as part of his FY2000 budget proposal.
Many of these proposals have been recommended to Congress before and are consistent with recommendations made
by the HHS Office of the Inspector General (orG) in recent reports. These new proposals, which will give HCF A
more tools to root out fraud, abuse, and waste in Medicare, include:

      Eliminating Wasteful Excessive Medicare Reimbursement for Drugs. A recent report by the OIG
       confirmed that under current law Medicare pays hundreds of millions of dollars more for 22 of the most
       common and costly drugs than would be paid if market prices were used. For more than one-third of these
       drugs, Medicare paid more than double the actual average wholesale prices, and in one case paid as high as ten
       times the amount. This proposal would eliminate the mark-up for many drugs by basing Medicare's payment
       on the provider's actual acquisition cost of the drug, the same policy Department of Veteran Affairs uses to
       pay fair prices for its drugs.

      Ending Overpayments for Epogen, a drug used to treat anemia related to chronic renal failure. An orG
       report found that the current EPO reimbursement rate of $1 0 per 1,000 units exceeds the current cost of the
       drug by approximately 10 percent. The Administration's proposal reduces Medicare reimbursement to reflect
       current market prices.

      Preventing Abuse of Medicare's Partial Hospitalization Benefit. A recent OIG report found that
       providers are abusing Medicare by billing for services that were never given or provided to many fewer
       patients than were billed for. One of the most abused benefits is group therapy. This proposal would better
       ensure that Medicare only reimburses for necessary services.

      Ensuring Medicare Does Not Pay for Claims Owed by Private Insurers. Private insurers of working
       Medicare beneficiaries are required under law to be the primary payor of health claims. However, Medicare
       and the taxpayers that support the program are being ripped off by private insurers who do not pay the claims
       they are responsible for. These proposals ensure that private payors pay first by requiring insurers to report
       the Medicare beneficiaries they insure to HCFA. This proposal would also provide the authority to recoup
       twice the amount owed by insurers who purposely let Medicare pay claims they owe and impose fines for
       those who fail to report legal settlements where Medicare should have been reimbursed.

      Empowering Medicare to Purchase Cost Effective High Quality Health Care. Using centers of
       excellence has enabled Medicare to take advantage of the widely used private sector insurance practices of
       contracting out with institutions that have a track record of providing exceptionally high quality care at a
       reasonable price. Under current law, however, Medicare can only do this under a limited demonstration
       authority. As a result, hundreds of millions of dollars have been wasted for potentially lower quality care. This
       proposal authorizes Medicare to expand its centers of excellence authority to all urban areas, which have
       multiple providers competing against each other on cost and qX~IA~ated Records Management System
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
       the authority it needs to terminate poorly performing contractors expeditiously. It also cannot adequately
       expand the pool of companies eligible to process and pay claims and therefore is dependent on a limited
       number of carriers, making it difficult to eliminate bad apples. The proposal would also give HCFA new
       flexibility to aggressively oversee general contractor performance, including important program
       integrity related functions, such as provider enrollment and overpayment collection.

TOOK NEW ACTIONS TO HELP ASSURE MEDICARE CONTRACTORS FIGHT FRAUD, WASTE AND
ABUSE. Today, the President is also unveiling new efforts to assure contractors are cracking down on fraud and
abuse. These include:

      Awarding First Contracts This Spring That Allow New Fraud Surveillance Units to Perform Payment
       Safeguard Activities. OIG reports have show that one-fourth of the fraud units have identified no cases to
       the OIG and nearly two-thirds have referred less than three cases. The Administration fought to include the
       Medicare Integrity Program (MIP) in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
       (HIPAA) that gave Medicare new authority to competitively contract with new, specialized fraud, waste, and
       abuse surveillance units or "fraud fighters" that are better equipped to conduct medical review, educate
       providers, and audit cost reports, activities that are vital to the detection of fraud, waste, and abuse.
       Previously by law Medicare could only hire insurers, who may have conflicts of interest, to do this work.
       This spring, the first fraud surveillance units will begin their efforts.

      Implementing the Competitive Bidding Demonstration for Durable Medical Equipment. The OIG
       recently found that Medicare rates for hospital beds are substantially higher than rates paid by other payers.
       HCF A will begin a competitive bidding demonstration this spring using market forces to decrease Medicare
       payment for hospital beds and other durable medical equipment, thereby lowering program costs.

      Requiring Contractors to Report Fraud Complaints to the Inspector General Right Away. Currently,
       many contractors hold back cases of suspected fraud because the dollar amounts seem low before reporting
       them to the Inspector General when, in fact, they may add up to significant dollars or show patterns of fraud.
       This month, HCF A will send program memorandums to every contractor requiring them to immediately refer
       suspicious fraudulent providers to OIG for review to ensure that fraud is identified and addressed
       expeditiously.

      Announcing That A New Comprehensive Plan to Fight Fraud and Abuse Will Be Completed By Early
       Next Year. To improve efforts to cut down on fraud and abuse, HCFA will release a new
       Comprehensive Plan for Program Integrity early next year. This report includes important new
       strategies to promote appropriate reimbursement of legitimate providers for covered, reasonable, and
       necessary services provided to eligible beneficiaries. This comprehensive plan outlines a strategy to
       promote better safeguards in Medicare and Medicaid by implementing improved management tools and
       targeting key benefit areas for routine audit.

BUILDING ON LONGSTANDING COMMITMENT TO FIGHTING FRAUD, WASTE, AND ABUSE. The
new steps the President took today build on the Administration's longstanding commitment to crack down on fraud
and abuse through the Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Justice and the FBI. Since
1993, the Administration's efforts have saved taxpayers more than $20 billion and health care fraud convictions have
increased by more than 240 percent. The Administration has assigned more federal prosecutors and FBI agents to
fight health care fraud than ever before. HIP AA created --for the first time ever -- a stable funding source to fight
fraud and abuse and in FY1997 alone -- the first full year of improved fraud and abuse funding under HIP AA -- nearly
$1 billion was returned to the Medicare Trust Fund. The Administration also fought for an array of new weapons in
the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 to keep scam artists and fly-by-night providers out of Medicare and Medicaid.


