RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Devorah R. Adler ( CN=Devorah R. Adler/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-DEC-1998 23:51:50.00

SUBJECT:   final document

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)    )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Hello

Here is our final discretionary budget document. It would be great if we
could get a final copy when you get a chance.

Thanks -- please call with questions.

Devorah

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D50)MAIL477000440.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504386060000010A02010000000205000000F8980000000200001CAC1A1EEOOC6F25DAC1FD
B596B48B72C8D2B9B2271C06212C475FB373E628ED92C3A73792937F8AB5B230DFF7CC379BC63E

Detecting and managing bioterrorism. (new initiative)             The threat of a bioterrorist attack
that has the potential to injure or kill millions of Americans through the dissemination of
infectious diseases is increasing. This proposal funds NIH, CDC, FDA, and SAMHSA to train
epidemic intelligence officers who identify and respond to attacks, develop a mass casualty
emergency response system, maintain a stockpile of pharmaceuticals, and develop new vaccines
and antibiotics that could be used in the event of an attack. It is strongly supported by HHS,
OMB, and DPC.

Cost. Original HHS cost estimate: $370 million

Issues. OMB believes that research and product regulation are primarily Federal
responsibilities, while public health surveillance, laboratory and epidemiological
capabilities, and medical response systems are areas that are primarily State
responsibilities. Therefore, NIH, CDC, FDA, and SAMHSA did not receive the full
funding amount requested. Having said this, OMB has unofficially indicated that they
would not oppose additional funding being dedicated for this initiative if it can be found
without undermining other currently funded priorities.

Response. Although States play an important role in public health surveillance and
emergency medical response activities, it is clear that the current local public health
infrastructure is unable to support these essential surveillance and response activities. For
instance, the Federal-State communications network is so inadequate that a recent test
demonstrated that CDC was unable to contact nearly half of local health departments
within a day's time. Depending on local public health entities to independantly meet the
challenges of detecting and managing the repercussions of a bioterrorist attack will place
the country at risk. The OMB pass back level prevents HHS from developing improved
surveillance and overall emergency preparedness plans, delays the development of new
vaccines for anthrax and botulism, and eliminates their ability to assess the mass
behavioral, psychological, and socioeconomic responses to a bioterrorist event.

Status.        OMB pass back: +$152 million; WH Need: additional +$90 million; HHS
               appeal addtional +$218 million.

Combating resistance to antibiotics (superbug). (new DPC proposal.) Recent reports have
indicated that resistance to antibiotics is increasingly becoming a public health crisis,
causing prolonged illnesses and even death. Currently, hospitals spend over $600 million
each year treating infections caused by bacterial strains that are resistant to antibiotic
therapy. This proposal funds CDC to develop and implement public health strategies, such
as educating consumers and health providers to help assure appropriate use of antibiotics,
raising awareness about appropriate guidelines, and improving surveillance and research
efforts.

Cost. Original DPC cost estimate: $20 million


                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
surveillance initiative, essentially eliminating the practical public health component of this
proposal. In addition, they believe that some of the infrastructure investments that are necessary
improve our ability to respond to antibiotic resistance are similar to the steps we are proposing to
respond to bioterrorist attacks.

Response. Although the surveillance efforts associated with this initiative can be subsumed
under this new public health surveillance initiative, we believe that to develop a credible
initiative in this area will require the investment of new funds in the implementation of
public health strategies. (OMB has unofficially concurred with this reasoning as long as the
investment stays at or below $10 million.)

Status. OMB passback: +0 (subsumed in surveillance initiative); WH Need +$10 million

Family Caregiver Support Program. (new initiative) Approximately 22.4 million U.S
households provide caregiving services that currently enable their elderly relatives to remain in
the community, providing services that would cost over $100 billion annually if provided by
home health care aides. This proposal creates a new national program through the
Administration on Aging to support Americans who care for chronically ill or disabled family
member or friends. It provides State grants for "one-stop-shop" access point to provide services,
such as information and counseling as well as respite services and adult day care. This proposal
is a priority for the Vice President, DPC, and NEC, and viewed by OMB as a solid
initiative.

Cost. Original HHS cost estimate: $150 million

Issues. OMB only provided $10 million for this initiative, far less than what is necessary for it to
be creditable. Barbara Chow has indicated, however, that this would be her first funding priority
if she could get additional resources.

Response. The OMB pass back level prevents the establishment of a national program, providing
only enough funds to establish systems in a limited number of States. This policy is a critically
important component of the long term care initiative, as it complements the long term care tax
credit. Funding of this proposal is necessary to obtain broad based validation from the advocacy
community for our entire long term care package.

Status.        OMB passback: +$10 million; WH need: additional +$140 million; HHS
               appeal: additional +$140 million

Nursing home quality initiative. (WH / HHS proposal) Last summer, the President
announced his commitment to improve the quality of nursing home care. This initiative provides
mandatory and discretionary funds to HCFA to help States strengthen nursing home enforcement



                                                    Automated Recores Management System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
be provided for new enforcement provisions and increased surveys of repeat offenders and
improve surveyor training. This proposal is strongly supported by DPC and the Vice
President's office.

Cost. Original HHS cost estimate: $153 million

Issues. OMB funds $50 million of this initiative through user fees. The pass back also assumes
that HCF will assume the survey and certification costs ($12.5 million) associated with the
initiative within its current funding levels.

Response. The user fees used to fund a large part of this initiative will not be viewed as creditable
by the advocates, the nursing home industry, or the Hill. In addition, there is currently another
GAO investigation on nursing home quality underway, which will no doubt underscore the need
for a significant investment in this area.

Status.          OMB passback: +$107 million; WH Need: additional +$50 million (this would
                 eliminate the need for user fees); HHS appeal: additional +$12.5 million

Educating Medicare beneficiaries about long term care options. (new WH initiative) Medicare
beneficiaries are often unaware that Medicare does not provide long term care services. This
proposal provides funds to HCFA to use the Medicare +Choice marketing materials to educate
beneficiaries about the limitations of Medicare coverage oflong term care and to inform them
about private sector insurance options. This proposal is strongly supported by OPC.

Cost:     OPC cost estimate: $25 million.

Issues. OMB believes this is a solid policy worth funding, particularly ifit is used to promote
high quality long term care products. However, this option did not get added until later in the
budget process and is currently not being carried by OMB. In addition, HHS has concerns with
this proposal because it fears that it will be perceived as an endorsement of private long term care
insurance.

Response. We believe we need this initiative to convince the private sector that we believe
it has an important role to play in this area and to also indirectly affirm that the Federal
government cannot and should not be relied on by the public to meet the overwhelming
long term care needs facing the nation.

Status.          OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: additional +25 million

Improving access to Ryan White programs. (existing program) Low income individuals
living with HIV often have to wait up to a year in order to access the comprehensive range
of drugs needed to effectively treat HIV. This proposal will increase our current proposed
investment in the Ryan White program and the AIDS Drug Assistance Program, which


                                                     Automated Records Management System
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
advocating for an increase but do not oppose one. (HHS never spends its capital advocating
for an increase in the Ryan White program because they assume that the White House will
always take care of it.) Increasing this investment is a top priority for the AIDS office and
the Vice President's office.

Cost.     Original AIDS office Ryan White request: $165 million

Issues. OMB has concluded that it does not have the resources necessary to meet the AIDS
Office recommendation of an additional $165 million for the Ryan White program.

Status.          Ryan White OMB passback: +$72.2 million; WH Need: additional +$50
                 million; no HHS appeal

Addressing HIV/AIDS in minority communities. (existing WH initiative) This past October, in
response to the Congressional Black Caucus, the President declared HIV/ AIDS in minority
communities to be a "severe and ongoing health crisis." This proposal seeks emergency funding
to strengthen and build on this initiative through a range of prevention and treatment programs,
such as a national "get tested" campaign, substance abuse treatment and prevention programs that
include an HIV component, and enhanced funding for 60 Ryan White planning grants. It is
strongly supported by DPC, HHS and the Vice President's office.

Cost.     Original AIDS office cost estimate: $50 million

Issues. OMB's official position is that this initiative was limited to a one time investment and that
there was no commitment to future funding. However, they unofficially have acknowledged that
it will be difficult to discontinue this funding priority in the face of extreme pressure by the
Congressional Black Caucus. As such, they would not oppose additional funding if dollars could
be made available.

Response. The OMB pass back completely eliminates funding for this initiative and prevents us
from sustaining our commitment to the Congressional Black Caucus.

Status.          OMB passback: +(0); WH Need:+$50 million; HHS appeal: +$50 million

Building on the President's Race and Health Initiative. (existing WH initiative) Minorities
suffer as much as five times the rate for certain diseases and mortality rates, such as
cancer, diabetes, heart disease, immunizations, HIV/AIDS, and infant mortality. Last year,
the President announced a $400 million commitment over 5 years to eliminate racial health
disparities in six critical areas by 2010. This proposal funds public health programs that have
proven effective in targeting diseases experienced disproportionately by minorities and a grant
program to test and replicate innovative approaches that address these disparities. It is strongly
supported by DPC and HHS.



                                                   Automated Records }'fanagement System
                                                   Hex-Dump Ccnvcrsicn

Issues. The OMB pass back suggests that HHS earmark $50 million of community health center
funding for this initiative, rather than providing new funds.

Response. It is extremely important to continue to make significant investments in this initiative
in order to deliver on the President's commitment. Dedicating dollars already earmarked for
CHCs will be viewed as ineffective and unresponsive by the minority community. In addition,
since they only provide direct services, CHCs are unable to adequately address the significant
public health infrastructure issues that currently prevent minorities from accessing effective health
care services that could arrest disproportionate rates of infection and disease.

Status.          OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: +$80 million; HHS appeal + $50 million

Enhancing mental health services. (existing program) Approximately 44 million adults
and 14 million children suffer from a mental disorder annually. This proposal increases
funding to SAMHSA to enable states to provide critical mental health services, including
access to prevention and treatment services and providing new incentives to communities
who have implemented effective mental health programs. This proposal increases funding
to SAMHSA as well as raising awareness about mental health through enhancing the
current level of funding provided to States through the mental health block grants. This
proposal is strongly supported by the Vice President's office and Tipper Gore's office.

Cost. Original HHS cost estimate: $146 million

Issues. The OMB pass back includes a net cut in funding for mental heath services. OMB
has stated that the reduction in mental health grant and services support is justified in the
context of large increases for mental health research at NIMH.

Response. The mental health community would strongly reject OMB's contention that
research grants in any way substitute for support for direct services. Moreover, it would be
extremely embarrassing for Mrs. Gore and the White House in general to defend such a
poor funding stream for mental health at a time when we plan on hosting a White House
Conference on Mental Health for this spring to raise awareness about mental illness. In
addition, next year, HHS will release a Surgeon General's report documenting the
widespread incidence and impact of mental illness. Therefore, we believe it is critical to make
a new investment in mental health services.

Status.          OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: +$100 million; HHS appeal +$116 million

Preventing and treating asthma.  (new initiative) Over the past 15 years, the number of children
afflicted with asthma has doubled to total about 6 million. The steep climb in rates of morbidity
and mortality classify asthma as an illness with significant public health implications. This


                                                    Automated Records Mcnagement System
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
for asthma, conduct a national asthma awareness campaign, reduce asthma triggers in homes, and
establish school based asthma programs in every community. This proposal is strongly supported
by both the First Lady's office, DPC, and the Vice President's office.
Cost. Original estimates: $50 million for HHS and $25 million for EPA

Issues. OMB has developed a counter-proposal that invests $25 million in EPA and uses the
Medicaid program to disseminate new treatment guidelines for asthma, but eliminates the
research and public health strategies that are integral to the HHS proposal. They believe that
those components of the proposal could be supported through existing sources of funding.

Response. Although OMB's disease management strategies can and should be incorporated into
the HHS proposal, we need a counter argument to OMB's position that will be supplied by the
First Lady's Office (Jen Klein).

Status.          OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: +$25 million for HHS; HHS appeal: +$50
                 million

Improving Emergency Medical Services in Rural Areas. (new initiative) The presence of viable
EMS systems is critical for residents in rural and frontier areas. Because of the high rates of
occupational injury associated with employment unique to rural areas, such as farming, mining,
and fishing, rural residents experience disproportionate rates of trauma and medical emergencies.
Many rural and frontier communities face challenges in obtaining ambulance equipment and
communication systems and recruiting, training, and retaining EMS personnel. This proposal
provides grant funds to States and local communities through HRSA to promote EMS systems
development, integrate EMS systems into local primary care services, and enhance provider
recruitment, retention and education efforts. It is supported by HHS and DPC, and has been
endorsed by the National Rural Health Association.

Cost.     Original HHS estimate: $50 million

Issues. OMB would prefer to fund this program through the Medicare program rather than
through a discretionary grant program. They believe that this initiative would substitute Federal
dollars for funding that has traditionally been provided by municipalities.

Response. Most rural communities have little or no resources to fund these initiatives. The mere
fact that some do should not eliminate any possibility of Federal support for these important
activities. The grant program structure takes into account the unique nature of small rural
communities and allows States to design systems that work for their individual constituencies. In
addition, the proposal is a way to relieve some financially burdened rural hospitals of the
extraordinarily expensive burden of 24-hour a day ER coverage.

Status. OMB passback: +(0); WH Need: +$25 million; HHS has not appealed



                                                    Automated Recon!s }.fanagement System
                                                     ,;J_-:;mn~ Comcrsion




    Providing needed education funds to children's hospitals. (new WH initiative) Medicare
    has invested billions of dollars in graduate medical education to hospitals since 1966.
    However, because of its current distribution formula, free-standing children's hospitals are
    forced to shoulder the majority of the cost of training pediatricians, placing them at a
    severe financial disadvantage. This proposal creates a new discretionary grant program to
    provide GME funds through the PHS in order to provide freestanding children's hospitals with
    Federal financing for the cost of providing graduate medical education. This proposal is strongly
    supported by the First Lady's office, DPC, and the National Association of Children's Hospitals.
    HHS does not oppose this proposal, as long as it is not funded through the Medicare trust
    fund.

    Cost. Original DPC cost estimate: $285 million

    Issues. OMB is strongly opposed to this proposal because they believe that the children's
    hospitals are financially stable and do not need additional federal assistance.

    Response. We believe that there is a legitimate equity argument here, as these hospitals
    shoulder much of the responsibility for training the nations' pediatricians and pediatric
    subspecialists. The current proposal is one seventh of the amount proposed by the
    children's hospitals, but would still be supported primarily because it would address the
    inequities faced by facilities training pediatricians and other pediatric subspecialists.

    Status.          OMB: +(0); WH Need: +$40 million

    Investing in Promising Biomedical Research.

    Cost.     HHS request: $1.5 billion

    Issues: While HHS and the Vice President's office support more generous increases, OMB has
    suggested that NIH reduce the amount of research started in FY 1999 in order to adjust to this
    new funding level. Many argue that this is not the best use of resources in a tight budget given
    the already generous funding at NIH.

    Response. Funding NIH at the OMB pass back level would result in a 28% decrease from
    the number of projects funded in 1999 and the lowest level of new research since 1994.
    While most advisors within the White House and OMB do not believe that it is necessarily
    warranted or prudent to dedicate additional large resources to NIH, we also well recognize
    that it will be important for the Vice President to deliver on a reasonably generous NIH
    increase. Moreover, it is politically untenable for us not to have a substantial increase
    incorporated in the budget prior to submission. With this in mind, we believe will probably
    be necessary to increase the NIH budget and if current trends hold, we are looking at least
    a $500 million increase for the FY 2000 budget.




                                                      Automated Recor6 Management System
                                                      Hex.Dump Conversion



    Status. OMB: +$49 million; WH Need: additional +$750 million; HHS appeal $1.5 billion.

    Investing in DoD cancer research programs.    (new DPC proposal) Every year the Congress funds
    programs at DoD for prostate and breast cancer research. While every White House principal
    has highlighted these innovative, widely acclaimed research programs, we have never proposed a
    single dollar for them in our budgets. We are also proposing an investment in osteoporosis
    research at the DoD. This is a priority for the Vice President.

    Cost. Original DPC estimate: $250 million

    Issues: DoD is likely to be resistant to this concept as they believe that although they have
    developed a model program in response to a Congressional mandate, cancer research is not
    within their military mission. They are more open to the concept of osteoporosis research
    because there are many military stress fractures. However, we think it could be highly
    problematic if the first time we ever invested in these programs we ignored the prostate and
    breast cancer programs and only funded osteoporosis.

    Response: Given the high level of commitment to cancer research and the fact that these
    programs are already up and running, it is important that we underscore our support for them.
    Also, DoD is likely to receive generous increases in the budget and this is a good way to invest
    in cancer priorities in a tight budget.

    Status.        OMB: +(0); WH Need: earmark $200 million of DoD increase


