RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 11-DEC-1998 18:56:39.00

SUBJECT:   Revised w/ Jose's 2 additions

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D42]MAIL412986842.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750436E100000010A02010000000205000000AD5C0000000200002E091DE53F8EOA0660500D
CF646CE63E2D414E13BCF61F74ED3005203079CA9ACC1CC9E53E5C11314B43774B7E5F2389942D

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                  Bruce Reed
                         Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:               DPC Weekly Report

        1. Health Care -- CDC Guidelines for HIV Surveillance: The Centers for
Disease Control (CDC) released draft guidance on Thursday to assist states in designing
and implementing new HIV surveillance and reporting systems.             The guidance
recommends that states track people with HIV by name (as states now track people with
full-blown AIDS). At our insistence, however, the guidance also allows states to use
so-called unique identifier codes, rather than names. The HIV/AIDS community is
relieved that the guidance gives states the option of using identifier codes, but is
disappointed that it expresses a preference for using names. The community believes
that names-based reporting jeopardizes confidentiality and discourages testing; CDC
disputes these contentions and argues that name-based reporting generally leads to
more effective surveillance. Members of the AIDS Council may raise questions
about this issue when they meet with you on December 18. You can respond by
indicating strong support for states (like California) that are developing effective
alternatives to name-based reporting.

        2. Health Care -- Presidential Task Force on Employment of Adults with
Disabilities: Your Task Force on the Employment of Adults with Disabilities will present
the Vice President with its first report on Tuesday. The Task Force will recommend
several new investments (ll, the Jeffords-Kennedy Work Incentives Improvement
Act), which we are considering in the context of the budget process; we are fairly confident
that the budget will incorporate enough of these recommendations to elicit a positive
response from the disabilities community. In addition, the Task Force will propose a
number of administrative actions that we can implement immediately. For example, the
Office of Personnel Management will develop a plan to increase the representation of
adults with disabilities in the federal workforce, and the Small Business
Administration will launch a new outreach campaign to improve opportunities for
adults with disabilities. The Vice President, in accepting the report, will reiterate the
Administration's commitment to passing a strong and enforceable patients' bill of
rights to improve the quality of care for people with disabilities.

      3. Health Care -- Dean Ornish: Nancy Ann Min DeParle is meeting with Dr.
Ornish today, to discuss his proposal for a demonstration project on the


                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

cost-effectiveness of programs like his "Life Style Intervention." Nancy Ann will
express support for the idea, although she will not be able to formally approve it at
this meeting. We will stay on top of this issue in the next few weeks, as HCFA makes
decisions about the scope and financing of the demonstration.
        4. Health Care -- New FDA Commissioner: The Vice President will swear in
Dr. Jane Henney as the new Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration on
Tuesday.

        5. Education -- ESEA Reauthorization: We are working with the Education
Department to include in our ESEA reauthorization proposal a set of accountability
requirements that are significantly stronger than any in current law. Some of the
proposals under consideration would require states and school districts that receive
funding under the ESEA to (1) take immediate steps to identify and intervene in their
lowest performing schools; (2) phase out the use of unqualified teachers, including
those who are not fully certified or are teaching out of field; (3) phase out the use of
instructional aides as primary instructors, especially in high-poverty schools; and (4)
have effective policies in place (including appropriate supports for students) to
prevent social promotion. We have more to do before we can present you with
specific recommendations, but we believe we will be able to get agreement on a plan
that demands a serious commitment by states and school districts receiving ESEA
funds to set and enforce high standards for schools, teachers, and students.

       6. Education -- National Education Goals Panel: The National Education
Goals Panel released its annual progress report on Thursday.              The report
highlighted improvements in school readiness, student achievement in math, and
participation of women and minorities in math and science in higher education. The
report, however, also pointed to apparent backsliding in teacher quality, student
achievement in reading, and student drug use. More generally, the report noted that
none of the Goals would be met by 2000. Members of the Panel are now discussing
what should happen to the Goals (and the Panel itself) after that year. Most
members still see a need for national education goals and a bipartisan,
intergovernmental panel to report on progress. Indeed, Senator Bingaman,
Governor Hunt, and some members of the business community are urging that you
take a high profile role in renewing the call for national goals. We and Secretary
Riley are concerned, however, that Governor Engler, Congressman Goodling, and
other Republicans would fail to support this effort. We will try to find out more
about the likely Republican reaction and then give you a recommendation.
       7. Education -- GED Test: You asked at yesterday's budget meeting about
the GED test. We have learned that the American Council on Education (ACE) is
responsible for developing and administering the GED. The ACE is now in the
process of upgrading the test to keep up with rising academic standards, and hopes to
unveil a new version of the test in 2001. We will work with the Education

Department on possible ways to make use of a strengthened GED in our education
proposals.

        8. Crime -- Capital Punishment: The Justice Department will release a report
on Sunday showing that 17 states executed 74 prisoners in 1997. This number represents
a substantial increase from 1996, when 45 executions took place; indeed, the 1997 number
is the largest since 1955. The states with the highest number of execution were: Texas
(37); Virginia (9); Missouri (6); Arkansas (4); and Alabama (3). All 74 people executed
in 1997 were men. The report classifies 45 of those executed as white, 27 as black, one as
Asian, and one as American Indian; it further notes that five of the total number were of
Hispanic descent. According to the report, an additional 3,335 individuals are now on
death row in 34 states and the federal prison system -- 1,876 whites, 1,406 blacks, 28
American Indians, 17 Asians, and 8 of other races. This total includes 238 Hispanics and
44 women. Finally, the report notes that as of November 30, 1998, 18 states had executed
58 inmates, with Texas and Virginia accounting for half the total (17 and 12 respectively).

         9. Crime -- COPS Retention: Earlier this week you asked about how a new
COPS initiative would deal with the issue of retention. Currently, we plan to set aside $50
million for one-year waivers to assist economically-distressed communities in absorbing
long-term costs of their new police hires. Addressing the retention issue on a case-by-case
basis through waivers will allow us to avoid creating an incentive for local police
departments to depend on federal grants indefinitely. Such an approach will also require
law enforcement agencies to demonstrate hardship before receiving a fourth year of
funding. In FY 98, Congress earmarked a $100 million in COPS funding for a retention
initiative that targeted smaller jurisdictions, which are the ones most at risk of failing to
meet their long-term funding commitment. At the time, we feared that this program might
encourage these smaller departments to apply for additional assistance -- and not meet their
original funding obligations. Ultimately, however, only $13.4 million of this retention
funding was spent due to limited demand. Thus, we believe that $50 million should be
sufficient to address the issue of retention in a new COPS initiative.

         10. Crime -- Preliminary 1998 FBI Crime Statistics: On Sunday, the FBI will
release the crime figures collected through the Uniform Crime Reporting System for the
first six months of 1998. The preliminary data show a 5 percent decline in overall crime
compared to the half-year figures of 1997, with violent crime down 7 percent, and property
crime down 5 percent. Specifically for violent crime, murder decreased 8 percent;
robbery, 11 percent; and 5 percent each for aggravated assault and rape. For property
crime, larceny dropped 5 percent; motor vehicle theft 8 percent; burglary 3 percent; and
arson 12 percent. Serious crime declined in each region of the country, with the Northeast
experiencing the greatest decline in serious crime (8 percent) followed by the West (6
percent), the South (5 percent), and the Midwest (one percent). Cities of alI sizes reported
decreases in serious crime, with the greatest declines reported by cities with populations
between 50,000 to 99,000 (8 percent) and over one million (6 percent). The smallest

declines in serious crime were reported by cities with populations of under 10,000 (3
percent). (Note to EK: All of percentage declines are for the number of offenses, not
rates.)

        11. Welfare Reform -- Work Participation Rates: We just received (but have
not yet published) the first work participation statistics from the welfare reform law. The
data show that 36 of the 38 states that were required to meet the law's all-family
participation rates in FY 1997 succeeded in doing so. (The remaining states began
implementation of the welfare law later and need not meet participation rates until FY
1998.) As you recall, these rates require states, in the first year of the law's
implementation, to ensure that 25 percent of all welfare families include an adult who
works at least 20 hours each week. (States can get credit toward meeting the work
participation rates by reducing their caseloads.) Only Nevada and the District of
Columbia failed to meet this requirement, and even they may give HHS enough additional
data in the next few weeks to come into compliance. States fared less well, however, in
meeting the law's separate work participation rates for two-parent families, who comprise
seven percent of the total caseload. These rates require states to ensure that 75 percent of
two-parent welfare families include an adult who works at least 35 hours per week. Only
20 of the 38 states met this strict requirement; the failing states now must enter into
corrective action plans with HHS to avoid financial penalties.

        12. Welfare Reform -- Teen Birth Trends: A study by the Centers for Disease
Control issued last week provided some new details about the previously reported 15
percent decline in the national teen birth rate from 1991 to 1997. The report showed
declines in teen births for all races and ethnic groups and in all states. In addition, the
report showed a steep decline (about 21 percent) in the rate of second births to teens during
this period. Second births currently comprise about one-fifth of total teen births.

        13. Children and Families -- Infant Mortality and Life Expectancy: Another
new study issued by the Centers for Disease Control last week showed positive trends on
infant mortality and life expectancy. The study reported that the U.S. infant mortality rate
-- a measure of the death of babies under one year old -- reached its lowest level ever last
year. The 1997 infant mortality rate was 7.1 deaths per 1,000 births, which is about 3
percent lower than the 1996 rate of 7.3 deaths per 1,000 births. The drop in infant deaths
came despite a 7.5 percent increase in the number of low birthweight babies and a two
percent increase in the number of births by women late in their childbearing years. In
addition, the study reported that Americans' average life expectancy rose to an all-time high
of 76.5 years in 1997. This increase is due in part to falling death rates from major
diseases and from accidents, homicides, and suicides. For example, deaths from AIDS
dropped by 47 percent in 1997. The most dramatic improvement in life expectancy was
among black males, whose expectancy increased by 1.2 years to 67.3.

        14. Children and Families -- Single Fathers Data: The Census Bureau
released data today showing that the number of single fathers with children at home
has increased 25 percent in the past three years, from 1.7 million to 2.1 million.
These men now account for one in six single parents, joining a total of 9.8 million
single mothers. About 35 percent of all single fathers have never married, while
more than half of single fathers with children under six have not done so. According
to the report, single fathers have higher incomes than single mothers and are more
likely to live with another person (mother, girlfriend, etc.) who helps with child care.

         15. Abortion -- New Abortion Study: The Alan Guttmacher Institute (AGI)
released a study on Friday showing the lowest nationwide abortion rates since 1975.
The study reports that from 1992 to 1996, the number of abortions performed fell
from 1,529,000 to 1,366,000, and the abortion rate decreased from 26 to 23 per 1,000
women aged 15-44. The report attributed most of this decline to effective
contraceptive methods, especially among teen-agers, and a consequent decrease in
unintended pregnancies. The study also reported a sharp decline in the number of
facilities providing abortions during this period, although it suggested that this
decline was not a major factor in the lower abortion rates. The total number of
facilities providing abortions decreased 14 percent between 1992 and 1996, with the
greatest decline among hospitals (18 percent decrease) and physicians' offices (26
percent decrease), rather than clinics (two percent decrease). Less than 10 percent of
total abortions are now performed in hospitals and doctors' offices. Finally, the
study examined the prevalence of dilation and extraction procedures -- i.e., so-called
partial birth abortions. According to the report, doctors at 14 hospitals or clinics
performed about 650 of these kinds of abortions in 1996 (out of a total of 1.36 million
abortions). The large majority of these procedures were performed between 20 and
24 weeks into a pregnancy.

         16.    Community Empowerment -- Community Development Financial
Institutions Fund (CDFI): The Treasury Department recently provided the DPC with
summary statistics on the CDFI awards made during the first three years of funding
(1996-98). Since its creation, the CDFI Fund has made a total of 196 awards to 164
institutions. Of the institutions receiving awards, 139 were already established and 25
were startup. Of the startup institutions, 9 were full-service financial institutions -- banks,
bank holding companies, and credit unions -- and 16 were more specialized financial
institutions such as microenterprise funds, venture capital funds, and business loan funds.
     AR1\/1S Email System                                                      Page 1 of 1


