    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:17-DEC-1998 13:42:29.00

    SUBJECT:   Welfare to Work Reauthorization

    TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Here's our write up with some specific questions for you.   Happy to meet
    to discuss (I left a message for Cathy to try to get a time)==================== ATT
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D98)MAIL48512345P.326 to ASCII,
     The following is a HEX DUMP:

    FF5750431C2C0000010A02010000000205000000EE66000000020000909CA87327A1BA24C1E028
    CB4775B6A5CC668DE728987D7DC31C44E7BC866D7A357D2532B2BFDC168017BEF05ED4BB952A7B
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


                     Welfare to Work Reauthorization -- Proposed Provisions
              (See italics for issues where your reaction would be particularly helpful)

Responsible Fathers Initiative

      Funding Flow: Require states to use at least 20% of their fonnula funds for services to help
       non-custodial parents increase their employment and child support.

      We think it makes sense to include the funding for Fathers as part of the WtW fonnula grant
      rather than a separate funding stream--do you agree? It ensures a significant amount of
      resources and attention are focused on this population without creating yet another employment
      program (after we worked so hard to consolidate in the Workforce Investment Act). The
      downside is that it may be slightly harder to talk about.

      This is also a clever resolution of the substate funding options we raised previously.
      Governors could choose whether to meet the 20% floor with a few concentrated projects or to
      pass this requirement down to every local PIC. A Governor who does not want to have a
      statewide fathers initiative could spend most or all of the Governor's 15% discretionary funds
      on fathers and make up the remaining amount by encouraging one or two localities to focus on
      fathers (not every PIC is ready or willing to have a fathers program). On the other hand, states
      such as MI, WI, and MO who have made non-custodial parents the primary focus of their WtW
      fonnula program could still do so.

      Options for what happens if state does not meet the 20% floor for fathers could include: a)
      allow Governor to redirect funds to basic WtW services for hard-to-serve recipients, b) take
      back funds and put in same pot as unclaimed fonnula funds (see below), c) give to other states
      who commit to spend these funds on fathers. Any preference?

     Eligibility: Generally, low income non-custodial parents (primarily fathers) who enter into a
      personal responsibility contract. States would have some flexibility to target services among
      the following groups, listed in priority order. Eligibility would be tied to status of the children
      rather than the parent.

      Non-custodial parents of:
      (1) children on public assistance for over 30 months or who are within 12 months of hitting a
      time limit;
      (2) child eligible for TANF;
      (3) child who left T ANF within one year;
      (4) child eligible for food stamps or Medicaid (this would allow services to a broader
      population of low-income fathers).

      We think this approach would keep eligibility relatively simple, while targeting services to
      fathers who are most likely to need help increasing their employment and child support and
      whose children are most in need of their fathers' support. [fyou support this basic approach,
       we will work further with DOL and HHS to refine the details.
                                                                          flex-Dump Conversion


    Personal Responsibility Contract: Every father would sign a personal responsibility contract
    requiring them to establish paternity, pay child support, and work or participate in community
    service or another work activity in order to participate in the program. We need to decide how
    prescriptive to be in the statute - we're inclined to make a general statement like the
    sentence above and let the rest be defined in regs or by the locals. What do you think?

    We would also propose these state options. What do you think?

           If a father is in community service or another work activity and temporarily unable to
           pay current support, the state could have the option to temporarily suspend or reduce
           current child support obligation (not past due support).

           If a father has another child out of wedlock, the state would have the option to deny him
           services. This would be consistent with the state option on family cap, which is a
           roughly parallel policy for the moms.

           If a father marries the mother of his child, the state could cancel or suspend the child
           support debts the father owed the State for past T ANF payments to the mother.

   Allowable Activities: Use the same list as the current WtW statute, which allows funds to be
    used to move individuals into and keep individuals in lasting unsubsidized employment
    through: community service or work experience; job creation through public or private sector
    wage subsidies; on the job training; job readiness, placement, and post-placement services
    through contracts or vouchers; and job retention or support services if not otherwise available.

    Through regulation or guidance, DOL could explain how a broader array of services to help
    fathers work and meet their child support responsibilities could be provided within the
    definition of job readiness and support services. Child support agencies and community and
    faith-based providers could deliver some or all of the services under contract with the state (in
    the case of 15% discretionary funds) or PICs (in the case of 85% formula funds). We think
    this approach will promote a strong focus on work, and avoid opening the statutory definition
    of allowable activities. Do you agree with this approach?

   Performance Measures: Use current WtW measures listed in the statute (employment,
    retention, earnings gain) and use the existing statutory authority for the Secretary to identify
    other measures as appropriate to add increased child support via regulations. Is this okay, or
    would you prefer a statutory change?

   State Plan: There would be a special part of the State WtW plan focused on fathers developed
    jointly with the workforce, child support and T ANF agencies. It would document how the state
    planned to meet the 20% floor, and how it would ensure strong, ongoing coordination with the
    child support system, welfare agency, and community and faith-based groups working on
    fathers issues at both the state and service delivery level. DOL proposed that the child support
    agency sign off on the WtW plan to ensure adequate attention to issues related to non-custodial
    parents. This seems to make sense.


                                                 2
                                                                     Hex-Dwnp Conversion
Other WtW Reauthorization Proposals

     Duration: DOL has proposed 5 year reauthorization. Are we supporting only a one year
      extension or multi-year reauthorization?

     Hard-to-Serve Eligibility Criteria: Retain the general focus on the hardest to serve, with some
      changes to make the criteria less burdensome. Currently, PICs must spend at least 70% of
      their funds on individual who (a) have been on public assistance for at least 30 months or are
      within 12 months of hitting a time limit and (b) have 2 of the 3 following barriers:
      (I)     lack a HS diploma/OED and have low math or reading skills;
      (2)     require substance abuse treatment; or
      (3)     have a poor work history.
      Non-custodial parents whose children meet (a) and themselves meet (b) are also eligible.

      PICs can also spend up to 30% of their funds on custodial or non-custodial parents who have
      characteristics associated with long-term welfare dependency, i.e. school dropout, teen
      pregnancy, poor work history.

      DOL has proposed simplifying eligibility by requiring individuals to meet one rather than two
      of the "barriers"under the 70% category; decoupling the education barrier to be either lacking a
      HS diploma/OED or having low math, reading, or language skills; and adding physical or
      mental (including learning) disability to the list of "barriers". DOL also proposed getting rid of
      the 70/30 split and allowing local flexibility to spend an unlimited portion of funds on those
      with characteristics associated with long term welfare dependence.

      There have been lots of complaints from states and locals about how hard it is to find people
      who meet the current 70% criteria, with most concern about the "and" in the education barrier.
      We think that simplifying the 70% eligibility requirements as proposed, but leaving the 70130
      split intact, will go a long way to addressing these concerns without diluting the focus on the
      long-termlhard to serve population. The addition of language skills should help highlight the
      ESL issue. DOL also proposed adding homeless to the list of barriers but we're not
      convinced this is necessary-most homeless welfare recipients are likely to have one of the
      other barriers.

     Unclaimed Formula Funds: Add authority for DOL to make formula funds not accepted by
      states available to Native American WtW programs and/or for additional competitive grants,
      with preference to tribes or competitive grants in the states who chose not to accept formula
      funds. DOL is still working through the mechanics, but we think the intent makes sense-to
      make sure services are still available to people in a given area, even if the Governor opts not
      to accept funds.

     Tribal Set-Aside: Increase set-aside for tribal grants from I % of total funds to either 2% or 3%
      (if funding level drops from $1.5 B to $1.0 B, a 3% set aside would double the funds available
      to tribes). Tribes would be encouraged to serve non-custodial parents, but would not be
      required to spend at least 20% of their grant on this population.


                                                  3
                                                                            ;:,.Dump Conversion


          Tribal Authority for Competitive Grants: Provide new authority for tribes to apply directly
           to DOL for competitive grants. Currently they must do so "in connection with" other entities,
           i.e. the local PIC.

          Reporting and Evaluation: DOL wants to move responsibility for all WtW program reporting
           and evaluation to DOL. Current law earmarks .06% ($18 M over two years) for evaluation and
           gives HHS responsibility for conducting the WtW evaluation and for collecting program data
           from formula grantees, while DOL has overall administrative responsibility, collects program
           data from competitive grantees, and financial data from both formula and competitive grantees.

           This 'bifurcated' system has been challenging for all involved. We're not sure how HHS would
           feel about losing this responsibility, and there are some on the Hill who deliberately gave HHS
           this role. We propose to leave the evaluation with HHS. Do you have a preference?

          Match: Retain current formula grant match requirement of $1 non-federal for $2 federal.
           Regulations allow up to 50% of non-federal match to be "soft" or in-kind match. DOL has
           proposed increasing this to 75%.

           DOL is responding to complaints from some states who are having trouble making the match.
            We're not convinced reducing the "hard" match requirement is warranted, especially if the
           total funding level for formula grants is reduced by approximately one-third as the total
           funding level decreases from $1.5 B to $1.0 B.

          Technical Assistance and Research: DOL has proposed reserving 2% of total funds for
           national TA and R&D projects ($20 M). Half of this money ($10 M) would be focused on
           fathers initiatives, of which about $5 M would be directed to the OCSE to ensure a strong focus
           on parental responsibility through child support and paternity. DOL currently has no WtW
           funds for T AlResearch. We're not sure OMB supports this, though some T A does seem
           warranted, especially on the new fathers component. OCSE is sending over additional
           justification.

          Formula/Competitive Split: Retain current split of about 75% for formula grants to states and
           25% for competitive grants. Retain requirement that 85% of formula funds get passed to local
           PICs/workforce boards (unless state requests a waiver) and 15% is available as Governor's
           discretionary funds for special projects to help long term welfare recipients become employed.

    NOTE: DOL continues to propose that up to one-third of the formula funds could be used to
    upgrade the skills of low-wage incumbent workers. We're not aware of any support within EOP for
    this proposal, and DOL has wisely made it their third priority (after hard-to-serve welfare recipients
    and fathers).




                                                      4


