RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:18-DEC-1998 20:45:45.00

SUBJECT:   Draft paper for homeless announcement

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett   ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a draft one-pager and Q&A that Tom and I have fact checked with
HUD and OMB.  The event is now planned for Wed December 23 as a phone call
between POTUS and 20 mayors who will be getting the grants. ==================== ATT
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D81]MAIL445051063.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043AE030000010A02010000000205000000B0100000000200005FC378COE24E81498C8056
8DBCF8CD7CC55E2BD39CEE59CE241E24F72566F5FDD5FF3C9F473D94B108FC4BD5DCOD2207595D
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
                                Homeless Radio Address Q&As
                                          12/23/98


Q:   What did the President announce in his phone call today?

A:   Today President Clinton announced $850 million in federal government grants to help
     homeless persons located in all fifty states obtain transitional housing, permanent housing,
     and other services. The grants from the Department of Housing and Urban Development
     (HUD) are part of President Clinton's ongoing Continuum of Care strategy to help break
     the cycle of homeless ness and to create safe, affordable housing for those who need it
     most.

Q:   What will the grants do?

A:   The Continuum of Care grants include $700 million to fund 1420 individual projects,
     including more than 1000 non-profit organizations who work with the homeless. The
     grants provide homeless people with transitional and permanent housing and fund
     supportive services such as job training, child care, substance abuse treatment, and mental
     health services. The non-profit organizations receiving funds include local chapters of
     the Salvation Army, Volunteers of America, and Catholic Charities. In addition, the
     President announced $150 million of grants under the Emergency Shelter Grants
     program. This program assists communities in providing temporary emergency shelter
     and essential services, and preventing homelessness. Grants are allocated to States,
     metropolitan cities and urban counties based on a formula which uses several objective
     measures of community need, including poverty, population, housing overcrowding, age
     of housing, and growth.

Q:   How many persons are homeless in the United States? Why are they homeless?

A:   The Administration's Priority: Home! The Federal Plan to Break the Cycle of
     Homelessness states that there are as many as 600,000 homeless men, women, and
     children in the United States on any given night. The homeless population is a diverse
     group whose homelessness has been caused by a complex array of factors ranging from
     economic difficulties and lack of access to affordable housing to mental illness and
     problems with substance abuse. Approximately 20-25% of the homeless population is
     made up offamilies with children. An estimated one-third ofthe homeless population is
     experiencing mental illness, while at least 50% of those who are homeless may have
     substance abuse issues. Some have become homeless as a result of domestic violence,
     while others were forced into homelessness by a health crisis, such as HIV/AIDS.
     Roughly a third of the entire male adult homeless population are veterans, and as many as
     half of all homeless adult men have some kind of military experience.

                                              1
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


Q:   What has the Clinton Administration done up till now to address homelessness?

A:   President Clinton has made addressing homeless ness a top priority. Since taking office
     in 1993, President Clinton has overseen a more than 70 percent increase in McKinney Act
     homeless assistance, and the Administration has implemented the Continuum of Care
     approach to homeless ness. This approach encourages communities to plan
     comprehensively for the full range of needs of poor and homeless people, and to
     coordinate services in a way that maximizes the impact of existing resources.

Q:   What specifically is the Continuum of Care?

A:    In 1993, HUD initiated a new strategy for reducing home1essness, requiring
     communities to establish "Continuum of Care" plans. A Continuum of Care plan is a
     coordinated community approach which focuses on ensuring that homeless persons move
     from home1essness into jobs and permanent housing. The key elements of a Continuum
     of Care community plan are: outreach and assessment; emergency shelter; transitional
     housing and services; permanent housing; and permanent supportive housing.

     Under the innovative Continuum of Care program, each community submits a list of
     priority projects to HUD. The applications are evaluated on the basis of a number of
     factors, including the strategy for addressing homeless ness, as well as the coordination and
     involvement of federal, state and local agencies, nonprofit organizations, homeless
     persons, and in many cases, local businesses.

Q:   How is the Continuum of Care approach working?

A:   The results of the Continuum of Care efforts over the last few years were documented in
     a 1996 report from the Barnard-Columbia Center for Urban Policy. The study found that
     as a result of such efforts, between 4 to 14 times as many homeless persons are
     receiving a wide-array of assistance to help them move into jobs and housing. The
     study also indicated that the number of children being assisted has grown from 6,500 in
     1992 to 89,000 in 1995. The report pointed to a significant transformation in the way
     communities are addressing homelessness. The fragmented approach of the past has been
     replaced by comprehensive planning and coordinated housing and service delivery. The
     success of the Continuum of Care approach was recently recognized when it was named
     one of 25 finalists for the prestigious Harvard-Ford Foundation Excellence in
     Government Award.


Q:   How much McKinney Act funding is in the FY '99 budget?


                                              2
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


A:   HUD's McKinney Act homeless assistance is funded at $975 million in FY 1999, an
     increase of $152 million or 18 percent over the 1998 enacted level of $823 million. This
     is also an increase of$403.4 million or 71 percent over the 1993 enacted level of$571.6
     million.

Q:   What McKinney Act programs are the grants awarded under?

A:   These grants are part of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act which is the
     main federal program addressing homeless ness. These grants provide funding under
     four HUD McKinney Act programs: the Emergency Shelter Grants program, the
     Supportive Housing Program (SHP); the Shelter Plus Care (S+C) program; and the
     Section 8 Mod Rehab Single Room Occupancy (SRO) program.




                                             3
                                                                     Hex-Dwnp Conversion

              PRESIDENT CLINTON ANNOUNCES $850 MILLION IN GRANTS
                          TO HELP AMERICA'S HOMELESS
                                December 23,1998

Today President Clinton will announce $850 million in grants to help homeless people in all fifty
states obtain housing and receive vital social services. The grants, issued by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD), are part of President Clinton's Continuum of Care
strategy to create safe, affordable housing and break the cycle of homeless ness.

Continuum of Care Grants for the Homeless

The President will announce $700 million in Continuum of Care competitive grants to help
homeless persons in 307 communities located in 46 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto
Rico. The grants provide homeless people with transitional and permanent housing and fund
social services such as job training, child care, substance abuse treatment, and mental health
services. The grants are provided under the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act and
fund 1420 individual projects including more than 1000 non-profit organizations. The non-profit
organizations receiving funds include local chapters of the Salvation Army, Volunteers of
America, and Catholic Charities.

Emergency Shelter Grants

The President will also announce $150 million in funding for the Emergency Shelter Grants
program. Under this program, states and cities select local projects to receive funding. The funds
are distributed through a formula based on a community's housing and poverty needs. Attached
is a state by state list of funds that will be distributed under the Continuum of Care and
Emergency Shelter Grants program.

President Clinton's Continuum of Care Program to End the Cycle of Homelessness

President Clinton's Continuum of Care program, initiated in 1993, requires local public and
private agencies to work together to create a comprehensive plan to address the needs of poor
and homeless people, and to coordinate services to use resources most efficiently. The goal of
the Continuum of Care strategy is to give communities the decision-making authority to craft
plans that move away from short-term emergency measures and toward permanent solutions that
help homeless people become self-sufficient. Under the Continuum of Care program, each
community submits a list of priority projects to HUD. The applications are evaluated on the
basis of the strategy for addressing homelessness, including the coordination and involvement of
federal, state and local agencies, nonprofit organizations, homeless persons, and in many cases,
local businesses. Since taking office in 1993, President Clinton has overseen a more than 70
percent increase in McKinney Act homeless assistance.


