RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Nanda Chitre ( CN=Nanda Chitre/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-DEC-1998 18:58:30.00

SUBJECT:     fyi

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:


             December 22, 1998


             AMA Urges Expansion of Gun Laws


             A.P. INDEXES: TOP STORIES    I   NEWS   I   SPORTS   I   BUSINESS   I
TECHNOLOGY    I ENTERTAINMENT

             Filed at 6:45 p.m. EST

             By The Associated Press

           CHICAGO (AP) -- Laws barring felons from buying guns should be
           expanded to prospective buyers who have committed misdemeanors,
           researchers say in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical
           Association.

          Their study found that handgun purchasers with a prior
misdemeanor
          conviction were nearly five times as likely as gun buyers
without a criminal
          record to be charged with new offenses involving firearms or
violence.

          A critic of the study said its methods were flawed and that its
authors and
          underwriters are activists favoring gun bans regardless of
science.

           But Jim Brady, the former presidential press secretary who was
wounded
             in an assassination attempt on Ronald Reagan, supported the
study's
             conclusions in an editorial accompanying the findings.


            The editorial, co-written by Brady's wife, Sarah, and by Dr.
Thomas B.
            Cole of JAMA's editorial staff, said California has successfully
stopped
          would-be gun buyers if they have convictions for violent
misdemeanor
          crimes.

          "The findings (of the study) strongly suggests there are
compelling reasons
          to do so, " the editorial said.

            The study was led by Dr. Garen J. Wintemute of the University of
            California, Davis, and underwritten in part by the California
Wellness
            Foundation.

            The researchers did a 15-year study of 5,923 randomly chosen
people in
            California who legally purchased handguns in 1977, based on state
            records. The researchers were able to track 5,177 for the full
study
          period, while the others could not be verified as continued
residents of
          California.

            Of the 2,735 subjects convicted before their gun purchases of at
least one
            misdemeanor, 1,379 (50.4 percent) were subsequently charged with
new
            crimes. Only 239 purchasers out of 2,442 who had no prior
criminal
            history were subsequently charged (9.B percent).

           Counting only the worst crimes -- murder and non-negligent
mans laughter,
           forcible rape, robbery and aggravated assault -- 421 people with
previous
           convictions (15.4 percent) were subsequently charged compared
with 60
           of people with no criminal history (2.5 percent), researchers
said.

            But Dr. Edgar A. Suter, chairman of Doctors for Integrity in
Policy
            Research, a nonprofit group that has countered medical research
vilifying
            guns, said the study was politically skewed.

          "The individuals involved with this want to make guns look as
bad as they
          can,"   Suter said Tuesday from San Ramon, Calif., where he is a
family
          practitioner. He said the study failed to fully examine the
population of gun
          buyers because many with clean criminal records had been pared
from
          state files of gun purchasers.

            The authors said including such buyers would not have changed


the results
          substantially. They said the public has the misperception that
laws requiring
          background checks of prospective gun buyers "prohibit gun
purchase by
          all but the law-abiding.

           "In fact, many thousands of persons with a history of criminal
activity
           legally purchase firearms every year, "   they added, citing
previous
           research.


