RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-DEC-1998 21:28:41.00

SUBJECT:       if you're there, take a look at this

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 12/28/98
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
1999 STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS
POLICY OUTLINE
January 19, 1999

           *    most significant proposals

Themes

        This is the last State of the Union of the 20th Century, delivered
at a pinnacle of American power and prosperity. A decade ago, we looked
around us, and saw a nation in decline. We asked: o&America -- what went
wrong?o8 Today, we see what went right.   After yeras of determined
effort, we now have the longest peacetime economic expansion in history,
surging wages, a balanced budget, welfare rolls shrinking, crime
plummeting, our leadership bringing peace around the world.  We have
forged a new consensus for how government can best serve the people    a
government that is modern, empowering,  flexible, a 21st Century
government to meet 21st Century challenges.

        Yes, this is a golden moment for America.  But America faces big
challenges as we make ready for the 21st Century. Dramatic scientific,
economic and social changes raise new threats even as they pose new
possibilities. The question before us is: will we make the most of this
time of strength? We look back with admiration and gratitude on the
achievement of our parents. will the generations of the new millennium,
when they measure our generation, say we did everything we could to
strengthen our nation in a new world?

        We must act to address these challenges, to strenthen our oldest
values in new times, to build the America of the 21st Century. We must
act with faith and confidence, shunning partisanship, rising above rancor,
and recognizing that once again America with its genius for progress can
lead the world.

1. The challenge and opportunity of an aging America

        In the 20th Century, we built a guarantee of security and dignity for our
parents. Now, with the number of elderly Americans expected to double,
living longer than ever before, we must make certain that our nation is
ready for the o&senior boom.o8

* Social Security
Medicare

* Long term care
           tax credit



Senior housing
Intergenerational centers (bringing seniors & children together)

2. 21st Century schools

        In the 20th Century, we built a system of public schools that lifted
millions of families into the middle class. Now, we must trasnform all
our public schools to give all Americans a better-quality education to
meet the challenges of the 21st Century.

lOOK teachers -- must build on success
* Social promotion: ESEA reform -- funds only if:
        No social promotion
        School report cards
        No unqualified teachers
        Intervention to save failing schools

* After school

School modernization
Computers in classrooms/digital library
Charter schools
Native Americans

3. Strengthening families for the 21st Century

         In the 20th Century, the American family underwent tremendous
stress as it adapted to new ways, but survived and was transformed.    Now,
we must strengthen the American family for the challenges of the 21st
Century.

Health of our children
Tobacco
*       legislation to allow a lawsuit/proceeds to Medicare
        comprehensive tobacco legislation

Alcohol -- .08,   [requesting Surgeon GeneralD,s Report on alcohol)

Health care

* PatientsD, Bill of Rights

Kennedy-Jeffords
Medicare prescription drugs
Medicare buy-in

Medical privacy [by law, if Congress doesnD,t act by August, President
will)
Genetic discrimination legislation

Work & home
* Child care
D&At-home momsD8 tax credit
FMLA expansion

Welfare reform
Welfare-to-work reauthorization
Salute success of WTW Partnership, launched 3 yrs ago in SOTU


4. Building a 21st Century economy

        In 20th Century, we built an economy that widened opportunity, at
home & abroad O( Now, in 21st Century, we must give the global economy a
human face

Investing in people   ~)   making sure that the fruits of prosperity are
widespread

        Lifetime learning
                universal training
                adult literacy
                challenge to businesses to train American workers first
        Equal pay
        Minimum wage

        urban initiative
                American Private Investment Corporation
                EZs/ECs
                Urban job creation initiative (HUD)

        Farm safety net

21st Century consumer protection & competition
        Financial consumer protections
        Electricity deregulation

International economy 0) goal: foster global growth & put a human face on
intO,l econ
        * Trade 0) new approach, common ground
                Fast track:
                          New WTO Round, Africa, FTAA
                          and labor standards, transparency
                Child labor convention
        Manufacturing & exports initiative
                 [steel] [?]
        Long-term stability of intO,l financial system

5. 21st Century Environment

        From the early days of the 20th Century, Americans have rallied to
an ethic of conservation.  Since, we created and then rolled back massive
industrial pollution and saved the last great wilderness areas of our
country. Now, in the 21st Century, environmental stewardship requires a
vision not only of protecting grand parks and preserves.  It also requires
enhancing our day-to-day quality of life.

* Livable communities -- initiative to restore and expand city parks,
preserve green spaces in suburbs, and to preserve farmland

Climate change
        - increased R&D
        - tax incentives for energy efficient cars, homes, appliances
        - reward early action by companies

Clean Water Act reauthorization
Full funding for Clean Water Action Plan

6. Security for the 21st Century


At home 0) crime & drugs

        In the 20th Century, we saw criminals nearly take over our cities,
but then rolled them back. Now, to keep crime going down, we must break
the cycle of crime.

        Crime bill II
                - COPS II
                - guns -
                         Brady II
                         one gun a month (stops gun-runners)
                         Gun-show loophole
                         Gun sentences
                - Drugs & crime initiative (stay clean or stay in jail)
                - prevention [after school programs]

        School discipline
        values-based crime prevention

Around the world

        In 20th Century, America led the forces of freedom, and stood strong for
our own security in two world wars and a long twilight struggle against
communism O( now, in the 21st Century, we must stand vigilant against new
threats while finding new avenues to peace.

        Peace
                  Balkans
                  Northern Ireland
                  Middle East

        New threats of 21st Century
                Iraq
                North Korea
                Terrorism/Critical Infrastructure
                CTBT (seek passage this year)

*       21st Century Military
                 Readiness (pay increase, procurement, emergency funding,
readiness study) .

        21st Century alliances
                NATO Summit
                Engagement in Asia -- Japan, South Korea, China

        Democracy --       Latin America, Cuba, Africa

7. 21st Century Community

        In 20th Century, we overcame many boundaries of race and class
to build the most diverse and democratic society the world has ever
known.  In the 21st Century, we must find ways to reaffirm and reawaken
the American values we all share.

        At home

        One America/race initiative
        ENDA
        Hate crimes


         Strengthening democracy -- campaign reform, free TV, increasing
voting

         AmeriCorps -- 100,000th member
                         Funding to reach 100,000 per year

         America and the world

         Immigration -- English as second language & civic education [from
adult literacy initiative]

         Millennium

         Millennium Project
         Y2K


