  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( CN=William R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME:12-MAY-1997 23:00:38.00

  SUBJECT:   IDEA

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  In case you are in early, here are draft press materials.  I'm still
  checking with ED on some of this stuff, but wanted to know if this looks
  like its in the right ballpark.

  Thanks.

  THE INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES EDUCATION ACT (IDEA)
  DRAFT -- May 12, 1997

  For over 20 years, the IDEA has guaranteed a free, appropriate public
  education to students with disabilities; IDEA currently assists ove"r 5.7
  million students across the U.S. to reach their full potential. The
  reauthorization legislation approved by the House and Senate today, with
  the strong support of the President, strengthens and reaffirms our
  NationO,s commitment to disabled children and their parents.

  The new legislation upgrades the IDEA in several ways:

   A stronger emphasis on educational results. The new IDEA revises the
  content of student Individual Education Plans to better focus on enabling
  disabled children to participate and progress in the general curriculum.
  In addition, the new law reaffirms that all children with disabilities
  must be included in State and district assessments, with appropriate
  accommodations where necessary.

   Better support for parents. Under the new IDEA, Parents will be more
  fully involved in student placement decisions.  Moreover, the new law
  requires that parents receive report cards on the progress of their
  children as frequently as parents of non-disabled children.

   Protecting the safety of all students in the classroom while retaining
  the essential rights and protections of disabled students. As proposed by
  the Administration, the new IDEA expands the authority of school officials
  to remove a child for up to 45 days for misconduct involving weapons or
  illegal drugs. The new law gives hearing officers the authority now
  reserved to courts to remove a child whose continued presence would pose a
  substantial risk of injury to the child or others. However, the
  reauthorization overrides a recent 4th Circuit decision on cessation of
  services, making clear that educational services may not be terminated for
  any child with a disability.

   Reduced costs, paperwork, and litigation.  The new IDEA gives school
  districts financial relief through new cost-sharing provisions, and
  reduces paperwork for teachers, school districts and States.  In addition,
  parents and school authorities will be able to resolve disputes through
  new mediation mechanisms.

   Improved funding formula.   As   propo~ed   by the Administration, the


 reauthorization makes changes in the IDEA funding formula to diminish
 incentives to wrongly identify children as having a disability, although
 these changes would only take effect in future years as appropriations
 reach higher levels.

 The new legislation is the product of   a consensus-building process
 involving congressional Democrats and   Republicans, the Department of
 Education, and representatives of the   education and disability
 communities, and shows how bipartisan   cooperation can help achieve
 important national goals.

 Talking Points on the IDEA Reauthorization - DRAFT May 12, 1997


  The IDEA reauthorization bill that is likely to pass today, with the full
 support of the President, will strengthen and reaffirm our NationD,s
 20-year old commitment to disabled children and their parents.

  The new law reflects many of the key principles outlined in the
 AdministrationD,s reauthorization proposal. The upgraded IDEA contains a
 stronger emphasis on educational results and provides better support for
 parents.   The reauthorization also protects the safety of all students in
 the classroom while retaining the essential rights and protections of
 disabled students.   In addition, the new IDEA has a modified funding
 formula to reduce incentives to wrongly identify children as having a
 disability.

         IDEA legislation died a contentious death at the end of the last
 Congress, but todayD,s vote shows what is possible when Democrats and
 Republicans put aside their differences and work to achieve important
 national goals.  We hope to continue in this bipartisan spirit and move
 forward on the rest of our agenda to improve education and prepare America
 for the 21st Century.




 Q:      Do you think Majority Leader Lott and his staff deserve the
 credit for passing this legislation this time?

 A:      The Majority Leader and his chief of staff showed considerable
 leadership throughout this process, but this accomplishment would not have
 been possible without the hard work of a number of Democrats and
 Republicans from both the House and the Senate, and the Administration
 negotiating team, led by Assistant Secretary Judy Heumann (D&HUMAND8).
 This group worked very closely with education groups and the disability
 community to get a consensus bill.

 Q:      What effect does this legislation have on VirginiaD,s dispute
 with the Administration over services to disabled students who have been
 suspended or expelled?

 A:       The new IDEA has important provisions that protect the safety
 of all students in the classroom while retaining the essential rights and
 protections of disabled students.  For example, the new law expands the
 authority of school officials to remove a child from the classroom for
 misconduct involving weapons or illegal drugs, and gives hearing officers
 authority (previously reserved to courts) to remove a child whose
 continued presence would pose a substantial risk of injury.   With respect
 to Virginia, the reauthorization adopts the AdministrationD,s position,


  overriding a recent 4th Circuit decision and making clear that educational
  services may not be terminated for any child with a disability.

  Q:      Pete Wilson and others have criticized this bill because it
  still requires that long-term inmates get services, taking funds away from
  other students.  Should Congress have prohibited services to this
  population?

 A:       In a compromise supported by California Republican Congressman
 Frank Riggs, the new IDEA strikes a reasonable balance. on the issue of
 serving disabled youth in adult correctional facilities, allowing the
 Governor to transfer responsibility for these services to the State
 correctional agency and relieving the State from certain requirements of
 the law.

  Q:      Is this legislation supported by education groups and the
  disability community?

 A:      While nearly all groups involved in the negotiating process had
 to give up something to reach consensus, the new law has remarkably broad
 support among both education groups and disability rights advocates.

  Q:      How much does the Federal government spend on special education?

  A:      For FY 97, appropriations for State grants under IDEA (parts B
  and H) total $3.78 billion, up from $3 billion in FY 96. The
  Administration has proposed increasing state grants by an additional 4.3%,
  to a total of $3.95 billion, for FY 98.


  [Q:      Some Republicans contend that this bill is an unfunded
  mandate.   Do you agree?]

  [A:     IDEA is clearly not an unfunded mandate as defined by the
  Unfunded Mandates Reform Act signed by the President.]

  [Q:     Does the Administration agree with Senator Gregg that the share
  of IDEA funding should increase to 40% of total costs?]

   [A:    The Administration agrees with Senator Gregg in principle that
  the federal government should pay a greater share of the costs of special
  education, and has consistently sought increases in funding for this
  program.]


