RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-DEC-1998 17:58:00.00

SUBJECT:   tps q&a

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Marjorie Tarmey ( CN=Marjorie Tarmey/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)       )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Leslie Bernstein ( CN=Leslie Bernstein/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached are draft q&a for the WH, State, and DOJ press offices. Doris is
scheduled to make the TPS announcement tomorrow morning at 11:30am.   The
agencies would like to have these to their press offices by first thing
tomorrow.

Also, we have just received the draft press release from INS. I am faxing
it over for your review. We have yet to receive the INS fact sheet,
though they keep assuring us that it is on the way.

julie

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D4)MAIL46254236G.326 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043EC080000010A020100000002050000003F36000000020000F718EB8F17D6B6AF05170B
87C038F9A61370B7A10CB9AB5C772796202C13941215D628099B2641B9B1C422C7BEF8EEFE8D25
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                     Questions & Answers
                             Central American Immigration Relief
                                      December 30, 1998

Q:   What is Temporary Protected Status (TPS)?

A:   The Attorney General has authority to designate a country for Temporary Protected Status
     (TPS) for 6 to 18 months if (1) there is an ongoing armed conflict within the state that
     would pose a serious threat to the personal safety of nationals of that state if they were
     returned; (2) the state has suffered an environmental disaster resulting in a substantial,
     temporary disruption of living conditions and is therefore unable to handle adequately the
     return of its nationals; or (3) other extraordinary conditions in a state prevent nationals of
     that state from returning in safety. Persons who apply for and receive TPS are not
     subject to removal and are eligible for permission to work in the United States during the
     time period designated by the Attorney General.

     After consultation with the Department of State, the Attorney General has decided to
     designate Honduras and Nicaragua for TPS for a period of eighteen months. At the end
     of this period, the designation can be renewed.

Q:   What is the difference between TPS and the stays of removal currently in place?

A:   The Attorney General can stay deportations for a short period of time as an exercise of
     her prosecutorial discretion. However, Congress has given the AG specific authority to
     grant TPS under specified circumstances for a period of six to eighteen months. The
     grant of TPS permits affected aliens to remain in the U.S. and receive work authorization
     during the designated time period.

     Conditions in Honduras and Nicaragua fit squarely within the TPS authorization.

Q:   Has TPS been used before as a result of an environmental disaster?

A:   Yes, only once. In 1997, TPS was granted to nationals of Montserrat after most of the
     population was forced to evacuate the island as a result of volcanic activity.

Q:   Why are nationals from El Salvador and Guatemala not receiving TPS?

A:   The Attorney General, after consultation with the Department of State -- and after
     consideration of additional information from the U.S. Agency for International
     Development (USAID), the Department of Defense, press accounts and
     non-governmental organizations -- has concluded that the effect of Hurricane Mitch in

                                               1
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion



     these two countries does not warrant a TPS designation. More than 90 percent of the
     deaths and displacement caused by Mitch occurred in Honduras and Nicaragua. Many
     people continue to be displaced in Honduras and Nicaragua, while the vast majority of
     the displaced in El Salvador and Guatemala have returned to their homes. While the
     economic and infrastructure damage in El Salvador and Guatemala has been serious, it is
     not severe enough to warrant the AG's exercise of her TPS authority.

     This decision in no way diminishes the United States' commitment to help the people of
     El Salvador and Guatemala rebuild their nations. The fact that these two countries will
     be able to receive returnees more quickly than the other two is an important indication
     that, in some areas within these countries, the emergency assistance phase is giving way
     to the rebuilding phase. We must continue to stand by our long-term commitment to
     Central America, including our large-scale support for assistance and rebuilding in the
     regIon.

Q:   Why has the Attorney General decided to continue the stays of removal for Salvadorans and
     Guatemalans?

A:   Though the conditions in El Salvador and Guatemala are not severe enough to warrant a
     TPS designation, the Attorney General -- on the recommendation of the State
     Department -- has decided to continue the stays of removal for another 60 days in order
     to: (1) preserve the status quo in these countries while the U.S. continues its
     reconstruction efforts; (2) help these countries achieve a greater level of stability before
     receiving a significant number of their nationals; and (3) support an orderly phase out of
     the stay already in place.

     This stay will only apply to those who arrived in the U.S. before December 30, 1998 and
     will not apply to criminals.

Q:   Is the Administration considering any other type of relieffor Salvadorans and Guatemalans?

     In the President's signing statement to the Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American
     Relief Act (NACARA), enacted in late 1997, he noted that the Administration would seek
     to overcome disparities created by the legislation through the implementation process.
     NACARA authorized virtually automatic permanent status for Nicaraguans and Cubans
     living in the United States, while providing Salvadorans and Guatemalans with only an
     opportunity to be considered under the more lenient (pre-1996 Act) rules for suspension
     of deportation (a form of immigration relief leading to permanent status).

     The INS has recently proposed regulations implementing NACARA and will be receiving
     comments though the end of January. Consistent with regulatory requirements, no

                                              2
                                                                            Automated Records Management Systen
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion


         decisions can or will be made on the final form of the regulations until the comment
         period has ended. However, the Administration remains committed to exploring all
         possibilities to resolve the disparity created by the legislation.

    Q:   How many Hondurans and Nicaraguans will benefit from TPS?

    A:   While precise numbers are hard to determine, we estimate that there are approximately
         90,000 Hondurans and 60,000 Nicaraguans in the United States who will be eligible for
         TPS. However, most of these Nicaraguans (those in the U.S. before December 31,
         1995) are eligible to become permanent residents under NACARA, and thus will not
         likely apply for TPS.

    Q:   How many Salvadorans and Guatemalans will benefit from the stay of removal?

    A:   The stay affects the return of those persons who have final orders of removal. While it is
         difficult to project how many people might have been removed during the next 60 days
         in the absence of a stay, the INS estimates that they return several hundred people to both
         El Salvador and Guatemala each month.

    Q:   Is there any concern that TPS will attract a larger pow of illegal immigrants to the United
         States from Honduras and Nicaragua?

    A:   This TPS decision only applies to people who are in the United States as of December
         30, 1998. Our embassies in Central America will be communicating to the people of
         Central America that those who enter the U.S. after December 30, 1998 -- either legally
         or illegally -- will not be given TPS protection. Moreover, we must recognize that
         improving conditions throughout the region is the best way to avoid large migrant flows
         in the long-term.

    Q:   Why is registration for TPS for Nicaragua and Honduras limited to six months when in the
         past it has been possible to register throughout the designation period?

    A:   In administering the TPS statute, the Attorney General must be alert to the risk of
         fraudulent applications. A limited registration period will help assure that applicants for
         TPS were in the U.S. as of the date of designation. At the same time, we believe that six
         months is an ample period of time for eligible persons to apply.

    Q:   What does the Administration intend to do with migrants from Honduras and Nicaragua who
         arrive in the US. after the TPS designation date?

    A:   Only those Hondurans and Nicaraguans in the United States as of December 30, 1998

                                                   3

                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
           are eligible for TPS. Any national who arrives in the U.S. after today will be subject to
           normal immigration procedures.

    Q:     What happens to Hondurans and Nicaraguans currently in detention?

    A:    In general, those in detention who are eligible for TPS will be released. However, many
          aliens -- including those who have been convicted of a felony or two or more
          misdemeanors committed in the U.S. -- are not eligible for TPS and, therefore, will not
          be released from detention.

    Q:    Will nationals of Honduras and Nicaragua protected by TPS be permitted to travel to their
          home countries during the TPS period?

    A:    This will be determined by the INS on a case-by-case basis.

    Q:     Is the Administration considering TPS for the Dominican Republic or Haiti?

    A:    No. While both countries did suffer damage from Hurricane Georges, the Attorney
          General -- after consultation with the Department of State and other agencies -- has
          concluded that the effects of Georges do not warrant the exercise of her authority to make
          a TPS designation for these countries.


    DRAFT
    10/29/98
    5:45pm




                                                    4


