 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:30-DEC-1998 16:10:58.00

 SUBJECT:   New Draft of Food Safety Budget Talking Points

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Here is the new draft of the talking points. All the questions you asked
 yesterday have been answered.  FDA, HHS, and USDA have signed off.
 However, OMB is still not signed off on the chart that shows each year's
 budget increases. They are still trying to figure out what is included in
 the columns for the FY1998 and FY1999 appropriations.  (Even without OMB's
 signoff, however, the numbers do add up to what we have been saying are
 the increases for the last three years) .

 I have the NY Times article from last year.   It only shows a 9 percent
 increase because all of USDA's FSIS (Food Safety and Inspection Service)
 is included, which is over $600 million.    In my chart, only that portion
 which was added to FSIS after the Food Safety Initiative was announced is
 included. Thanks, Mary==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D86]MAIL48557146D.326 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF5750432DOB0000010A02010000000205000000184E000000020000E1EBE197AOA68A20D8E506
 5693F4A4ECD792A5B4644E8B9150209E98D26942359278E05BBDBDBODA6BA040CA9B199BD5E8BC

                                                                     Ul:llS,(S IU:lUl:llraU1l?-l: SillOO:llI P:ljEWOjn V


                              FY 2000 Food Safety Initiative

         President Clinton will recommend a $72 million expansion of his National Food Safety
Initiative in his fiscal 2000 budget proposal. If enacted, the budget would result in a third year
of significant growth in government efforts to prevent potentially deadly foodbome illness
through a comprehensive, science-based inspection, surveillance, research and education
initiative. The new funds are to be shared by the Department of Agriculture (USDA), which
which would receive $32 million, and the Department of Health and Human Services which
would receive a total of $40 million, $30 million for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
and $10 million for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Improving Domestic and International Food Safety Inspections

       The President proposes to greatly expand inspections of domestic and imported food
products. The President's food safety budget would ensure that the FDA inspect, every one or
two years, every domestic high risk food manufacturer (manufacturers that produce ready-to-eat
foods that support bacterial growth such as raw and pre-cooked seafood products).
Currently, each of the 6200 domestic high risk food manufacturers are inspected every 3-4
years.

        Imported food would also be subject to increased scrutiny. FDA would double the
number of inspections conducted of foreign food processors from 100 to more than 250. The
FDA technical experts also will examine the food growing, processing, and transportation
systems in additional foreign countries to determine if they meet high standards for safe
production. The FDA has jurisdiction over all food products except meat, poultry, and egg
products, which are under USDA's jurisdiction. For USDA, which conducts daily inspections
of meat and poultry products, funds would be provided for continuing phase-in of Hazard
Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP), the Agriculture Department's science-based,
prevention-oriented meat and poultry inspection system, which has already helped to reduce
significantly dangerous pathogens levels. HACCP is currently in effect in the nation's
approximately 300 largest plants which account for 7S percent of the volume of meat and pOUltry
production in the United States. HACCP will be phased in at the over 2,700 smaller plants
(those employing 10 to 499 employees) starting in January 1999, with the result that a total of90
percent of meat and poultry production will be covered.

        The President's plan also envisions even greater coordination among federal and state
agencies handling food safety issues. For the first time, state and federal inspection results will
be shared by electronic connection, reducing overlapping efforts and enhancing the ability of
authorities to focus on public health improvements. Developing a nationally integrated food
safety system at the federal, state, and local levels will allow greater uniformity and the use of
common standards among the states and Federal government in ensuring food safety. USDA
will strengthen its 26 federal-state partnerships to facilitate the interstate shipment of
state-inspected meat and poultry products. Current law prohibits the mostly small plants that are


                                                 I
                                                                         d RecorCs }.lanagem~
                                                                Automate
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

subject to state inspections from shipping interstate. USDA is working with the states and all
constituent groups on a legislative proposal that would permit plants subject to state inspections
to ship interstate on the condition that they implement HACCP and are subject to enhanced
federal oversight.

Public Health Research and Surveillance

        The funding increase would also enable better surveillance of foodborne illness. CDC
would expand its foodborne illness monitoring system, called "FoodNet," and its computerized
database to identify unique illness "DNA fingerprints," called "PulseNet." The new funds will
allow PulseNet to expand its network oflaboratories in state health departments for subtyping
E.coli (currently 29 labs) and Salmonella (currently 15 labs) to 40 labs for each, and will permit
FoodNet to expand the number offoodborne pathogens that it monitors. The expanded
surveillance network is the heart of our nation's foodborne disease early warning system and was
already helpful in identifying the recent Listeria monocytogenes outbreak.

       Finally, USDA and FDA's food safety research efforts would also benefit from the
President's budget proposal. Expanded research would focus on:

·      creating new detection tests for dangerous contaminants such as Salmonella in eggs,
       Cyclosopra in fresh produce, and test methods for E. Coli 0157:H7 in foods in which it
       cannot now be tested. Such tests would have been useful, for example, when the
       cyclospora outbreak occurred in 1996 and 1997 from tainted raspberries. In that case,
       scientists had no test to find the contaminant in the berries.

·      helping farmers better control potentially dangerous bacteria and fungi in fruits and
       vegetables,

·      combating antibiotic resistance in pathogens that colonize food-producing animals,

        The President's Joint Institute of Food Safety Research will continue developing a
strategic plan for conducting and coordinating all federal food safety research efforts and work
closely with the private sector and academia in the process.

       The President's proposal builds on a strong record of food safety accomplishments,
ensuring that Americans eat the safest possible food. Last year, the President proposed a
$101 million increase (47 percent) in food safety funding, more than $80 million of which
was ultimately approved by Congress in the final budget. The Administration has put in
place improved safety standards for meat, poultry, and seafood product, and has begun the
process of developing enhanced standards for fruit and vegetable juices.




                                                 2
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion



Description of Agency Initiative Allocations and Functions

FDA ($30 million):

$3.6M - Antibiotic Resistance Activities.

$5M - Surveillance. Connect FDA labs to the CDC Pulse Net system and to state
laboratories, and to do additional tracebacks for the source of contamination when
disease outbreaks occur.

$16.9M - Inspections.

         $11.9 - Domestic Inspections. High risk inspections accomplished
at least once a year per plant, including the necessary followup when problems are found; would
allow HACCP training; $3M of this funding would go to states.

        $5M for Imported Food Inspections.     Increased inspections of imports and for
evaluation
of other countries' system.

$1 M - Education. Targeted at high risk populations, such as the elderly,
very young, and immune compromised.

$3.5M - Research and Risk Assessment. Would allow development of additional test methods
development to detect pathogens and to assess preventive control techniques. Would allow new
information to become available about how much of a contaminant must be in a food to make
people sick (such as Listeria) and how certain contaminants (such as Salmonella) best can be
controlled.


USDA ($32 million):

$O.5M - Surveillance. Would improve emergency outbreak response coordination.

$2.4M - Inspections. Would enhance the Federal-State inspection partnerships.

$O.9M - Education. Would improve food safety education to producers, retailers and
consumers; and would improve food service institution food safety education.

$22.6M - Research. To develop better techniques to assess exposure to health risks in food,
develop improved detection methods, increase understanding of antimicrobial and antibiotic drug
resistance, and develop methods to reduce health risks in food handling and distribution.


                                                3
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

$S.6M - Risk Assessment. Would develop better techniques to assess exposure to health risks in
food.

CDC ($10 million):


$10M - Surveillance. Would expand the scope of FoodNet (monitoring of foodborne illness)
and the capacity of PulseNet (DNA fmgerprinting) to better capture pathogen DNA
fingerprints of both E. coli 0157:87 and Salmonella enteritidis and include more state
health departments in the network.




                                              4
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
          $72 million (24 percent) increase for FY2000

                 $32 million more for USDA
                 $30 million more for FDA
                 $10 million more for CDC



                          PRESIDENT'S FOOD SAFETY INITIATIVE
                                       (In millions)
                                 1998     1ncr.    1999     Incr.     2000 Request*    Increase over
                                 Appr.*   Over     Appr.*   Over                       FY99
                                          FY97              FY98

 USDA                            66.3     8.8      119.1    52.8      151              32

 HHS (CDC, FDA)                  147.8    34       177.8    30        218              40

 Totals                          214      42.8     296.9    82.8      369              72

 Percentage Increase                                        39%                        24%

*Inc1udes only the 6 components of the May 1997 Food Safety Initiative:

1.        Expansion of the Federal food safety surveillance system.

2.        Better coordination among Federal, State, and local health authorities.

3.        Implementation of improved inspection strategies.

4.        Improved risk assessment capabilities.

5.        Additional research.

6.        More food safety education for consumers and retail food service workers.




                                                   5
                                                               Hex-Dump Ccnversion
            Clinton Administration Accomplishments In Improving Food Safety

The President's announcement builds on a strong record of food safety initiatives, ensuring that
Americans eat the safest possible food. The Administration has put into place improved safety
standards for meat, poultry, and seafood products, and has begun the process of developing
enhanced standards for fruit and vegetable juices. The Administration also has expanded
research, education, and surveillance activities throughout the food safety system.

*August 1998. The President establishes the President's Council on Food Safety which will
develop a comprehensive strategic federal food safety plan; advise agencies of priority areas for
investment in food safety and ensure that federal agencies annually develop coordinated food
safety budgets; and oversee the Joint Institute for Food Safety Research.

*July 1998. President creates a Joint Institute of Food Safety Research which will develop a
strategic plan for conducting and coordinating all federal food safety research activities,
including with the private sector and academia.

*May 1998. Administration announces PulseNet, a national computer network of public health
laboratories that helps to rapidly identify and stop episodes of foodborne illness. The system
allows scientists to identify food contamination problems by perfonning DNA "fingerprinting"
on foodborne pathogens.

*May 1997. Administration announces comprehensive new initiative to improve the safety of
nation's food supply --"Food Safety from Fann to Table" -- detailing a $43 million food safety
program, including measures to improve surveillance, outbreak response, education, and
research.

*January 1997. President announces new Early-Warning System to gather critical scientific data
to help stop foodborne disease outbreaks quickly and to improve prevention systems.

*August 1996. President signs Safe Drinking Water Act of 1996. The law requires drinking
water systems to protect against dangerous contaminants like Cryptosporidium, and gives people
the right to know about contaminants in their tap water.

*August 1996. President signs Food Quality Protection Act of 1996, which streamlines
regulation of pesticides by FDA and EPA and puts important new public-health protections in
place, especially for children.

*July 1996. President announces new regulations that modernize the nation's meat and poultry
inspection system for the first time in 90 years. New standards help prevent E.coli bacteria
contamination in meat.

*December 1995. Administration issues new rules to ensure seafood safety, utilizing HACCP


                                                6
                                                                     Automated Recortls r. fanagement System
                                                                                        .
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
     regulatory programs to require food industries to design and implement preventive measures and
     increase the industries' responsibility for and control of their safety assurance actions,

     *1994.   CDC embarks on strategic program to detect, prevent, and control emerging infectious
     disease threats, some of which are foodbome, making significant progress toward this goal in
     each successive year.

     *1993. Vice-President's National Performance Review issues report recommending
     government and industry move toward a system of preventive controls.




                                                   7


