RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul D. Glastris ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-JAN-1999 19:37:52.00

SUBJECT:   Tomorrow's ed speech--comments back ASAP please

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Folks,

Mike Waldman has just started reading this draft, but it's getting late
and he asked me to get your comments back quickly, thanks-paul

Draft 1/6/99    7:30 p.m.
Paul Glastris
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS ON AFTER SCHOOL
EAST ROOM, THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON, DC
Thursday, January 7, 1999

        On March 31, 1994, I signed into law a landmark education measure
called Goals 2000.   That legislation did many things.  It spurred efforts
to fight gangs, guns, and violence in schools.   It called for efforts to
assure that every student enters school ready and able to learn. Most
important of all, it called on states to establish, for the first time in
U.S. history, tough standards for what every child in every American
school should know.   I said at the time, and I believe even more
passionately now, that D&every child can and must learn a world-class
standards of excellence.DB Today, I want to talk about the progress we
have already made, and another step we must take, toward meeting that
crucial goal.

        I am pleased that 48 of 50 states have now adopted the tougher
academic curricula we laid out in our Goals 2000 program. The wisdom of
our drive for higher standards is confirmed in a new survey in U.S. News &
World Report released today.  The magazine finds that the best American
high schools are not necessarily those in the most affluent communities,
but those that have a challenging core curriculum and high expectations of
students.

        Since the Goals 2000 legislation, schools have cracked down on
guns, gangs, violence and indiscipline in schools, and the percentage of
students who report being threatened or injured at school nationwide is
down. We have begun to organize an army of tutors to help elementary
school children learn to read and middle and high school students prepare
for college. We have increased investment in early childhood learning
through Head Start. We are making progress towards connecting every
school and library in America to the Internet by the year 2000.   Last
fall, we fought for and won from Congress a down payment on 100,000 new,


highly-trained teachers to reduce class sizes in the early grades.  I
trust that the new Congress will keep up those payments, and I hope they
will work with me to build or modernize 5000 of our oldest school
buildings.

        All these efforts and more are beginning to show results.   SAT
scores are up.  Math scores have risen in nearly all grades nationwide.
This is good news. We should be pleased. We should be thankful.    But we
should not be fooled into complacency. Reading scores have hardly
budged. Many our foreign competitors are improving their educational
systems faster than we are.

        We must do better.  I believe we can, if we continue to demand
high standards and if we demand more accountability at every level of our
educational system for meeting those standards. Accountability works.   I
have seen the evidence with my own eyes in the many visits the First Lady
and I have made to schools in Chicago. Three years ago Chicago Mayor
Richard Daley took personal responsibility for improving his city's
schools. He made many changes, the most crucial of which was ending the
practice of social promotion, in which.students proceed to the next grade
level regardless of whether they have mastered the material in their
current grade level.   Advancing students who have not mastered the basics
is no favor to those students, and it sends the message to all students
that performance and effort don't matter.   But it would be wrong to mark
students as failures when it is the educational system that has failed
them.

        That is why in Chicago students who fail tests the end of 3rd,
6th, and 8th grades are placed in academically-enhanced summer school and
after school programs and drilled until they do pass--and most students
eventually do.  ChicagoD,s Lighthouse after school program keeps 112,000
children in 248 Chicago schools off the street and out of trouble while
drilling them in math and reading and providing everything from computer
instruction to supervised sports to a hot evening meal. ChicagoO,s summer
school program is now the sixth largest school district in America.

        This investment in after school and summer school is the linchpin
that makes the whole experiment in ending social promotion work.  Citywide
math and reading scores have gone up three years in a row in Chicago, with
the biggest gains coming from some of the most disadvantaged schools. Now
other cities such as the District of Columbia, and states such as Delaware
and South Carolina, are getting results by insisting that students pass
rigorous tests before advancing to the next grade and offering after scho
01 and other help in order to pass those tests.

        Today, Education Week published a survey showing that in high schools
that require students to pass an exit exam before graduating, 68 of
students say the tests D&make them work harder.08 Think about that.
Sixty eight percent. That means that over two-thirds of these students,
by their own admission, were not striving, were not doing their best,
until adults had the courage to challenge them and hold them accountable.
Now imagine what would happen if we started holding all public school
students in America accountable.  Imagine what would happen if two-thirds
of those students, tk-million students, started trying harder.

        After school programs honor our values and benefit our nation.
They provide opportunity to students, bolster responsibility among
students, and strengthen our communities.  Incidents of violent crime by
juveniles doubles in the hour after school lets out, and our children are
also at greatest risk of becoming victims of crime in the hours
.   '



        immediately after school.  But in communities where children have
        something positive to do, youth crime and victimization drop steeply.

                  That is why I have supported grants for quality after school
        programs through the 21st Century Community Learning Center Initiative,
        first introduced by Sen. Jeffords and championed by Senators Kennedy, tk,
        and tk.  This crucial effort has grown from $1 million in 199tk to $40
        million in 199tk to $200 million in the budget I signed last fall.   Yet
        the demand for quality after school, the bipartisan support it has gained,
        and its potential to transform public education in America, far outweigh
        the investment we have made so far.

                 We must do more. Today, I am pleased to announce that my new
        budget triples investment in after school programs, targeted to schools
        that stop promoting students to the next grade who have not learned what
        they should have learned in their current grade. This investment in
        academically-enriched after school will give more of our students the help
        they may need to meet the higher educational standards we must set for the
        21st Century.  It will give more of our children a place to go other than
        the streets when school lets out--a place where they can study, play,
        learn crafts, or explore the Internet.  It will give peace of mind to
        working parents as the fight the traffic home at night.

                A quality after school program cannot be a substitute for a poor
        quality program during the regular school day. We will make sure that
        these investments go only to schools that end social promotion the right
        way. We must insist on more accountability not just from students but
        from parents, teachers, principals, school superintendents, and elected
        officials at the local, state, and federal level. We must have more
        high-quality child care so that all children are ready to learn on the
        first day of kindergarten.  Raising our investment only a step; but an
        absolutely crucial step towards transforming our public schools so that
        every child in America has a world-class education for the 21st Century.

                Thank you and God less you.

        ###


