     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JAN-1999 17:39:28.00

     SUBJECT:   Visas for exploited aliens

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Scott Busby ( CN=Scott Busby/OU=NSC/O=EOP @ EOP [ NSC 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     As you recall, last December   the NSC raised the issue of whether the
     Administration would support   the creation of a new visa category for
     victims of smuggling, worker   exploitation and the like who are illegally
     in the U.S.  Scott Busby and   I met with DOJ, INS and DOL this afternoon to
     discuss this issue.

     Though the DOJ has not yet come forward with a formal proposal, they are
     interested in pursuing the creation of a temporary (non-immigrant) visa
     that would provide status (permission to remain in the U.S.) to those who
     step forward and provide information to the government that assists in
     bringing a law enforcement action against their exploiter(s).

     Under their current system, INS has a visa program (the s-visa) that is
     used to protect illegal aliens who are material witnesses in a criminal
     case.  Those who qualify (as determined by the local U.S. Attorney and the
     DOJ's Criminal Division) are eligible for temporary stays of deportation
     (including work authorization) and, after three years, permanent status.
     Traditionally, this visa category has been used to protect international
     criminals who have agreed to testify in a U.S. criminal proceedings again
     st their bosses (it has been commonly referred to as the "snitch" visa).
     The program is capped at 250 visas per year (which includes 50 reserved
     specifically for international terrorists).

     In recent years, the DOJ has expanded the use of the s-visa to protect
     victims of labor or other exploitation.  For example, the s-visa was used
     to protect the deaf Mexicans who were involved in smuggling and
     exploitation in New York and the Thai women who were enslaved in
     California.  However, the Criminal Division at Justice has put up a lot of
     resistance to using this visa for victims of abuse.  They have been
     lobbying hard to retain its use only for the protection of international
     criminals who are helpful with criminal investigations.

     Given that resistance, NSC (Eric Schwartz in particular) is very
     interested in our exploring the creation of a new visa category to
     temporarily protect the victims of egregious labor and other abuses
     (smuggling; prostitution rings; etc.) during the pendency of a law
     enforcement investigation.   Though no particulars have been decided upon,
     this visa would likely be different from the s-visa in that: (1) it would
     be temporary, with only the possibility to adjust to permanent status
     under severe circumstances (i.e., a demonstration that return would be
     life threatening); and (2) it would not be limited to criminai prosecu
     tions, but would cover administrative investigations into labor
·

    exploitation and/or smuggling (conducted by the Departments of Labor or
    State). Like the s-visa, it would carry an annual cap (perhaps 500) and
    each application for a visa would need specific approval from the
    investigating agency, the INS, and the AG.

    DOJ is doing some background work to make sure that this would not be a
    big deal on the Hill. Their preliminary read is that this will be seen
    more as a tool to enhance enforcement against traffiking and egregious
    worker exploitation than anything else -- particularly b/c it is temporary
    and carries a small annual cap. On the whole, this seems to me to be
    worthwhile to explore further, as long as we make sure that the
    legislative proposal is crafted very narrowly, so as not to induce people
    to come to this country under adverse conditions with the hope of getting
    work authorization (even if temporary).

    Does that seem right?

    Julie


