 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Mike Cohen <mikec_20904@yahoo.com> ( Mike Cohen <mikec_20904@yahoo.com> [ U

CREATION DATE/TIME:II-JAN-1999 07:56:03.00

 SUBJECT:   Materials for response to POTUS re:Edley

TO: Michael Cohen     CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD j )
 READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO j )
 READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD j )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
                                  P6/(b)(6)
                                                                              [o():,   J
Attached are two draft documents. One is a summary of our accountability
proposals, reflecting our meeting on Friday. I've sent a copy to Mike
Smith to make sure he is ok with it, and will check with him as soon as I
get in.

The second is a draft memo to POTUS responding to the issues Edley raises
in his memo. I envision attaching the accountability document to this
memo, though if that will be too much the memo can be revised accordingly.

 I'll touch base as soon as I get in--page me if you need me before that.




DO YOU YAHOO!?
Get your free ®yahoo.com address at http://mail.yahoo.com
 - newact2.wpd - edleyr.wpd==================== ATTACHMENT      1 ;===================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D16jMAIL48795401X.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043C8070000010A02010000000205000000DF3D0000000200OOB3CD2F6E4352C57DFB2AOB
19F432F6DCD45A2A55BlACEAIA3A9BD51217DC975F14B032C2FB43F3Cl3D043580BC35136563EA
490AA24659160D65DE7E6ADOA52AB762DD2911326F51CE2A897E20FB633592C7EAF2B5491763D5
AFA7CCD34450CBAF00824A3AD75B9BED9C419FF95EI070F6CF41AA25E4260FA50061F89137F52E
3A61F206137BD6990336F36F9029C059479EEFBODDA418366EEDDF97234ACA77D6DOA22C14A6CB
7282AE4C601274635F8EIF5AC5641DIFID6DOB419FC43A2CIA9CAOBE7528C20EB64032FE3EA072
ED88A1306765A008F5797E3C5103E0503BICFFCA32BC58C2846FODCE40B4F7DEA778738B4BE9E4
D14B0935556B8079B8276F5B615769BAF54E821BE7B0751"3223CEAEE16FB012AIEIBC673FE73BB
C13F7AB39F55E6BCD9139CAE4A64902D353257BOA7D6E175F84961BOCOB647666926820DDB7F9C


075E324A34EE5701A8B6DI03DE58A7FB5DF9DC3E399CA41A7B5CDD9DOBD18BB804CBB95FBAOFA5
BAE45157159DIB6F3833DD3E273EA65B8320792CB2E3EEC7E04AAA54EB099425354112Bl125509
1/10
                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

                       Strengthening Accountability for Results in ESEA

        The 1994 enactment of Goals 2000 and reauthorization of ESEA marked a sea-change in
federal education policy by insisting that states set high standards for all students, measure
student and school progress toward reaching the standards, and by taking the first steps to focus
accountability on achieving results rather than complying with regulations. Our 1999 ESEA
reauthorization proposal will complete this process by establishing a basic framework for holding
states and school districts, schools and teachers, and students accountable for results. It does this
by building on and strengthening provisions already in law and adding new provisions.

Taken together, our approach to strengthening accountability for results would require states to:

Establish High Standards and Aligned Assessments. We would retain provisions of current
law, which require states to establish content and student performance standards and assessments
aligned to the standards by 2000-01 school year. States must also define adequate yearly
progress -       increases in the percentage of students meeting state performance standards -- for
Title 1 schools and local school districts in a manner that would result in continuous and
substantial progress toward meeting state standards within a reasonable time frame.

Produce and Disseminate School, District and State Report Cards that Focus on Results.
As a condition of receiving ESEA funds, we would require states and school districts to produce
annual report cards, easily understood by and widely distributed to parents and the public, for
each school, school district and the state as a whole. The report cards would include
information on student achievement, teacher quality, school safety, attendance, graduation rates.
Where appropriate the student achievement data would be disaggregated by demographic
subgroups, to allow a greater focus on the gaps between minority and majority, low-income and
more advantaged students.       In addition, states would be required to publicly identify the lowest
performing schools, so that parents and community members are aware of the need for
improvement, and so local school boards and school administrators are under immediate pressure
to address the situation.

        Title 1 currently requires school and school district profiles, including disaggregated
achievement data. Our proposal strengthens this provision by requiring report cards for all
schools, not just those participating in Title 1, expanding the data to be reported, requiring the
report cards to be widely disseminated, and requiring state level report cards as well.

Take Immediate Corrective Actions to Turn Around the Lowest Performing Schools.
States would be required to identify no more than 5% of its schools as low performing, and make
the identification public. These should be the schools with the lowest levels of student
performance which have made little or no improvement over the previous 3 years. States must
take corrective actions in these schools, based on an external audit and which address
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


fundamental staffing and curricular issues that are fundamental for improved student
performance. Initially, corrective actions will include steps such as provision of extended
learning opportunities, implementation of proven school reform models, and extensive teacher
training. If these actions do not result in satisfactory improvements in student performance
within [2] years, corrective actions must then include steps to replace adults in the school, either
by reconstituting the school and making wholesale staff changes, or by closing the school down
entirely and reopening it with new staff or as a charter school. If these steps do not work, the state
must repeat them until they do; the Secretary will also have the authority to withhold ESEA
funds provided for state administration. This approach will penalize state officials without taking
funds away from services to students.

Recognize [and Reward) High Performing Schools. States would be required to recognize
and reward schools that make significant and sustained (over 3 years) improvements in the
percentage of students meeting state performance standards. States would have discretion in the
design of this approach, including in the size and uses of financial rewards to schools.

       Our ESEA reauthorization proposal would set aside 2.5% of Title 1 funds to fund the
requirement for states to intervene in failing schools and reward high performing schools. Your
FY2000 budget requests $200 million to jump start this process by requiring states to begin
interventions in the lowest performing schools immediately.

End Social Promotion. States would be required to end social promotion by adopting (or
requiring local school districts to adopt) policies that (1) require students to meet academic
performance standards at key transition points (e.g., 4th and 8th grade, prior to high school
graduation) before being promoted; (2) uses multiple measures, including a test valid for these
purposes as the primary tool to determine if a student has met the standards; (3) permit other
factors to enter into a final determination as to whether the student has met the standards and
should be promoted.

        While requiring students to meet standards sends them an important message that
"performance counts", the more important message in this policy is that schools and school
systems must devise and implement strategies for helping students meet the standards - on
time. States and school districts would be required to show how they will help students meet
promotion standards on time by (1) strengthening learning opportunities in the classroom with
clear standards, small classes with well-prepared teachers, high quality professional
development, use of proven instructional practices, and early identification and intervention for
students who need extra help; (2) providing extended learning time for students who need extra
help, including after-school and summer school; and (4) providing appropriate programs for
students who still do not meet the standards, rather than simply having them repeat an entire
grade.

       States would be given five years to phase in this requirement, in order to provide the time
necessary to ensure that adequate learning opportunities are available for all students, and


                                                  2
                           Hex-Dump Conversion

especially for those in low perfonning schools and school systems. However, states would have
to commit to this policy, provide a detailed plan for its implementation, and identify annual
implementation milestones in order to receive funding at the beginning of the five year period.
The plan would require the approval of the Secretary of Education, who could withhold funding
if the state failed to follow through with its implementation plan.

Assume Greater Responsibility for Teacher Quality - and Hold Teachers Accountable for
Performance. As a condition of receiving funding under ESEA, states would be required to:

·      Implement performance-based assessments for initial licensing. States would be
       required to develop and implement perfonnance-based assessments for the initial
       licensing of teachers, aligned with student content and perfonnance standards. These
       assessments would include written exams of content and teaching knowledge as well as
       an evaluation of teaching perfonnance. The assessment of teaching perfonnance could
       take place during a traditional teacher education program or during the first year of
       teaching for those who enter the classroom through alternative routes.

·      End the use of unqualified teachers. States would be required to phase out the use of
       (1) teachers with emergency rather than full certification and (2) teachers teaching "out of
       field". Both of these practices are particularly prevelant in high poverty, low-perfonning
       schools, and it will be essential to end them if we are to close achievement gaps, tum
       around failing schools, and help students meet promotion and graduation standards.

        In addition to these provisions, we are working with the Education Department to develop
 additional requirements to strengthen teacher accountability and deal with low-perfonning
teachers. These may include approaches such as requiring periodic recertification of all teachers,
requiring school districts to implement peer review processes for teacher evaluation, or requiring
school districts to adopt procedures for identifying low perfonning teachers, providing them with
needed help, and removing them fairly and quickly if they do not improve.




                                                3
                              Hex-Dump Conversion


                       Rewarding Success: Education Excellence Fund

       The overriding goal of our ESEA proposal is to help all students reach challenging
academic standards, and to close the racial, ethnic and socioeconomic gaps in student
achievement at the same time. The accountability provisions, targeting provisions and program
changes are all designed to work together to accomplish this purpose.

         To reward those states, school districts and schools that succeed at this goal, we propose
the establishment of a $500 million per year Education'Excellence Fund, which would first
distribute funds in the third year after ESEA is enacted. At this level of funding, states and
districts could receive a level of funding roughly equal to what they receive under Goals 2000 --
enough money to be seen as a significant incentive, and to focus national attention on those
places that earn the funds.

The fund would have a simple design:

·      All states and the [100] largest urban school districts [align this with targeting provision
       in school modernization proposal] would be eligible to participate, though none would be
       required to.

·      In order to participate, states and school districts would be required to participate in
       NAEP reading and math on an annual basis, at three grade levels. As is presently the
       case, NAEP would be administered to a sample of students in each state or school district.

·      Once a baseline level of performance is established in the first year after ESEA is
       enacted, the Secretary would determine for each state and school district annual targets
       for increases in the percentage of students meeting NAEP performance standards, as well
       as the increased in the percentage of racial, ethnic and socioeconomic subgroups meeting
       NAEP performance standards.

·      Any state or school district that reaches its targets over three years would be eligible for
       funds under this program. The level of funding would be equal to that state or district's
       share of Title 1 funds. The overall pot of money would be divided on a 50-50 basis
       between states and big cities.

·      Funds allocated to states or school districts that choose not to participate or that fail to
       reach performance targets would be redistributed to those states and districts that meet
       performance targets. Thus, at the outset, every state and district would know the


                                                  4
                            Hex-Dump Conversion

    minimum level of funding it could receive if it meets performance targets, though it could
    receive higher levels depending on the performance of other states and districts.

·   States and districts that receive funds under this program would be required to distribute
    90% of the funds to its schools that made the greatest overall achievement gains and did
    the most to help close achievement gaps. States and districts would use state and/or
    local testing programs for these purposes. Each school would be free to use the funds for
    any activity it determines would contribute to additional improvements in student
    performance. States and districts would also be free to determine the use ofthe funds
    each could retain.




                                            5
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                  Bruce Reed
                       Mike Cohen

SUBJECT:               Reaction to Education Issues in Chris Edley's Memo

Chris Edley's memo argues that the approach we have developed with the Education Department
to strengthening accountability in ESEA focuses on inputs (including a requirement that states
and districts end social. promotion) rather than results and lacks teeth. He also argues that our
proposal to require states to end social promotions will alienate progressives, and suggests that
instead of these proposals you pursue the idea of establishing a new and flexible education
funding stream, targeted to high poverty communities, that would remain available to them only
as long as they improve student achievement. As you review these ideas, we ask you to consider
the following:

Our proposal provides strong accountability for results. A summary of our approach to
strengthening accountability for results is attached. In brief, it requires states to set standards,
measure student performance, issue school report cards, identify and reward outstanding schools
and intervene to tum around lowest performing schools. It also requires states to end social
promotion. The required interventions are tough; if schools are not turned around the state must
replace the adults in failed schools, either by reconstituting the school and making wholesale
staff changes, or by closing it down and reopening it with new staff or as a charter school. And
if these changes don't produce improvement in student achievement, the state must take them
again until they do. In our proposal, states must adopt and implement these practices as a
condition of receiving any funds under ESEA. If they fail to do so, or if they are not
implemented in a serious and effective fashion, the Secretary of Education can and should
withhold funds from the state.

        This approach to holding schools accountable for results is based on what you have tried
to accomplish for more than a decade, as governor and as president. As last week's Education
Week report shows, these practices are stilI not nearly as widespread as they should be. Yet
other recent studies show they contribute significantly to the success that states such as North
Carolina and Texas have achieved in boosting student achievement and reducing achievement
gaps attributable to race, ethnicity and socioeconomic status.

Our proposal to end social promotion may well be controversial in some quarters, but it is
sound and will be effective. Our approach requires states to phase in, over five years, an end
to social promotion, thereby squarely focusing the attention of students, teachers, parents and the
entire school system on getting kids to meet standards. The phase-in period will help ensure
high quality implementation, prevent the abuses that Chris fears, and enable states to comply
with civil rights laws addressing use of high stakes tests.
                               Hex-Dump Conversion

        For those who oppose the use oftests to hold students accountable for performance under
almost any circumstance, this requirement will indeed be controversial. However, by coupling
an end to social promotion to other requirements and steps to strengthen learning opportunities in
the classroom, provide extra help to students who need it, end the use of unqualified teachers,
and hold schools and teachers accountable, we can honestly and accurately argue that this policy
will help rather than harm students. Our requirements are designed to foster help for students
who need it, and thereby increase the percentage of students promoted on time, rather than
increase retention rates. This would track your own experience with the 8th grade test in
Arkansas, where passing rates from 1985 to 1988 increased in reading from 85% to 96%, and in
math from 82% to 95%.

If designed well, new funds can be effectively used to reward states, districts and schools
for increased performance. We think a new fund that rewards school systems that make
overall gains in student achievement and close achievement gaps is a good idea. The attached
summary of accountability measures includes a description of how we would approach this.

        As we understand Chris Edley's recommendation, he would create a large fund (growing
to approximately $8 billion per year, roughly the same size as Title 1). Funds would be
provided to high poverty communities, which would have virtually complete flexibility in their
use. School systems that do not show gains in student achievement would lose funding. Chris
argues that such an approach is necessary because it is virtually impossible to cut off Title 1
funds, since local recipients see these funds as a virtual entitlement.

       Our proposal differs from Chris's in several critical respects. It would be significantly
smaller (perhaps $1 billion over 5 years). While Edley's proposal would give high poverty
communities additional funds they could use to improve achievement, our proposal presumes
that we are already giving these communities funds to improve achievement -- through Title 1,
Class Size Reduction, the Technology Literacy Challenge Program, the Reading Excellence Act,
etc - so that additional funds should be available only to those who are effectively using these
and their own funds to boost achievement. Finally, both Chris and we presume that Title 1 and
other ESEA programs will continue. We propose to significantly strengthen their accountability
provisions, and withhold funds where necessary, while Chris apparently would leave these
untouched.

We agree that in rhetoric and in program design we should heavily stress the need to close
the achievement gap between minority and majority, arid between disadvantaged and
advantaged students. We urge caution in framing this as a national goal akin to sending a man
to the moon. We fear this may be seen as no more credible or likely to be reached than the
National Education Goals set in 1990, including becoming first in the world in math and science.
