RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Shannon M. Hinderliter ( CN=Shannon M. Hinderliter/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-JAN-1999 14:20:04.00

SUBJECT:   NARAL

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Melanne Verveer has asked that you clear the following message for us. It
is to be printed in the dinner journal, and the First Lady is speaking at
the event. Please note-they need the message later today for printing
purposes. If you have any questions I can be reached at 6-5526. Thank you.

     I am pleased to congratulate the members of NARAL as
you celebrate your organization's 30th anniversary.

     You can look back with pride on three decades of action
and accomplishment in the struggle to defend the right to
choose.  From the grassroots level to the halls of Congress,
NARAL members have stepped forward with courage and conviction
to promote policies that protect the lives and health of women
and ensure their reproductive freedom and dignity.

     Working together, we have made real progress in our goal
to make abortion safe, legal, accessible, and rare.  Early in
my Administration, I restored Medicaid funding for abortion in
cases of rape, incest, and life endangerment; stopped all pro-
ceedings on the "gag rule" that prevented women from discussing
abortion with health professionals; reversed the Mexico City
policy; and signed into law the Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances Act to protect women's health care centers from
violence.  In all of these achievements, your leadership
and support played a prominent role.

     As we mark this milestone in the history of NARAL and
the 26th anniversary of Roe v. Wade, let us reaffirm our com-
mitment to preserving the freedom, safety, and health of all
our citizens, and let liS look forward to the day when every
child in America is a wanted child, raised in a strong, loving
family.

     Hillary joins me in extending best wishes for a memorable
anniversary celebration.


