 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Todd A. Summers ( CN=Todd A. Summers/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:14-JAN-1999 15:05:32.00

 SUBJECT:   International AIDS Funding

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 CC: Sandra Thurman ( CN=Sandra Thurman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 During his meeting with the AIDS Council, they expressed concern about the
 level of US support for international AIDS activities through USAID.  In
 response, the President said that he would "put some money in there" (see
 relevant dialogue from transcript at end) .

 We had requested that OMB respond to this commitment; unfortunately, to
 our knowledge, USAID is being level-funded for FY2000. Moreover, OMB
 tells us that USAID may cut AIDS funding by $3-4 million if they receive
 no new money overall (allocations to AIDS programs are at the USAID
 Administrator's discretion and are not typically earmarked here or in
 Congress). We are concerned that the President's commitment to the
 Council will be unfulfilled, and that funding may in fact be cut instead
 of increased.

 Another issue is the AIDS orphan funding announced by the President on
 December 1, This $10 million was part of a $50 million emergency plus-up
 for child welfare at USAID (Rep. Callahan pushed it, Rep. Pelosi got the
 AIDS orphan cut). The fact that this money was "one time only" was also
 raised by the Council.  Sandy is about to set off for a trip to Africa to
 prepare for the larger visit requested by the President. USA Today is
 accompanying Sandy on the trip, and is expected to do a major piece on the
 issue. Our ability to provide some kind of responsive funding would be
 very helpful; conversely, with PM Blair just announcing a $185 million
 increase in their AIDS support to southern Africa, the lack of increased
 US support will be a vulnerability.

 Our suggestions
 Given that the budget numbers are locked down, we suggest that USAID be
 asked to provide a modest (+/- $5 million) increase for FY2000 in its AIDS
 budget, and that we commit to work with them to obtain additional
 appropriations in Congress.
 An effort should be made during Congressional negotiations to support a
 $50 million increase in the child-survival funding at USAID, with a
 portion allocated to AIDS orphan relief.

Relevant Sections from Transcript of AIDS Council Meeting (12/18/98)
MR. ISBELL: Mr. President, six million people become infected
with HIV each year around the world, half of them under the age of 25.
More than 90 percent of the infections in the world happen in the


developing world where there is little or no access to the drugs 'that
have made such a big difference to people in this country.
       We were extremely impressed and heartened by your use of World
AIDS Day to highlight the need for American leadership in the global
fight against HIV. We strongly support the $10 million program that you
announced to address the needs of women and orphans of AIDS.   And we
would strongly support you making this one-time funding a permanent part
of USAID.       Despite this initiative, Mr. President, U.S. funding for
global
AIDS activities has declined in real dollar terms since 1993. Just last
year the administration proposed a 10 percent cut in federal support for
funding for infectious disease programs throughout the world. We
believe that we cannot turn the tide against HIV throughout the world
without the aggressive, bold, energetic leadership of the united States.
And we would strongly encourage in your next budget, Mr. President, that
you're about to send to the Hill, that you include substantial increases
for international AIDS programs at USAID and the CDC.
       Just also to close, we'd also strongly support an improved
coordination of the many federal programs that happen all across the
government that have a role to play in the international AIDS efforts.
Secretary Albright has announced, as you know, a plan to draft a U.S.
international AIDS strategy, and we would hope that you would look to
this as a first step toward making sure that all the federal agencies
are reading off the same page and that they're part of the same team --
because it's an urgent problem and it requires an urgency of the entire
u.S. government.
       THE PRESIDENT: Well, in general, let me say I think the budget
should reflect better attention both to prevention at home and to the
communities of color. And I've been trying to get more money for the
USAID mission and we'll put some more money in there.   I think I'd like
to make two points.
       One is that this budget year will be more difficult than the last
one because we got such big increases in everything last time and
because of the global economy kind of slowing down, we don't expect the
same amount of revenues to come in this time.   And we have to fund all
the big increases we got last time again.   But we'll do the best we can.
       The second thing I would like to say is I think that it would be
very helpful to have all of you using your, whatever influence you have,
with members of Congress in both parties to support more global efforts,
because eventually all this is going to a menace to the United States.
So it's not only a moral imperative, it's also very practical over thelong
run.
       One of the things that has kind of bothered me is that in the
aftermath of the Cold War we were able for several years to reduce our
defense budget, and that was a good thing and everyone --and even the
Pentagon wanted to do it. There reduced like by about 300,000 the
number of civilian employees. And they plan for further reductionsthere.
       But during that time, we actually needed to make a larger
commitment on the diplomatic front or in the non-defense security areas,
if you will. And with the exception of the special efforts we made in
the former Soviet Union to dismantle and destroy nuclear weapons,
basically there's been a wholesale effort to cut back on our diplomatic
budget, even though, contrary to popular wisdom, the United States
spends a smaller percentage of our income on international affairs than
any other major country.
       And one of the things that I have seen -- almost no one knows
this, but it's true -- one of the things that I have -- now, to be fair,
we also spend more on defense and a lot of our defense goes to protect
other countries, as you see in the last couple of days.   But, still, for
the numbers -- are so much more modest, not only for -- if you just look


 at the USAID program, the health programs, the empowerment of women and
 children, especially young girls, initiative, the small scale
 microeconomic development -- all that stuff that doesn't cost much money
 and it has a huge impact. And especially a lot of the things we can do
 in public heath.
        And, interestingly enough, a lot of the preventive activities that
 we would engage in with regard to AIDS, for example, would go quite well
 with other things we need to be doing out there with these large
 populations anyway in a lot of countries that have severe public
 healthproblems.
        So we've been sitting here meeting in our -- I've been having each
 of the last three or four days rather long, detailed budget sessions,
 trying to figure out how to get more blood out of that turnip.    And one
 of the things that I'm trying to do is to figure out how to make the
 case to the Congress in an effective way that the united States has
 enormous interest, as well as obligations, in making these kinds of
 investments beyond our borders.
        And I think anything you can do to help that, I would appreciate
 it.   I mean, there is this .sort of general awareness in Congress that
 the world is becoming more interdependent. There's a much more
 sophisticated understanding of the economics, for example.    But it's not
 just economics.   It's the environment, it's the public health, it's all
 these other things where we are becoming more and more caught up witheach
 other.
        Our major military mission in the last six months, before the
 operation in Iran, has been to send several thousand of our uniformed
 personnel to Central America to help them rebuild after Hurricane Mitch.
 It's not only the right thing to do from a humanitarian point of view,
 it is in our national interest.    Because if those countries don't
 rebuild they will become highly vulnerable to all the drug traffickers.
 And if they don't rebuild then all their people will have to come here.
 And if they can't get here legally will try to come illegally.    So
 there's all these things that we need to begin to see our relationships
 beyond our borders, as more of.an extension of our relationships with
 one another, rather than as something totally different and apart from
 our relations with one another.
        And, anyway, I don't mean to give you a speech on that; I know you
 believe that.   But the point I want to make is, most people who run for
 Congress never have to think about these things unless they have a large
 immigrant population within their district from a particular place.     So
 it doesn't -- this kind of discussion we're having, because you
 understand the HIV/AIDS issue -- I'm preaching to the choir here.    But
 anything you can do to sort of just sit down and walk through this with
 congressional delegations, or their chiefs of staff, or whoever the
 appropriate people are from around the country, I would reallyappreciate.
        Because I think there is a lot of support. For example, you can
 always get good support in Congress, bipartisan, for a big increase in
 the Ryan White Act.   And now, we've finally got pretty good support in
 Congress, this whopping increase we had to help people purchase the
 drugs, the medicines.   But it drops off markedly when you try to talk
 about the connection between what we're doing here at home and beyond
 our borders. And I really think you could help, because this is one
 example of a more general challenge the country will have to face --
 more every year for the next 20 years. Maybe forever, but certainly for
 the next 20 years.


 Full Transcript
 THE WHITE HOUSE


Office of the Press Secretary

For Immediate Release                               December 18, 1998


REMARKS OF THE PRESIDENT
IN HIV-AIDS ADVISORY COUNCIL MEETING

The Cabinet Room


5:45 P.M. EST


             MS. THURMAN: Good afternoon, everybody.   I want to
thank you all for joining us this afternoon. Those of us who are
gathered in this room today are partners in a battle that, while
we've had significant successes in recent years, has no end in sight.
Our victory over AIDS will require incredible resolve, persistence,
and steadfast leadership.

             This is a struggle which we all know has had all too few
national leaders, but has always had the support of this leader.  It
is my distinct honor to present to you our leader, the President.

             THE PRESIDENT:    I want to get right to the subject of
listening to all of you, but I would like to say that, as all of you
know, we had a very good couple of days when we finally made the
budget last year -- we've had a lot of good increases, a lot of
things that I know you care so much about. But we've got a lot of
work to do, es·pecially in prevention and in the vaccine development I
think we're going to -- (inaudible) -- pretty soon.

             I would prefer, I think, because we've met before and
I'm trying to stay familiar with your concerns -- I think we've done
a good job of getting the money into the programs this time, but
there's a lot more we can do -- (inaudible.)  However you organized
this -- (Laughter.)

             DR. HITT:                        Okay, we want to start
off by having Reverend Mother Altagracia Perez lead us in a short
prayer.

             REVEREND PEREZ: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. President,
for this moment where we can gather our thoughts and especially bring
to mind all those who today are in need of courage and strength, so
if we could have a moment of silence.

             Spirit of life and justice and power, we welcome you in
our midst. We've been brought together by a desire to improve the
quality of life for all the people that we serve and represent.
We're especially conscious at this moment of the men and women, that
right now, are in harm's way.  Our thoughts are with them and their
families, as we await their safe return.

             We're also ever-mindful of those who are gathered here
with us and, through us, all those who struggle daily with a virus
that has no cure and is hard to live with. They are here with us;
the people who called us to this work; those who have gone and who
have left us their legacy of courage and perseverance.



             We especially gather in a spirit of gratitude for our
President. We remember all too well those dark years, when a meeting
like this would have never happened. We are grateful for his life
and for his leadership, and we pray that you sustain him through the
power of your spirit. Give him strength and courage, and stamina,
and wisdom, as he continues to lead us through this dark time.

             There's still so much that we have to do.  Let us
especially remember our communities of color and those most
vulnerable throughout the world who today, and every day, are living
in a state of emergency. May each of us leave this encounter with
our vision of what we can do together restored, and our strength
renewed, to go forward and face the challenges that await us.
In the name of the One who came with hope and brought us light, we
pray. Amen.

             DR. HITT: Mr. President, on behalf of the Council I
want to thank you for meeting with us, especially so close to your
recent high profile events regarding the Congressional Black Caucus
HIV Initiative for communities of color and World AIDS Day spotlight
on international crisis.

             six and a half years ago I was very honored to stand
with you on the stage of the Palace Theater in Los Angeles, where you
outlined your commitment and genuine care and concern for those
living with HIV and a really good vision of how -- (inaudible.)   In
light of the efforts you made in securing unprecedented funding, for
starting the Office of AIDS Research, Office of National AIDS Policy,
convening the White House Conference on AIDS, establishing a goal of
a vaccine -- which are all landmarks I think you can be very proud of
-- I am just as honored to be with you here today.

             THE PRESIDENT:    Thank you.

             DR. HITT:  In addition, I want to thank you for the
humbling honor of serving this Council of incredibly dedicated and
committed individuals as its chair, and to tell you on behalf of all
of us how honored we are to serve your administration.

             Continuing with our task of offering advice to you, we
recently adopted our priorities, which reflect the community
realities, especially the urgent need for action in the racial and
ethnic communities, and in the youth of our country.  This epidemic
has been full of changes and challenges and we're really at a
crossroads in this epidemic. The media all the time tells us about
how people are living longer and this is a chronic, manageable
disease and less people are dying overall of AIDS.

              What they often fail to mention is that curb-prevention
efforts are not reaching the American pUblic.   Three hundred thousand
Americans don't even know they're HIV positive. And contrary to your
own stated goals, we are not decreasing the numbers of new people
infected.   And, in fact, in many communities the numbers are
increasing.

             In addition, thousands of HIV individuals cannot get the
early treatment the public health service guidelines tell them that
they should get, but, rather, they have to wait until they become
disabled from the disease before becoming eligible for treatment.



              Out of all our recommendations to date, there are a few
 items we would like to discuss with you today that need your specific
 presidential intervention now if we are going to achieve these·goals.
 Before we give you these few suggestions I want to emphasize to you
 that none of what we're recommending to you today would be possible
 without the tireless efforts of several people who serve you, this
 Council and the people living with HIV and AIDS -- especially in the
 White House and across administration.  It's because of them that
 you've had so many successes -- namely your own NAP Director, Sandy
 Thurman -- (applause) -- who made real your vision of a White House
 office that leads the national response to this epidemic, along with
 the Deputy Director Todd Summers and the Council's Executive
 Director, Dan Montoya.  And we appreciate the efforts very much.

              The Rabbi has a few words.

              RABBI EDELHEIT: Mr. President, we're honored to be with
 you today, especially so soon after your recent trip to the Mideast,
 where you courageously engaged in the making of peace, where you
 brought the gift of hope to the land of the Bible.

              During this week of Hanukkah, on the eve of Ramadan and
 one week before Christmas, we are all reminded that all these
 religious holidays promise us light in the darkest time of the year.
 As your Advisory Council, we want to help you fulfill your vision to
 bring the ligh,t of hope to those living with HIV/AIDS.

              HIV/AIDS still darkens the path to that bridge that
 crosses into the 21st century to which you have prophetically led us.
 We want to help you illumine the darkness that still covers the path
 to that bridge. We must warn you that there are some Americans who
 are in danger of being unable to cross when you lead our nation to
 that bridge into the 21st century.

              How can we be sure that the African American who has no
 access to clean needles, nor the newest combination of drug therapies
 will get to the other side? What do we need to do to make sure that
 the Latino youth who is not eligible for Medicaid will have access to
 primary care and still be able to work that he, too, can cross the
 bridge with other Americans?

               Here is a gift, Mr. President, from my four children.
 It is a dreidel -- that's right.   I'm impressed.   (Laughter.) It is
 the traditional spinning top we play -- and the four letters on it,
 Mr. President, stand for "a great miracle happened there." But, Mr.
 President, we know that there will be no one great miracle that ends
 HIV-AIDS.   So we are here to help revive your vision of zero rate of
 transmission and an equitable access of care to all persons battling
 HIV disease.

              We are here with you today, Mr. President, when a
 terrible political darkness has fallen over this land, because we
 want you to know that we will do whatever it takes to cross that
 bridge with you into the 21st century.

              DR. HITT: As I said, we fought through a lot of
 recommendations and tried to come up with some specific new
 initiatives that we wanted to bring to your attention.  And to start
 that off, I'm going to have Mr. Tom Henderson lead with one of the


       new initiatives.

       D,

                    MR. HENDERSON: Mr. President, when I stood, with many
       others during the stirring speeches of Bob Latoy (phonetic) and
       Elizabeth Glaser at the 1992 Democratic National Convention, I truly
       believed it would be my last national convention. But because of the
       remarkable progress we've made under your leadership in fighting this
       disease, I'm still here today, alive and well.

                   That's primarily because I'm fortunate enough to be
      employed and adequately insured and, therefore, able to enjoy the
      benefits of the new combination drug therapies.  For those who must
      rely on Medicaid, however, for their health care, the story is often
      much different.
                   On one hand, we have new public health service
      standard-of-care guidelines that call for early treatment of HIV
      prior to disability.  But on the other hand, in many cases, accessing
      Medicaid requires individuals to be already disabled.  Instead of
      being able to enjoy the benefits of living longer and better lives,
      many are still forced to wait until they're sick and unable to work
      before they can even begin treatment.

                   Not only is that inhumane, Mr. President, it's costly as
      well. Access to quality medical care for those living with HIV who
      are incarcerated is also a major problem.  In most cases, there is no
      preparation for connecting those individuals to medical care, once
      they are released back into the community.

                   In April of 1997, the Vice President asked HCFA to
      evaluate the possibility of expanding access to Medicaid for poor
      HIV-positive individuals, prior to becoming disabled.   HCFA/HHS has
      concluded that can't be done in: a budget-neutral manner. Now, some
      would suggest that the only near-term solution is to rely on the
      demonstration programs called for in the Jeffords/Kennedy
      legislation. Mr. President, we reject those conclusions. We believe
      there are two things that can be done now, without legislation, to
      solve this problem.  First, OMB currently requires finding offset
      cost savings within Medicaid only to determine budget neutrality.
      AnY savings generated within other federal programs can't be
      considered to determine budget neutrality.

                   Also, current policy only allows looking at a five-year
      budget window. We believe those hurdles can be overcome, but only if
      you make the decision to include a broader look at cost savings, and
      a longer budget window, and then direct the Secretary of HHS, and the
      Director of the OMB, to modify current policy to account for any
      resulting savings.

                    Second is the issue


