  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME:14-JAN-1999 18:54:05.00

  SUBJECT:   Tobacco AP story

  TO: J. Eric Gould ( CN=J. Eric Gould/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ:UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  O'Hara called to complain that we hadn't given a "we're doing it for kids"
  quote.

  Clinton Proposes Cigarette Tax Hike

                      By Laura Meckler
                      Associated Press Writer
                      Thursday, January 14, 1999; 5:56 p.m. EST

                      WASHINGTON (AP) -- President Clinton, who has been
  rolling out a
                      series of spending initiatives, will propose paying for
  them with a new
                      55-cent-a-pack cigarette tax, an administration official
  said Thursday.

                      The cigarette tax, which will surely be opposed by
  Republicans in
                      Congress, would raise some $8 billion for the domestic
  spending
                    initiatives, according to the official, who spoke on
  condition of anonymity.

                    The Clinton administration also will insist that states
  turn over some of the
                    money they will get from a giant settlement with tobacco
  companies, but
                    not this year. Clinton's plan doesn't count on that
  money until 2001,
                    meaning he does not need it for the fiscal 2000 budget
  he will submit to
                    Congress next month.

                      In recent weeks, Clinton has touted a number of new
  ideas but avoided
                      discussing how he would pay for them. Still, he has


 promised his budget
                   will be balanced without reaching into the budget
 surplus -- making it
                   nearly impossible to pay for new spending without new
 taxes.

                   On almost a daily basis, Clinton has put forward
 spending proposals,
                   including more money for after-school programs, new
 defense spending,
                   tax incentives for long-term care and money to help
 people with
                   disabilities go to work. The plans announced Thursday
 were for more
                   money to fight crime and to aid people with mental
 illnesses.

                      But congressional Republicans have consistently warned
 Clinton against
                      paying for his plans with increased taxes, including
 cigarette taxes.

                    "Raising taxes has never been the answer to our
 nation's problems,"  Rep.
                   Bill Archer, R-Texas, chairman of the House Ways and
 Means
                   Committee, wrote the president last week.

                      Archer's spokesman, Ari Fleischer,   said Thursday
 Republicans are
                      concerned that other tax increases may be in the ofting:
 "This (cigarette)
                      tax hike is not enough to pay for all the president's
 new spending
                      programs, not even close, "   Fleischer said.

                      Last year, Clinton proposed paying for new domestic
 spending with a
                      massive fine on the tobacco industry, envisioned as part
 of sweeping
                   tobacco legislation. But that legislation fell apart
 under criticism that it was
                   too hard on the industry.

                      The states responded by settling lawsuits with tobacco
 companies on their
                      own. Cigarette makers agreed to pay 46 states $206
 billion over 25
                   years, raising prices by 45 cents a pack. That
 contributed to a 30 percent
                   jump in cigarette prices in December, the government
 reported. Four
                   other states previously had settled their suits
 independently.

                      State lawmakers and governors are already debating how
 to spend the
                   money, but the federal government has long held that it
 has a right to much
                   of it. Many state lawsuits had sought to recover money


    spent by Medicaid
                        on sick smokers, and the federal government pays for at
    least half of
                        Medicaid costs in every state.

                       For a while, it seemed a deal was possible.
    Administration officials
                       indicated they might let states keep the money if they
    agreed to spend it on
                       certain public health; anti-smoking programs. But now CI
    inton envisions
                       using some of the money for the federal budget,
    beginning in 2001.

                        The White House still wants federal legislation imposing
    new restrictions
                        on the tobacco industry, while also giving the federal
    government a
                      financial settlement of its own. But that requires
    congressional action. The
                      administration hopes states will press Congress for such
    legislation if their
                      settlement money is on the line.

                        " I t ' s an attempt to create an environment and pressure
    for a bipartisan
                        agreement on tobacco,"   an administration official
    explained.

                       The states aren't pleased. They argue that some of the
    suits were based on
                       consumer fraud claims, not Medicaid. They say the
    federal government
                       should file its own lawsuit if it wants money.

                        Washington state Attorney General Christine Gregoire was
    told about the
                        administration's plans and spread the word to other
    states Wednesday
                      night. "The federal government didn't assist us in any
    way, " Gregoire said
                      Thursday. "Our taxpayers took the risk. We assumed all
    of the work. ' ,

                                       Copyright 1999 The Associated Press


