     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:15-JAN-1999 18:16:18.00

     SUBJECT:   Revised Weekly 1/15

     TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
       Chris revised the bioterrorism item==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ===========
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D25]MAIL49935171K.036 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF57504384100000010A020100000002050000009A52000000020000C750DCBAC6CC10C2F95C59
     42C084375DD403B44COC4A41A12404162342B99ABE09EEF724C33549E9969936873439DA676140
     EDCCA6361F45183AOACACF9A6842B2356A43D8636EOD6FF18B728EFD06602414F09479D067F4AE
     D5D155647D7A331893577060CB687FA57C17979D9847C074FED370CCDEB387892A332469CD5BAE

                               Automated Records Management System
                              Hex-Dump Conversion


                                       January 16, 1999

    MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

    FROM:                 Bruce Reed
                            Elena Kagan

    SUBJECT:              DPC Weekly Report


            Health Care -- Event to unveil your budget investments to combat
    bioterrorism and cyber-terrorism. On Friday, you are scheduled to participate in an
    event for you to announce your FY 2000 budget initiatives designed to prevent and
    combat two of the greatest, technologically-based threats to the nation's security --
    bioterrorism and cyber-terrorism. Last May, you issued two Presidential decision
    directives that require the federal government to develop and implement new
    counter-terrorism strategies. Your policy and this event, which we have developed
    in conjunction with the NSC, OMB, HHS and the Justice Department, responds to
    your directives by increasing your budget in these areas by $1.2 billion, an impressive
    12.5 percent increase over the FY 1999 budget request. Your proposals respond to
    very real threats, such as the sarin attack in the Tokyo subway and the Solar Sunrise
    attack on the Pentagon computers. Your budget increases will, among other things,
    invest at least $200 million in (1) new research and development in vaccines necessary
    to protect against the most fearsome biological weapons; (2) a new rapid response
    public health surveillance system that will make it possible for doctors and other
    health care personnel to respond effectively to a bioterrorist attack; (3) new computer
    intrusion detection networks, which will allow computer systems to work together to
    protect the government network from outside intruders; and (4) funds for the
    establishment of Cyber Corps, which will provide tuition assistance to college
    students studying computer science in return for a period of service safeguarding
    computers at agencies such as Social Security, FEMA, and FAA. These initiatives
    are strongly supported by virtually every credible national security expert in the
    country. In that vein, we are considering inviting former Senator Nunn to the event
    to serve as a possible participant and certain validator.

           Health Care -- Congressman Dingell's meeting request on Medicare and
    Patients' Bill of Rights:. Congressman Dingell has requested a meeting with senior
    White House staff to discuss the Medicare Commission and strategy around the Patients'
    Bill of Rights. He is extremely concerned about Senator Breaux's handling of the
    commission and the Senator's advocacy for a premium support program. He fears that the
    proposal could well significantly harm lower or lower middle-income Medicare
                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                  2

beneficiaries in tenns of higher premiums and cost-sharing. Most of all, he fears that we
may support a Breaux proposal and provide him with all the political cover he needs to
pump out a "severely flawed" policy. As such, recognizing that Senator Breaux is
requesting and-receiving technical assistance from the Administration, he will request (and
we are currently planning on agreeing to it) that we keep him integrated in any policy
development process; in particular, he, will want to be kept closely apprised of any policy in
this area that we might eventually support. On the Patients' Bill of Rights, he will likely
request that we give him some room and time to develop a strategy in the House to attract
more Republican cross-overs. He appears to believe (and we agree) that a notable change
on the liability (enforcement/remedies) section of the bill will be needed to accomplish this
goa\. However, he also appears to believe that it is premature to start negotiating with the
Republicans on this -- or virtually any initiative at this time. As a result, he is expected to
reintroduce the original Ganske/Dingell bill early this year, start negotiating in earnest
shortly thereafter, and continually ask you and the rest of the White House to do everything
possible to keep the pressure on the Congress to pass out a strong bill for your signature.
Since this meeting will occur immediately after the State of the Union Address, he should
be pleased with you in this regard.

        Health Care -- Appealing Grijalva vs. Shalala to the Supreme Court. In
October 1997, the Ninth District court ruled that when a Medicare HMO denies a claimed
benefit for a beneficiary, the denial is tantamount to government action, and so
beneficiaries are entitled to full due process under the Constitution. Despite the potential
for a public relations problem (i.e., "the same Administration advocating for a Patien~s' Bill
of Rights is now appealing a court decision designed to help patients"), the Department has
decided to appeal this decision. HHS is deeply troubled by the court ruling because,
among other things, they fear having to carry the liability of wrongful actions taken by an
HMO under contract with the program. (It's worth noting that since the district court's
decision, HCFA regulations have established strong notice and appeal rights for Medicare
beneficiaries enrolled in Medicare+Choice that are in compliance with your Patients' Bi1l
of Rights directive.) Although the HHS decision to appeal may be perceived by the media
and the public as backtracking on our commitment to the Patients' Bill of Rights, we have
authorized this position as long as it is oriented towards process rather than the substance
of the appeals process requirements. In addition, the Department is working to get
validation -- or at least non-opposition -- from the aging advocacy community. We have
also stressed to HHS that we are viewing this appeal by them to be a purely legal and
administrative issue that is being handled exclusively by the Department.

        Crime -- Democratic Crime Bill: Next Tuesday, Senator Leahy will reintroduce
a consensus Senate Democratic Leadership crime bill," The Safe Schools, Safe Streets and
Secure Borders Act of·1999." The bill extends and increases funding for many programs
authorized in the 1994 Crime Act, including the COPS Program, VAW A, and drug courts.
The legislation incorporates a scaled-back version of the Democratic juvenile crime bill
including provisions on the federal prosecution of juveniles as adults; grants for states to
                         Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                3

incarcerate violent youths; prevention programs for at-risk youth; and a number of
Administration-supported firearms measures including a prospective ban on gun ownership
for violent juveniles ("juvenile Brady"). In addition, the bill contains provisions on money
laundering, terrorism, and international crime. The leadership is not planning any press
surrounding the introduction of the bill.

       Crime -- National Instant Check System (NICS): On Monday, the FBI released
new data showing that in the first 41 days the NICS was operational (11/30/98-111 0/99),
11,584 gun sales were blocked to prospective gun buyers -- most of whom were convicted
felons. Moreover, the FBI informed relevant state and federal law enforcement agencies
of the 1,541 prospective gun buyers .who had outstanding arrest warrants. Overall, the
NICS conducted over 1 million background checks for the 26 states and territories for
which it completes all gun sale checks, and the 11 states for which it conducts checks for
long gun sales only. The remaining states that complete their own checks performed'
462,298 background checks. The FBI does not have information on how many of these
sales were denied.


        Womens Issues -- Women's Health Clinic Safety: This weekend, we are
planning to leak the $4.5 million investment in your budget to improve security for
women's health clinics that provide abortions. In recent years, violence against women's
health clinics and their doctors and nurses has escalated. Under this proposal, the
Department of Justice would make security assessments and enhancements available to
clinics deemed to be at high risk of violence. Security enhancements to improve safety
and better protect health care providers and their patients may include closed circuit camera
systems, improved lighting, motion detectors, alarm systems or bullet-resistant windows.



        Welfare Reform -- Wisconsin Welfare Reform Study: The first major study of
individuals leaving the welfare rolls in Wisconsin shows impressive employment results
while also highlighting the challenges some people face as they leave welfare. The study
is particularly important because it provides an early glimpse at how the least job ready
individuals left on the rolls are faring -- Wisconsin's caseload had already declined nearly
70 percent at the time the surveyed individuals left the rolls.

        Most people -- 83 percent -- had worked for some period since they left welfare and
62 percent were currently working at the time of the survey. Most were working full time,
with an average wage of $7.42 per hour. The 38 percent who were not working at the time
of the survey gave a variety of reasons including that they could not find a job that paid
enough, they didn't have the needed skills or experience, individual or family health
problems, child care problems, or work performance issues. Most of those who were not
working received another type of cash benefit (such as SSI or Unemployment Insurance),
                                 Automated Records Management S)'3Wlfi
                                 Hex-Dump ConversiQn.
                                                                                                       4

      and/or non-cash benefits such as housing subsidies, Medicaid, or Food Stamps, and nearly
      20 percent lived with someone else who was working.

               An encouraging finding was that 87 percent of all those surveyed had some type of
      health insurance. A significant number of individuals did indicate they were having
      difficulty making ends meet, although they also experienced many of the same problems
      while on welfare. There are some indications that Food Stamps may not be getting to all
      those who are eligible (as noted below [in other weekly item], USDA is taking steps
      nationwide to ensure states provide people with Food Stamps to which they are entitled,
      even if they are no longer on TANF). These findings confirm that people are moving from
      welfare to work at unprecedented rates, but there is a continued need to monitor closely
      and to invest in services to help the least job ready families make a successful transition
      from welfare to work and succeed in the workforce, as we are doing in our
      Welfare-to-Work, Access to Jobs transportation, housing vouchers, and child care budget
      initiatives.

             Welfare Reform -- New York Food Stamp Application Review: In November,
      we told you that both USDA and HHS are investigating whether New York City is
      inappropriately requiring families to wait until their second visit to a human services office
      before letting them apply for Food Stamps and Medicaid. While HHS' review is
      on-going, USDA has documented a number of problems resulting in the delay of Food
      Stamp applications and termination of Food Stamp benefits. The agency has shared its
      preliminary findings with the state and city and are expecting a response shortly, after
      which the agency will produce a final report. If the state does not comply, USDA can
      issue a formal warning and then impose penalties or seek an injunction to force
      compliance.

               While the particular situation in New York is being resolved, USDA is sending
      letters to all state commissioners to ensure that they understand requirements of the Food
      Stamp law which provide families the opportunity to apply for Food Stamps and receive
      benefits to which they are entitled, even if they are not eligible for TANF. We are
      encouraging HHS to take similar action and will keep you apprised of our progress.

              Livable Communities--Better America Bonds: Since the Vice President's
      announcement of the Administration's livable communities announcement on January 11,
      a number of Members of Congress from both sides of the aisle have indicated interest in
      the Better America Bonds (BABs) proposal and the livable communities agenda. On
      Friday, Bud Shuster, Chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee,
      announced support for BABs. In addition, a coalition of Republicans and Democrats have
      formed a Senate working group on smart growth. Finally, Senator Daschle's staff has
      indicated strong interest in working with the Administration on BABs. DPC will be
      working closely with Legislative Affairs, NEC, OVP, and Treasury on working to build a
      bipartisan coalition of support in the next couple of weeks.


