RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TlME:16-JAN-1999 13:15:55.00

SUBJECT:   press paper for education leak

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is draft press paper for Bruce to use for the leak of the SOTU
accountability stuff. You should know that the same material is included
in the SOTU and SOTU Race material on education I have prepared.====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D71]MAIL48233371S.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043E0040000010A02010000000205000000C72A000000020000A64E5F5C9BB3D985F57F26
93E017ED6E708CD5A3D8B8C797356372CODD468E11C5C968A935F19FFE8FBDAOA7522E887821D7
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

    PRESIDENT CLINTON'S PLAN TO STRENGTHEN ACCOUNT ABILITY FOR
                       RESULTS IN EDUCATION

        In his State of the Union Address, President Clinton will announce a package of
proposals designed to hold students and schools to high academic standards, and to make sure
that schools, school districts and states fulfill their responsibilities to provide students with a high
quality education. These proposals will help ensure that in every state and in every' school,
student achievement increases across the board, and that special attention is paid to help boost
achievement for our most disadvantaged students. Specifically, the President will announce that
he will send Congress legislation later this year, to reauthorize the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act, that will require states and school districts participating in these programs to:

Establish High Standards and Aligned Assessments. The 1994 enactment of the
Administration's Goals 2000 program marked a sea-change in federal education policy by
insisting that states set the same high standards for all students and measure student and school
progress toward reaching the standards. President Clinton's new proposals will continue to hold
states to this requirement, and begin another sea-change by instituting new measures to hold
students and schools accountable for meeting the standards.

Issue School Report Cards. States will be required to produce annual report cards, easily
understood by and widely distributed to parents and the public, for each school, school district
and the state as a whole. The report cards will include information on student achievement,
teacher professional qualifications, class size, school safety and other factors that will help
parents judge the overall performance of the schools. Where appropriate, the report cards will
show academic achievement of ethnic and racial subgroups, to ensure accountability for helping
all students to achieve. Thirty-six states currently publish or require local school districts to
publish school report cards, and five additional states will begin the practice in the next two
years. However, a recent report by Public Agenda shows that only 31 % of parents had seen these
report cards, and that parents and taxpayers still have difficulty getting the information they need.
 President Clinton's proposal will help ensure that parents in every state have access to the
information they need to determine the quality of their schools and identify areas in which
improvement is needed.

End Social Promotion. States and school districts would be required to end social promotion --
the practice of promoting students from grade to grade regardless of whether they mastered
required material and are academically prepared to do the work at the next level. Students who
are promoted without regard to their achievement fall even further behind their classmates, arid
are more likely to lack basic skills upon high school graduation.

To ensure that this requirement helps more students succeed, rather than simply increasing the
number of students who are held back, states and school districts would be required to show how
they will help students meet promotion standards on time by (l) implementing strategies to
diagnose students early and identify and provide extra help to those who need it; (2)
strengthening learning opportunities in classrooms with clear standards, small classes with
well-prepared teachers, high quality professional development, and use of proven instructional
                             Hex-Dump Conversion

practices; (3) providing extended learning time for students who need extra help, including
after-school and summer school; and (4) developing a serious action plan to give students who
still do not meet the standards intensive intervention with appropriate instructional strategies,
rather than simply having them repeat an entire grade.

In 1996 President Clinton challenged every state and school district to adopt policies to end
social promotion and require students to pass high school graduation exams. Twenty six
states have high school exit exams, and last year four states adopted policies that linked
promotion to state tests. A growing number of urban school districts, including Boston,
Philadelphia, New York City and Washington D.C. are adopting similar policies. In
Chicago, where they ended the practice of social promotion three years ago, students get
extra help after school and those who fail end-of-the-year tests attend summer school.
Citywide math and reading scores have go~e up three years in a row, with the largest gains
coming from some of the most disadvantaged students. President Clinton's FY 2000 budget
proposes to triple the funding from $200 million to $600 million for after-school and
summer school programs that will give students the extra help they need to succeed.

Put Qualified Teachers in the Classroom. According to the National Commission on
Teaching and America's Future, a growing body of research shows that the knowledge and skills
teachers bring to the classroom is one of the most important factors in improving student
achievement. Yet too often states permit individuals who do not meet minimum standards for
certification begin teaching, and school systems often assign teachers to teach subjects for which
they lack adequate preparation. Approximately 50,000 teachers are hired by school districts each
year on "emergency" certificates, which means they do not meet state certification requirements.
Nearly one quarter of secondary school teachers lack even a minor in their main teaching field,
and in schools with the highest minority enrollment, students have a less than 50% change of
having a math or science teacher with a license and degree in the field. Students in schools with
the highest concentrations of poverty -- those who often need the most help from the best
teachers -- are most likely to be in classrooms with teachers who are not fully qualified.
President Clinton's proposal will require states to adopt competency tests for new teachers,
requiring them to demonstrate subject matter knowledge and teaching expertise. States and
school districts will also be required to phase out, over five years, the use of teachers with
emergency certificates and the practice of assigning teachers to subjects for which they lack
adequate preparation. President Clinton's proposal will also provide resources to help states
strengthen teacher certification standards, implement competency testing for new teachers,
provide training to current teachers, and providing incentives to recruit more highly qualified
teachers.

Turn Around Low Performing Schools. States will be required to identify the schools with
the lowest achievement levels and the least improvement, and begin to take corrective action to
tum them around. These corrective actions, based on a careful assessment of each school's
needs, would include steps such as extensive teacher training, support to improve school
discipline, and the implementation of proven approaches to school reform. If these actions do
not result in improved student achievement within 2 years, additional corrective actions must be
taken, including permitting students to attend other public schools; reconstituting the school,
                                    Automated Records Management System
                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

       fairly evaluating the staff and making staff changes as necessary; or closing the school and
       reopening it as a charter school or with a new staff. Nineteen states currently take similar actions
       to help improve low performing schools, and experience demonstrates that when these
       interventions carefully implemented and are accompanied by the resources to support change,
       schools improve and student achievement increases. The President's FY 2000 budget contains
       $200 million to help states begin taking these steps immediately.


