RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JAN-1999 20:08:44.00

SUBJECT:   final -- welfare to work remarks

TO: Joshua S. Gottheimer ( CN=Joshua S. Gottheimer/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Andrea Kane ( CN=Andrea Kane/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP@ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: shesol ( shesol @ aol.com @ inet [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Final 01/22/99 7:30pm
Jeff Shesol

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS ON WELFARE-TO-WORK INITIATIVES
THE WHITE HOUSE
January 25, 1999

        Acknowledgments: Secs. Herman, Shalala, Slater, Cuomo TBD; Reps. Ben
Cardin & Ruben Hinojosa; Janice LaChance, Dir. of OPM; Aida Alvarez,
Administrator of SBA; Gov. Mel Carnahan; Robert Higgins, Fleet Bank
President and Chief Operating Officer; Carlos Garcia

        In 1992, when I ran for President, I told Americans that there
were few things more important than reforming our welfare system. A lot
of people agreed that we should change welfare, but not everybody believed
that we could do it. After all, this was a system that had trapped
generations in a culture of dependency; there were neighborhoods where,
quite simply, no one worked.  The governmentO,s compact with the people
seemed, somehow, to have broken down.  The wrong values were being
rewarded; and the right ones, it appeared, were being punished.

        In the past six years we have done much to change all that.  When
I became President, I worked with 43 states, freeing them from federal


strictures, enabling them to create new, innovative programs that move
Americans from welfare to work; and, in 1996, I signed the landmark
bipartisan welfare reform law, ending the old system as we knew it.  I
said then that O&our nationO,s answer to the problems of poverty will no
longer be a never-ending cycle of welfare; it will be the dignity, the
power, and the ethic of work.OB Today, if we stay on the new path we have
forged, I believe we will break that cycle of dependence for good, and it
will be one of our greatest accomplishments as a nation.

        Already, even our greatest hopes are being surpassed. Welfare
rolls are the smallest in 30 years, down by 44 percent since I took
office.  In the same period, the number of welfare recipients who are
working -- taking that first step toward responsibility -- has tripled.
And every state is meeting the work participation standards required under
welfare reform: Simply put, America is working again -- proving that
something as basic as a full-time job can transform a life or a whole
family.

        The welfare system is no longer holding people back; it is helping
them move ahead. Welfare reform alone could not achieve that.   That is
why have continued to support health care and child care for low-income
families.  And we have doubled the Earned Income Tax Credit, a targeted
tax cut that is especially generous to low-income working families.  For a
family of four with an annual income of less than $30,000, that tax cut is
worth about $1,000.

         I have said that if we are going to require able-bodied people to
take jobs, we have to make sure as a nation that there are jobs for them
to take.   In our strong and growing economy, the true engine of job growth
is the private sector. Two years ago, I asked five companies to lead a
national effort to hire people off welfare. Today, our Welfare to Work
partnership includes 10,000 companies who have hired, retained, and
promoted hundreds of thousands of people. ItO,s not a charity; itO,s good
for families and good for the bottom line. weO,ve heard some of those
success stories this morning; and I know, between Eli Segal and companies
like Fleet, we will be hearing many more in the years to come.

        Smaller caseloads and bigger paychecks are important signs of
progress.  But they are not the only ones. The sense of pride, the sense
of security of newly working Americans -- these are the best measures of
our success. As more Americans gain the confidence that a full-time job
can bring, we gain more confidence that our new strategy is working -- and
strengthen our determination to do more.

        We know what works. We know how to turn long-term welfare
recipients into full-time workers. Now, as we move into the 21st Century,
we must ensure that even more Americans move from welfare to work.  In my
State of the Union Address last week, I said we can help another 200,000
Americans make that transition.  To achieve that goal, I propose that we
renew the successful Welfare-to-Work program, which is set to expire in
the year 2000. My balanced budget includes $1 billion to help states and
communities build upon their record of success.

        My budget dedicates $150 million of those funds to low-income
fathers who fulfill their duty to work, to pay child support, and to
become part of their childrenO,s lives again.  Every father has that
responsibility to his children and the mother of his children.  But, as
Carlos Garcia just told us, some fathers have difficulty getting or
keeping a job, and that is why many states are using some of their
welfare-to-work funds to help committed fathers of children on welfare


fathers who sign personal responsibility contracts -- to get jobs. My
balanced budget will help ensure every state can support fathers who
support their families.

        But there is more we must do. America has achieved the longest
peacetime expansion in our history. And as our economy continues to grow,
businesses reach farther and wider to hire new talent, bringing more
welfare recipients into the workplace. We can -- and must -- use this
moment to make permanent our gains on welfare.  Our prosperity gives us
this opportunity, and makes it an obligation.

        We must, therefore, do more to help welfare recipients who remain
on the rolls.  In many cases, they are the ones who face the greatest
challenges to entering the workforce. We know that if you canO,t get to
work, you canO,t go to work. Two-thirds of new jobs are in the suburbs,
but three-quarters of welfare recipients live in cities or rural areas.
That is why my balanced budget will double the funding to get workers to
the workplace.  I am also announcing a 50 percent increase in housing
vouchers -- to help families find affordable homes, avoid those difficult
commutes, and to get them closer to a new job and a better, brighter
future.

        Thanks to the efforts of companies like Fleet, officials like
Governor Carnahan, and working Americans like Carlos Garcia, more families
are enjoying that kind of future.  Across our nation, governors and mayors
and county officials are joining with the private sector to develop new
ways to move people from welfare to work.  I urge the Congress to renew an
investment that is expanding opportunity and rewarding responsibility for
millions of Americans.  In that way, we can continue to make good on what
I called, two years ago, D&a historic chance to make welfare what it was
meant to be: a second chance, not a way of life.DB We can go farther
toward fulfilling our nationD,s basic bargain -- to reward the hard work
of our citizens, and to give them the tools to succeed in changing and
exciting times.  Thank you.


