RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mike Cohen <mikec_20904@yahoo.com> ( Mike Cohen <mikec_20904@yahoo.com> [ U

CREATION DATE/TlME:27-JAN-1999 08:32:52.00

SUBJECT:   Ed-Flex guidance

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]   )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ]     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Ed-Flex is being marked-up in Senate this morning. attached guidance
presumes that none of the D. amendments, like adding class size, pass, and
that bill is then reported out with few changes on a bipartisan vote.  If
something else actually occurs, I will send changes.




DO YOU YAHOO!?
Get your free @yahoo.com address at http://mail.yahoo.com
 - edflex.wpd==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D87]MAIL49090772F.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043EC050000010A0201000000020500000009150000000200OOOAD8A4186102877A95565A
7AOA4D668BEBE1C42EC43A23EB9D3F94377145CF056F6537A247C2B349Cl199938C534E112211A
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion                        Hex-Dump Conversion

                          THE CASE FOR INVESTING
               . PART OF THE UNIFIED SURPLUSES IN EQUITIES

In his State of the Union Address, the President proposed that 62 percent of the unified budget
surpluses over the next 15 years be transferred to the Social Security Trust Fund, in order to
increase the ability of that Fund to meet promised Social Security benefit obligations. The
President further proposed that about a fifth of the transferred surpluses be invested in equities to
achieve higher returns for Social Security, helping to extend the life of the Social Security trust
fund to 2055. This action does, however, raise understandable concerns about the possible
extension of political influence on investment decisions and the risks that this might pose to the
economy and the Trust Fund. Any system of collective investment can and must address these
concerns. That is why we will work with Congress to design a system that observes five core
principles:

1.     Private Sector Managers Selected by Competitive Bidding. Social Security
       beneficiaries deserve the same efficient management and market returns that people
       receive in their private pensions and personal savings. The actual investments should be
       managed by private sector money-managers selected by competitive bidding.

2.     Independently Managed and Non-Political. There would need to be wholly
       independent oversight of investment that was insulated from political influence. The
       choice of investment managers should be done by an independent board whose sole
       responsibility would be to pick fund managers so as to maximize the performance of the
       investments. This would ensure that the investment of funds was carried out with zero
       government involvement.

3.     Limited. The share of Trust Fund assets invested in equities ought to be kept at a very
       modest level -- both to limit risk to the Fund and to ensure that collective investments
       never account for more than a small fraction of the stock market as a whole.

4.     Broad-based, Neutral, and Non-Discretionary. Assets should be invested
       proportionately in the broadest array of publicly listed equities, with no room for
       discretion in adding or deleting companies and no room for active involvement in
       corporate decisions. Neither the government nor the private sector managers it selects
       to undertake investment on its behalf should be involved in "stock picking." As a
       shareholder the Funds should be entirely passive; one way to accomplish this would be to
       mandate that proxies be voted in the same proportions as other shareholders.
       Alternatively, if the investments were spread among a number of managers so that no one
       manager had a large share of the total market, the managers could vote the shares in the
       interests of the share holders, just as mutual fund managers do today.

              No Market Timing or Stock Picking. In essence, the managers should be on
               autopilot in investing the funds. They should have little or no discretion in the
               investment of Trust Fund assets -- so they cannot "time the market" or pick
               individual stocks_

5.     Lowest-Cost. Collective investment needs to be administratively simple and achieved at
       the lowest available cost -- both to obtain the highest possible returns and to further
       enhance the system's transparency and independence.
                                                                             <._   ~ufOmated Records Management System
                                                                                   .oex-Dump Conversion
              WHY INVEST PART OF THE SURPLUSES IN EQUITIES?                                               I
1.   Investing Part of the Surpluses in Equities Would Raise the Rate of Return That
     Workers Would Experience on Their Contributions into the Social Security System.

          Historically, the Trust Fund has been invested exclusively in government bonds.
           While these bonds have the upside that they are essentially risk-free, they have the
           downside that they pay a relatively low rate of return on average. Adding
           equities to the Trust Fund portfolio would allow the Social Security system to
           enjoy a higher rate of return, on average. Between 1959 and 1996, the difference
           between the average annual rate of return earned on stocks and the rate earned on
           bonds held by the Trust Fund -- the "equity premium" -- was 3.84 percent.

          Raising the rate of return on the Trust Fund would mean that the Social Security
           system could be brought into long-tenn actuarial balance with smaller reductions
           in benefits, or smaller increases in revenue, or both.

     .     Investing part of the transferred surpluses in equities accounts for about one-third
            of the improvement in the actuarial balance achieved under the President's
            framework.

2.   Investing Part of the Trust Fund in Equities Would Bring Social Security into Line
     with the "Best Practice" of Both Private- and Public-Sector Pension Plans.

           The overwhelming number of private-sector defined-benefit pension plans invest
           part of their reserves in equities. Among large private-sector defined benefit
           plans (those with more than 100 participants), more than 40 percent of total assets
           of were invested in equities.

          Similarly, 65 percent of the portfolio backing the defined-benefit pension plan of
           the Federal Reserve System is invested in equities.

            In aggregate, state and local pension plans hold fully 10 percent ofthe overaII
            stock market.



           WHY IS EQUITY INVESTMENT BETTER UNDERTAKEN
     THROUGH THE TRUST FUND THAN THROUGH INDIVIDUALAcCOUNTS?

1.   Administrative Costs Associated with Trust Fund Investment Would Be Much
     Lower.

          For example, the equity-fund component of the Federal Thrift Savings Plan (TSP)
            incurs annual investment-management costs of only about one basis point (one
           one-hundredth of a percentage point). Thus, for every $100 in equity assets
           under management, the TSP pays only about one cent per year in management
           fees.


                                                  -2-
                             Hex~Dump Conversion


          By contrast, asset management fees for individual accounts such as IRAs typically
           run in the neighborhood of 100 basis points or more -- or about $1 per year for
           every $100 under management.

                  The asset management fees associated with lRAs are thus typically at least
                  100 times larger than the fees associated with centralized investment.

          Management fees are extremely important in determining the buildup of assets.
           A fee of one basis point paid every year for 40 years would reduce the
           accumulated balance by only about 0.2 percent. By contrast, a fee of 100 basis
           points would reduce the accumulated balance by about 20 percent.

2.   Financial Risk Can Be Spread Much More Effectively If Equity Investment Is
     Undertaken Through the Trust Fund than Through Individual Accounts.

          Financial risk that arises through equity-investment of the Trust Fund can be
           spread both across the entire population participating in the system at any given
           point in time, and over time. Indeed, provided equity investment is undertaken
           through the Trust Fund, the consequences of market fluctuations can potentially
           be spread over many generations.

          By contrast, in a system of individual accounts, the consequences of market
           fluctuations must -- by definition -- be borne by each individual. If the market
           happens to do well during a certain individual's lifetime, that individual can enjoy
           a relatively prosperous retirement. If the market does poorly, that individual's
           financial security in retirement may be jeopardized.




              WHY CAN WE BE CONFIDENT THAT TRUST FUND
          INVESTMENT IN EQUITIES WON'T DISRUPT THE MARKET?

1.   This Is Not Direct Government Investment -- It Is Investment Undertaken by
     Private-Sector Managers Selected by Competitive Bidding.

          A bedrock principle of the President's program is that the government itself
           should not be a participant in the market. All transactions will be executed by
           private-sector managers.

          The Thrift Savings Plan selects managers in a similar way, placing its portfolio
           with managers that bid the lowest cost. These managers also vote the shares of
           stock they control.

2.   Institutional Rules Can Be Established to Create Very Strong "Fire Walls" Against


                                           -3-
                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
     Political Interference.

           The experience of state and local pension funds points to several elements of
            institutional design that have been essential in that context in helping prevent
            political interference.

           Investments can be made in a broad-based, neutral, and non-discretionary way.
            Through passive investing in an index, private-sector managers will not be
            involved in "stock picking."

            History shows that political influence can be avoided. The overwhelming bulk of
            assets in state and local plans are invested wisely -- not in politically motivated
            ways.

           For example, the Federal Thrift Savings Plan (TSP) invests $77 billion in stocks
            and bonds, with more than half in stocks. Francis Cavanaugh, the first executive
            director of the Board responsible for TSP investments, says that investments have
            been made without political interference. Specifically, in a recent news article,
            Cavanaugh said, "Can it be done? It's been done ... We did it."

3.   The Equity Holdings of the Social Security System under the President's Program
     Would Be Modest Relative to the Holdings of Other Major Players in the Market.

           Under the President's program, the Social Security system would hold an average
            of about 4 percent of the aggregate U.S. stock market.

            The top 10 largest private-sector portfolio managers all have more than one
            percent of the market under management. Fidelity, the largest such private-sector
            manager, has about 4 percent of the market under its management.

            By contrast, state and local governments in aggregate already hold about
            10 percent of the market.




                                            -4-
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
              SAVING SOCIAL SECURITY NOW, WHILE.
       MEETING AMERICA'S CHALLENGES FOR THE 21st CENTURY

In His State of the Union Address, President Clinton Put Forward His Framework To Save Social
Security Now, While Meeting America's Challenges for the 21st Century. The President and Vice
President's framework strengthens Social Security by:

       Using The Budget Surplus To Help Save Social Security And Invest A Portion In the Stock Market
       To Seek Higher Returns. The President proposes to transfer 62 percent of the projected budget
       surpluses over the next 15 years -- $2.8 trillion -- to the Social Security system. The President proposes
       to invest less than one-quarter of the transferred surpluses in the private sector to achieve higher returns
       for Social Security -- just as any state or local government, or private pension does -- after working with
       Congress to devise a mechanism to ensure that the investments are made independently and
       without political interference by private sector managers with minimum administrative costs.

..     This Framework Will Save Social Security Until 2055 - And the President Will Work With
       Congress To Save It Until At Least 2075. Transferring over 60 percent of the surpluses to Social
       Security and investing a portion in the market will keep Social Security solvent until 2055. The
       President believes we must work on a bipartisan basis to make the hard-headed but sensible and
       achievable choices to save Social Security until at least 2075. As part of this effort, President Clinton'
       believes that we must:

       (1)     Reduce Poverty Among Single Women. Reduce poverty among elderly women -- particularly
               widows, who have a poverty rate nearly twice the overall poverty rate for older Americans; and

       (2)     Eliminate The Earnings Test. Eliminate the confusing and out-dated earnings test so that we
               stop discouraging work and earnings among older Americans.

After Social Security Reform Is Secured - Consistent With the President's "Save Social Security First"
Commitment - the President Proposes To:

       Strengthen Medicare for the 21st Century. The President's framework will reserve 15 percent of the
       projected surpluses for Medicare, securing Medicare until 2020. The President further called for
       bipartisan reforms that would allow Medicare to be secure until 2020 while also providing prescription
       drug benefits.

       Reserves $536 Billion for Tax Credits to Create New Universal Savings Accounts - USA
       Accounts. The President's framework will reserve 12 percent ofthe projected surpluses to create new
       Universal Savings Accounts (USAs) so all working Americans can build wealth to meet their
       retirement needs. To help Americans save and to strengthen our current pension system, we would
       provide Americans a flat tax credit to make contributions into their USA Account. In addition, we
       would provide additional tax credits to match a portion of an individual's savings -- with more help for
       lower-income workers.

       Prepare America for the Challenges of the Future. The President's framework will reserve II
       percent of the projected surpluses for military readiness and other pressing domestic priorities.

                          A FISCALLY RESPONSmLE PROPOSAL:
                 PUBLICLY HELD DEBT FALLS TO LOWEST LEVEL SINCE 1917

        Debt-to-GDP Ratio Will Fall to Lowest Level Since 1917. As a share of the economy, the
        publicly held debt increased from 26% in 1981 to 50% in 1993. Since President Clinton took
        office, the publicly held debt as a share of GDP has dropped to 44 percent. And under the
        President's framework, current projections suggest that the publicly held debt, as a share of GDP,
        will fall from 44% today to less than 10% in 2014 -- its lowest level since 1917.


