RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-JAN-1999 11:47:50.00

SUBJECT:   this time the guidance is attached

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Sorry--I forgot to paste before sending!


Guidance on Senate Mark-Up of Ed-Flex Partnership Act
January 28, 1999


Q.      Does the Administration support the Ed-Flex bill marked-up by
the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee yesterday?

A.      The President strongly endorses the principle of greater flexibility in
federal education programs tied to greater accountability for results, and
last year he supported a responsible Ed-Flex bill. While the President is
prepared to consider a separate Ed-Flex bill consistent with the one he
supported last year, he believes it would make much more sense to consider
Ed-Flex as part of the overall reauthorization of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act. This will ensure that Congress designs Ed-Flex t
o fit the federal education programs of the next five years, rather than
the last five years. The AdministrationO,s ESEA reauthorization bill, to
be transmitted in March, will contain such a proposal.

Q.      How does the Ed-Flex bill being considered by the Senate fit
with the accountability requirements that the President proposed in his
State of the Union Address?

A.      This Ed-Flex bill is consistent with the PresidentO,s belief in giving
states more flexibility in exchange for greater accountability, and the
bill promotes higher standards, student testing, school report cards, and
a procedure for intervening in failing schools. But because the
presidentO,s State of the Union proposals have not been enacted, this bill
does not specifically address them.  This is another reason to postpone
consideration of Ed-Flex until the ESEA reauthorization. We will then
will work with the Congress to ensure that an Ed-Flex bill provision
reinforces, rather than undermines, the accountability measures the
President called for.

Q.      Yesterday~,s vote in the Senate Committee was partisan, with
Republicans voting in favor of Ed-Flex and Democrats not participating in
the mark-up at all. What does this say about the ability of the Congress
to work together on Ed-Flex and other education issues?

A.      This is a proposal that has all the potential to be bipartisan
from start to finish, with support from the Administration, the Republican
leadership and key Democrats including Sens. Wyden and Kennedy. We should
do everything in our power to keep it bipartisan, and to set a tone for


all of the other work we and the Congress will do in education this year.
Therefore, it is particularly unfortunate that the Senate majority
yesterday chose to mark-up this bill at a time when many Committee
Democrats were unable to participate. The President has said many times
that politics must stop at the schoolhouse door.  Unfortunately, instead
of putting politics aside on this important issue, the majority has tried
to turn Ed-Flex into a partisan issue.


