RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-JAN-1999 12:31:22.00

SUBJECT:   weekly report 1/29/99

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D40)MAIL44743613S.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BC100000010A02010000000205000000B77F000000020000924B9DB165B08D7F30C45A
A8DC2B9566F802F60C6AE7011977BOEA5D661D1DC220FD6A40974170D411C46E2C2588050F9800
006F6597DBA3E681628E34D780BF5FB86D4978A36522D93C1E49BCE880F5CC5CD796BCA55ABE1E
C464ECCCC277FFC96CD9426146FA6977FA512A494CA470A11E22BA64633311B240BB1AF19B55CO
F0818E6B15AA514EA638467C38FFA5B5ED5B94926E1AFA21120C1A99A1D9FAC7630E9DFF94988F
C304A5BCF2E258091153CFEF6A515D885349C29CF88DB22F5FB4E848683B232E28AF81F2A15736
ED4E6FC469981E92C401DF97A90833550FEE28C3AOOC19AD169C5A946AFBD550F355D45974DE14
                               Hex-Dump Conversion


                                       January 30,1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                    Bruce Reed
                         Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:                 DPC Weekly Report

       Health Care -- Medicare Commission Update:             Your Wednesday event
highlighting the need to dedicate a portion of the budget surplus to the Medicare trust
fund was extremely well received by the Democrats and even by Senator Breaux_
Professor Uwe Reinhardt .effectively 'validated the economic need and rationale for the
dedication of these revenues for this purpose. While the event went very well, it also
highlighted the fact that the Medicare Commission has yet to formally acknowledge the
need for these revenues. In addition, it is important to note that Democrats on the
Medicare Commission, with the exception of Senator Kerrey, remain extremely
disturbed about Senator Breaux's lack of responsiveness to their concerns about his
current proposal. Following this week's Commission meeting, Senator Kennedy
delivered a scorching critique of Senator Breaux's premium support proposal and other
elements of the Chairman's mark, including provisions that increase the age of eligibility
to 67 and require beneficiaries to pay copayments for home health services. We are
working with HHS, OMB, and key White House advisors to develop options around the
Commission for your consideration. These include the development of principles of
reform, a strategy to work with the Commission to improve its current proposal and
shape it into an acceptable package, or the development of your own counter-proposal.

        Education -- Reaction to ESEA Proposals: Overall initial reaction to your
education proposals has generally been positive within the education community and in
the press. The education community is supportive of your proposals, understands
clearly the need to meet the challenges of raising standards, turning around failing
schools, ending social promotions and the use of unqualified teachers. At the same
time, many are worried about their capacity to meet these challenges, and will be
looking to the Administration's budget and ESEA reauthorization proposals for
financial, programmatic and technical support to carry out the needed reforms. Your
proposals have also generated considerable press attention, with several stories this
week in the New York Times, Washington Post, and USA Today. These stories have
focused on the content of your proposals -- particularly on the pro's and con's of ending
social promotion -- and on the threat that states and school systems could lose funding if
they fail to implement them. There have been a number of favorable editorials,
including one by Diane Ravitch in the Wall Street Journal, NYU education professor
                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                 2

John Zimmerman in the New York Times, and Timothy Noah in Slate magazine.
Criticisms of your proposal have come from David Broder, who charges that your
proposals merely replicate and add a layer of federal bureaucracy to what the states are
already doing, and Lamar Alexander, Checker Finn are quoted in a number of stories
criticizing your proposal as a federal takeover of state and local education systems.

        Education -- Ed-Flex: The Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions
Committee marked-up and reported out an Ed-Flex bill last week, on an 11-0 partisan
vote. The bill would give authority to waive selected federal education requirements to
states that have academic standards, assessments, school report cards and a mechanism
for intervening in failing schools. No Democrats were present at the session, which
occurred shortly after several key votes in the impeachment trial. Kennedy, Dodd,
Harkin, Reed and other committee Democrats (except Wellstone) reluctantly supported
a similar version of this bill last year and expect to ultimately vote for it again when it
comes to the floor. They and we would much prefer to address Ed-Flex as part of
ESEA reauthorization, and we expect it will be taken up in that context regardless of the
fate of this separate bill. Sen. Lott has made Ed-Flex a top priority, and has indicated
that the Senate will take it up shortly. Republicans hope to score a quick, bipartisan
victory with a strong local control message. DPC is working with Sen. Democrats to
develop a series of amendments that will attempt to (1) strengthen the accountability
provisions in the underlying bill, particularly by including all of the accountability
provisions in your State of the Union Address; (2) counter the Republican message with
an amendment that would also authorize the Class Size Reduction initiative for the full
seven years as your originally proposed, and (3) ensure that Ed-Flex is revisited as part
of the ESEA reauthorization by sunsetting this provision when ESEA reauthorization is
complete.

        Crime -- National Instant Check System (NICS): On Thursday, the U.S. District
Court of D.C. denied the NRA's motion for a preliminary injunction to block the FBI from
retaining records on gun purchasers as part of the NICS. As you know, the FBI's policy of
temporarily retaining certain records is intended to ensure the integrity and effectiveness of
the NICS while protecting the privacy of gun purchasers.

        Crime -- Gun Show Directive: In response to your November 6, 1998 directive, the
Treasury and Justice Departments are ready to submit a joint report to you with their
recommendations on gun shows. The report will be released as part of next week's radio
address. The report indicates that there were over 4,400 gun shows advertised in 1998, most
of which were promoted by about 175 firearm collector organizations imd individuals. While
federally-licensed firearms dealers (FFLs) comprise 50 to 75 percent of the vendors at most
gun shows -- and are required by the Brady Act to conduct background checks on prospective
purchasers -- non-FFL vendors are under no legal obligation to conduct a background check or
keep records on their sales, making it impossible for law enforcement to trace firearms they
sell which are later recovered at crime scenes.
                              Hex-Dump Conversion                                                  3


        The report confinns that gun shows provide a forum for illegal firearms sales and
trafficking, and serve as a source for fireanns later used in crimes. In compiling the report,
Treasury and Justice reviewed 314 gun show-related investigations involving more than
54,000 fireanns. The investigations span a wide range of feder:al fireanns violations,
including straw purchases, transactions by FFLs without Brady checks, and the sale of kits to
modify semiautomatic firearms into automatic fireanns. Over 46 percent of the gun
show-related investigations involved felons buying or selling fireanns. In more than a third
of the investigations, the fireanns involved were known to have been used in subsequent
crimes, including homicide, assault, robbery, and drug offenses. Many of the investigations
involve numerous fireanns: more than a third involved over 50 fireanns and about one-tenth
involved over 250 fireanns.

      In order to close the gun show "loophole", Secretary Rubin and Attorney General
Reno's key recommendations include:

       (I) Broadly defining "gun shows" to cover not only traditional gun shows but also
       flea markets and other similar venues where fireanns are sold.

       (2) Requiring gun show promoters to register with ATF. Promoters would be
       required to provide the time and location of every gun show, a list of vendors (both
       FFLs and non-FFLs), ensure that all vendors are given infonnation about their legal
       obligations, and require vendors to acknowledge receipt of it. Failure to fulfill these
       obligations could result in revocation or suspension of registration or civil or criminal
       penalties.

       (3) Requiring Brady background checks on all firearms transferred at gun
       shows. All firearms would be transferred by, or with the assistance of an FFL. Thus,
       FFLs would conduct a Brady checks and retain records for all sales by a non-FFL.

       (4) Reporting information to the ATF's National Tracing Center (NT C) on
       firearms sold at gun shows. This would require FFLs to submit certain information
       ~, manufacturer, serial number) on all fireanns transferred at gun shows to ATF's
       NTC and retain such information to assist in future fireanns trace requests by law
       enforcement.

       (5) Developing an educational campaign, in conjunction with the firearms industry,
       to encourage all fireanns owners to take steps to ensure that fireanns do not fall into
       the hands of prohibited persons such as criminals or juveniles.

In addition, the Departments are continuing to review the definition of "engaged in the
business" of selling firearms to make future legislative and regulatory recommendations. The
Gun Control Act requires that those who seek to "engage in the business" of importing,
                              Hex-Dwnp Conversion
                                                                                                    4

manufacturing, or dealing in firearms must obtain a Federal firearms license. Engaging in the
business without a license was involved in more than half of the 314 investigations reviewed
by Treasury and Justice.

The report also recommends committing more resources to combat illegal firearms sales at
gun shows. During the radio address, you will announce that your FY 2000 budget includes
$24 million in new funds to hire over 120 additional ATF agents to bolster firearms·
enforcement. The new agents will be used to support investigations at gun shows, the arrest
of violent criminals and gun traffickers, illegal attempts to buy firearms, and to expand the
Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative from 27 to 37 cities. The budget also includes an
additional $5 million for U.S. Attorneys to increase firearms prosecutions.

        Welfare Reform/Community Empowerment -- Implementation of FY 99
Initiatives: Last week, to complement your announcement of FY 2000 budget initiatives
related to welfare to work, three agencies also announced grant competitions for FY 1999
funding for three of your initiatives. The Department of Labor announced the availability of
$240 million in FY 99 Welfare-to-Work competitive grants, with priority for projects focusing
on non-custodial parents or long-term welfare recipients with disabilities, substance abuse
problems, limited English proficiency, or domestic violence (this is the third round of
competitive grants). HUD announced the first competition for 50,000 welfare-to-work
housing vouchers, which are available to housing authorities who collaborate with their
welfare and workforce partners to provide assistance to help families get or keep a job. And,
HHS announced the first grant competition under the Individual Development Account
demonstration program you signed into ·law in October (at the Microenterprise event on
February 5th, you will announce that your new budget includes $20 million for IDAs, which
doubles the FY 99 funding level).

        Welfare -- NYC Food Stamp and Medicaid Case: This week, Judge William H.
Pauley III of Federal District Court in lower Manhattan issued an injunction directing the New
York City to allow "all persons applying for food stamps, Medicaid and cash assistance ... to
apply for such benefits on the first day that they visit a Job Center" and to revise its training
and procedures to insure that workers are following federal law. The city must submit a
corrective action plan by February 10. As you know USDA's preliminary investigation
found the city did violate federal law; HHS' s investigation is still on-going.

       Children and Families --Budget Initiatives: This past week, the Vice President
and the First Lady hosted a series of events to announce new budget initiatives relating
to children and families: (1) the Vice President unveiled that your FY 2000 budget will
include a $607 million increase in Head Start, which would be the largest Head Start
increase ever enacted and serve 42,000 additional children; (2) the First Lady
announced that your budget will include $300 million over five years to provide
enhanced support to children who emancipate from foster care, turning 18 without
being adopted or permanently placed (a new Medicaid eligibility option and greater
                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                5

support for vocational and life skills training); (3) the First Lady announced that your
budget will include $67 million in new dollars for childhood asthma research,
surveillance, and management; (4) the First Lady announced $40 million to provide
freestanding children's hospitals -- for the first time -- with Federal financing for
graduate medical education; and (5) the Vice President and the First Lady met with the
women's groups and pro-choice advocates to announce that your FY 2000 budget will
include an historic $25 million increase for Title X family planning services, as well as
$25 million dollars for the United Nations Population Fund (the UNFPA).

Summaries of Leadership Bills


          S. 7 -- The Public Schools Excellence Act: Senate Democrats have introduced
  the Public Schools Excellence Act (S. 7), which includes our school modernization and
  class size reduction proposals and an after-school initiative incorporating both the 21st
  Century Learning Program and funds for community-based after-school programs
  through the Child Care and Development Block Grant. The bill also includes a
  Teacher Excellence Act which closely tracks one we have been developing as well as
  relevant aspects of your accountability proposals. The bill would provide $1.2 billion to
. states and local school districts to help raise teacher certification standards, recruit
  excellent teacher candidates, retain and support promising beginning teachers and
  provide veteran teachers and principals with ongoing professional development needed
  to help all children meet high standards. Under this teacher quality proposal, states
  and school districts would be accountable for reducing the number of teachers with
  emergency credential and out-of-field placement of teachers.

        S. 2 -- ESEA Reauthorization: Senate Republicans also introduced a bill (S. 2)
to extend ESEA. However, the bill contains only a statement of themes and principals --
returning control to parents, supporting exceptional teachers, making schools safe,
directing federal dollars to the classroom, and stressing basic skills and proven practices
-- that will eventually be translated into specific legislative proposals.

         S. 5 -- The Drug Free Centuries Act: In lieu of an omnibus crime bill, the Senate
Republican leadership introduced an anti-drug bill, the Drug Free Centuries Act. The bill has
four titles: international supply reduction, domestic law enforcement, demand reduction, and
funding for federal counter-drug enforcement agencies. Overall, the bill does not contain
many new proposals, but is intended to augment and complement many of the drug
interdi,ction programs and funding increases enacted in last year's FY 99 omnibus
appropnatlOns act. To this end, the bill increases funding and establishes earmarks for
specific Customs, Coast Guard, DEA, Treasury and Defense counter narcotic operations and
equipment. Moreover, the bill's provisions on international supply reduction borrow
significantly from the Administration's international crime bill introduced last year.
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                      6

        On the domestic front, the bill increases the number of border patrol agents to 15,000
and contains modest prevention proposals including a $10 million drug-free teen· drivers
incentive grant program and $5 million DEA drug-free families grant program. While the
bill does not contain many changes to criminal penalties, it includes a controversial proposal
to establish greater parity on cocaine sentencing by significantly lowering the threshold
amounts of powder cocaine necessary to receive mandatory federal sentences (from 500 grams
to 50 grams for a 5-year sentence, and from 5 kilograms to 500 grams for a 10-year sentence).

        S. 9 -- The Safe Schools, Safe Streets, and Secure Borders Act of 1999: S. 9 is an
omnibus crime bill introduced by the Senate Democratic leadership, similar to legislation
introduced at the end of the last Congress. The Democratic bill contains a two-year extension
for many programs authorized in the 1994 Crime Act, including COPS, the Violent Offender
IncarcerationlTruth-in-Sentencing programs, VAWA, and drug courts. The legislation
incorporates a scaled-back version of the Democratic juvenile crime bill including provisions
on the federal prosecution of juveniles as adults; grants for states to incarcerate violent youths;
prevention programs for at-risk youth; and a number of Administration-supported firearms
measures including a prospective ban on gun ownership for violent juveniles ("juvenile
Brady") and an expansion of the Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative. The bill also
contains provisions to assist victims, including a model bill of rights for crime victims in the
federal system. In addition, the bill contains numerous Administration-sponsored provisions
on money laundering, international crime and hate crimes.

        HR. 358 -- Patients Bill of Rights: The Senate Leadership reintroduced the
Daschle-Kennedy Patients Bill Of Rights, which is the companion to the Ganske-Dingell
bill. They included very few changes, and chose not to modify the old remedy I
enforcement provision. They believe that they want to start the process with as strong a
bill as possible and then negotiate off of it.

        S. 10 -- The Health Protection and Assistance for Older Americans Act: This
bill incorporates three major initiatives including: (1) your long term care initiative, (2)
your Medicare buy-in, and (3) the reauthorization of the Older Americans Act, which
you explicitly endorsed last year. Obviously, these inltiatives will be broken out into
separate bills when and if the legislative process commences. However, this bill reflects
the Democrats' growing belief that they need to particularly emphasize their sensitivity
and responsiveness to issues of importance to older Americans.

        S. 17 -- the Child Care ACCESS Act: The Democratic Leadership bill on child
care is called the ACCESS Act -- Affordable Child Care for Early Success and Security.
 It largely mirrors your FY 2000 budget request on child care, although it is more
expensive, mainly because it makes the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit (DCTC)
refundable for low-income families. The bill adopts our proposals for $7.5 billion over
five years for enhanced child care subsidies for low-income families and greater tax
relief through the DCTC for middle-income families. Also, it incorporates your call to
                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                   7

expand after-school programs by tripling to $600 million the 21st Century Learning
Program. Similar to our budget, the bill provides tax relief through the DCTC for
parents who stay at home with their young children, but, unlike our proposal, makes
this tax relief refundable, as well. To improve child care quality and promote early
learning, the bill provides $2 billion over five years for States and $2.5 billion for
communities, while your budget includes $900 million over five years for States to invest
in quality improvements and $3 billion over five years for communities to promote
school readiness. Finally, to boost private sector investment in child care, the bill
adopts your proposed tax incentive for employers who offer child care services, but,
unlike our proposal, also includes $400 million over five years to create challenge grants
in which communities that generate funds from the business sector could receive
matched federal dollars.

        S. 18 -- the SAFER Meat and Poultry Act (Safe and Fair Enforcement and
Recall): Senator Harkin has again introduced the food safety bill we supported last year that
gives USDA much-needed leverage in regulating food processors and handlers. The SAFER
Meat and Poultry Act, one of the Democratic Leadership's Initiatives, would: (\) require
processors and handlers to notify the USDA about contaminated meat and poultry products;
(2) authorize USDA to conduct mandatory recalls of unsafe products; (3) clarify and reinforce
the USDA's authority to refuse or withdraw inspection of plants that violate safety standards
or procedures; and (4) give the USDA the power to assess civil fines for violations.
Currently, the USDA can respond to food safety violations only by bringing criminal actions
or withdrawing inspections; and all recalls are done on a voluntary basis and no civil penalties
are available.

         S. 74 -- Paycheck Fairness Act: The Paycheck Fairness Act, an equal pay measure
the Administration supported last year, is also included in the Democratic Leadership
Initiative. The legislation, introduced by Senator Daschle, includes three major provisions:

           Increased Penalties for the Equal Pay Act (EPA). The legislation adds full
           compensatory and punitive damages as remedies, in addition to the liquidated
           damages and back pay awards currently available under the EPA. The proposal
           would put gender-based wage discrimination on equal footing with wage
           discrimination based on race or ethnicity, for which uncapped compensatory and
           punitive damages are already available.

           Non-retaliation provision. The bill would prohibit employers from punishing
           employees for sharing salary information with their co-workers. Currently, many
           employers are free to take action against employees who share wage information

           Training, Research, and Pay Equity Award. The bill provides for increased
           training for EEOC employees on wage discrimination; more field research on
                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                 8

           equal pay; and the establishment of a national award to recognize model
           employers.

        S. 11 -- Campaign Finance Reform: At Senator Feingold's suggestion, the
Democratic Leadership introduced campaign finance reform legislation (S. 11) modeled on
the bill that passed the Senate in 1993. The legislation includes a ban on "soft money,"
voluntary spending limits, anti-bundling provision, and reduced-price television time. In
order to maintain the aura of bipartisanship around McCain-Feingold, the Democratic
Leadership decided to use the 1993 bill. Senator Feingold's staff believes there is greater
momentum in the House for passage of bipartisan campaign finance reform and have adopted
a "House first" strategy.

        S. 20 -- Brownfields And Environmental Cleanup Act of 1999: This bill (S. 20),
whose author is Senator Lautenberg, is based on legislation introduced in prior Congresses is
in part based on EPA's current "brownfields" program. The legislation would: 1) provide
grants to local and state governments to evaluate brownfields sites. These evaluations would
inform interested parties about what is required to clean up sites, and which types of reuse
would best suit the properties; 2) furnish funds to state and local governments to establish
and capitalize low interest loan programs for cleanups. These funds could be loaned to
prospective purchasers, municipalities, and other parties; 3) limit the potential liability of
innocent property buyers. So long as purchasers or landowners have made reasonable
inquiries about possible contamination, they would be exempt from liability under federal
Superfund law, as would owners of contiguous properties who did not cause or contribute to
the release and exercised appropriate care.


