           RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

           CREATOR: Paul D. Glastris ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

           CREATION DATE/TIME: I-FEB-1999 15:59:21.00

           SUBJECT:   actual latest version of tues ed speech

           TO: Joshua S. Gottheimer ( CN=Joshua S. Gottheimer/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
           READ:UNKNOWN

           TO: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
           READ: UNKNOWN

           TEXT:
           Draft  2/1/99    3:30 p.m.
           Paul Glastris

           WILLIAM J. CLINTON
           REMARKS AT JACKSON MANN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
           BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS
           Tuesday, February 2, 1999


                   In my State of the Union address last month, I had the honor of
           reporting to the American people that our nation is stronger, healthier,
           and more prosperous than ever before. But I also said that we have an
           historic responsibility to use the prosperity we have created to meet the
           challenges of the 21st Century. There is no greater challenge than the
           need to give all our children first-class educations, and in my address I
           set out an ambitious plan to do just that.  It is a plan that calls for
           more investment in our public schools, but also for changing the way we
           invest--to stop rewarding what doesn't work and to start investing more in
           what does work.

                   I have often said that every problem in education in America has
           been solved somewhere in America.  The trick is transferring proven
           solutions to other public schools. We know what works. What works is
           what you are doing in this state, in this city, and in this school.
           Better-trained teachers.  Reasonable discipline codes. Issuing report
           cards on all schools and turning around those that fail.  Setting high
           academic standards for students and ending social promotion, but also
           giving students the support they need to meet those standards-with after
           school and early childhood learning programs, with reading tutors, with
           better trained teachers, and with outreach programs to get parents more


involved. The rising test scores here at Jackson Mann elementary school
show that you are on the right track.

        We must make sure all schools are on that right track. These
reform ideas are spreading.   But they are spreading too slowly--especially
in our inner cities, isolated rural areas, and on Indian reservations.
That is where the need for improvement is greatest. That is where our
largest federal investment in public schools, Title One, is targeted. We
have made ·$180 billion in Title One investments over the last 30 years.
We have not gotten anywhere near $180 billion worth of educational
improvements.    From now on we must say to states and school districts
that receive this money: identify your worst-performing, least improving
schools, and turn them around, or shut them down.

        If we fail to do this, and do it quickly, we are going to lose
another generation of children to low expectations, low educational
achievement, and low chances to move ahead in life.

        For as I have said many times before, the information age is
really the education age. The education of our children must be a
national priority. And we have changed the priorities of the national
government.  We have balanced the budget--moving from a deficit of $290
billion when I took office to a surplus of $70 billion last year. But as
we shrank government and balanced the budget, we nearly doubled our
investment in education and training.

        This year we will have a great debate, perhaps a contentious
debate, about the next steps to improve education in America.   Here is
what I believe.   No child in America should be passed from grade to grade
without having mastered the material. No child in America should be
taught by an unprepared teacher. No child in America should be trapped in
a failing school. Renewing our schools is in the national interest -- and
this must be a national commitment.


        We have worked hard in the last six years to provide ·states and
school districts with more of the tools they need to improve their
schools. We have helped every state adopt tougher academic standards.
we've helped hundreds of school districts crack down on drugs, gangs, and
violence, and the percentage of students who report being threatened or
injured at school nationwide is down.  We've cut regulations in our
elementary and secondary education programs by two-thirds, and granted
dozens of waivers so that states and school districts can have the
flexibility to try new approaches. We've begun to organize an army of
tutors to help elementary school children learn to read and middle school
and high school students to prepare for college--and I know that some of
our America Reads tutors are doing a great job right here at Jackson Mann.
We've dramatically increased our investment in early childhood learning
through the Head Start program.

        All these efforts and others are beginning to payoff.   SAT scores
are up. Math scores have risen in nearly all grades nationwide--including
in many of our big cities. But you know and I know that we still have a
long way to go.  Reading scores have hardly budged.  And while our 4th
graders outperform their peers in other developed countries in math and
science, our 8th graders are around average, and our 12th graders rank
near the bottom. Clearly, we must do better.

        I believe the time to try is now, with our nation strong, our
economy prosperous, our budget in surplus, and our people confident.


Yesterday, I releaseq our new balanced budget for the year 2000.  It is a
budget that is both prudent and progressive.  It preserves the fiscal
soundness that has been key to our prosperity. Yet it also calls for
vital new investments in
education--to build or fix 5000 schools; to hire 100,000 new, well-trained
teachers over the next seven years to bring down class sizes; to connect
every classroom and library to the Internet; and to help all schools put
in place the kind of educational changes that work so well here at Jackson
Mann.

        Every five years, the federal government revisits the terms on
which it invests $15 billion in our nation's schools.  1999 is such a
year.  This gives us a golden opportunity, and a solemn responsibility,
not only to invest more in our schools, but to change the way we invest.
In my State of the Union address, I announced that later this year, I will
send to Congress a plan
that, for the first time, holds states and school districts accountable
for progress and rewards them for results.

        My Education Accountab'ility Act will require every state and
school district receiving federal help to identify their worst-performing,
least-improved schools and take responsibility for turning them around--as
you have begun doing here in Boston. LetO,s remember: we talk about our
nationO,s schools, but each school is different.   Many suburban schools
are doing quite well, and some urban ones are too.   But on balance, the
problems of public education in America are concentrated in schools in our
more disadvantaged neighborhoods--the very schools where children need the
boost trom strong education the most. These schools are often out of
sight but they can never be out of mind.   We must insist that all schools
regardless of where they are offer high quality education. We canO,t
accept less for the children of the inner city than we expect as a matter
of course for the children of the suburbs.

        Under my plan, states and school districts must audit failing
schools for educational weaknesses and provide resources that might help,
such as reading tutors, training for teachers, or an outreach coordinator
to get parents more involved.  If these actions do not result in improved
student achievement within two years, states and school districts must
take stronger actions. That means permitting students to attend other
public schools; reconstituting the school, by fairly evaluating the staff
and making staff changes as appropriate; or closing the school and
reopening it as a charter school or with an entirely new staff.

         It would be wrong to require these changes and not offer extra
resources to help get the job done.   So today, I am pleased to announce
that the balanced budget I submitted yesterday contains a new $200 million
pool of flexible Title One funds that school districts can use for all
these, purposes and more to turn around failing schools. And my new
balanced budget continues our commitment to help more communities launch
charter schools.

        We know this approach can work. It is working in a number of urban
school systems right now.   Six years ago, Houston listed 68 of its schools
as low performing. Today, after much intervention and hard work, the vast
majority of those schools have improved to the point that they are now off
the list. Dade County Florida took 45 critically low-performing schools
and raised their math and reading scores. Now all 45 are off the list.
Boston is now beginning to take these steps as well.   Every community in
America should do the same.   It is simply wrong to consign children year
after year to schools that fail to help them learn their way of poverty.



        My Education Accountability Act calls for four other important
steps.  First, all schools must end social promotion--but end social
promotion the' right way.  It is not fair to label students as failures
when the schools are failing them.   The goal of ending social promotion
must be to boost more students up, not hold more students back. Under my
plan, states and school districts will have to show how they will provide
the help students need to meet higher standards. That means offering
smaller classes and better-trained teachers, and my new balanced budget
contains substantial new resources to recruit and train teachers and bring
class sizes down. It means purchasing new instructional materials that are
proven to work, and there is new money in my balanced budget for that. It
means offering after school and summer school classes to students who need
help passing end-of-the-year performance exams. My balanced budget triples
funding for after school and summer school.   It means acting on the belief
that every child can learn, and no child should fall through the cracks.

         Second, all states and school districts must take responsible for
 the quality of their teachers, as the state of Massachusetts has done and
 Jackson Mann has done with its teacher development efforts. The great
 majority of our teachers do a fine job. But in too many schools, teachers
 don't have college majors--or even minors -- in the subjects they teach.
 New teachers should be required to pass performance exams, and all
 teachers should know the subjects they're teaching.

         Third, all parents should be provided with report cards on their
 children's schoOl, as the Boston schools now do.  Picking a school is
 perhaps the most important choice a parent can make for a child.  But in
 too many communities, it's easier to get information on the quality of the
 local restaurants than on the quality of the local schools. That must
 change.

         Fourth, to assure that our classrooms are truly places of
 learning, and to respond to what teachers have been asking us to do for
 years, all states and school districts must both adopt and implement
 sensible discipline policies--like the kind you have in Boston schools [ckl .

        These four steps, plus the fifth step of turning around or closing
failing schools, can spark a revolution of rising expectations in our
nationO,s schools. The federal government must not try to micro-manage
our public schools.  But we must work in partnership with states and
school districts, to invest more in our public schools, but to invest in a
way that states and school districts have shown works.  In this day and
age, when what you learn depends more than ever before on what you learn,
it is simply wrong as a nation to sit back, do nothing, and let another
generation of disadvantaged kids languish in failing schools. We must not
be complacent. We must act, this year, for our children, and for the
future of our beloved country.

         Thank you and God bless you.


