RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( CN=william R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 15-MAY-1997 18:12:10.00

SUBJECT:   HR 1385

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP    [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Today you asked about HR 1385, the Employment, Training and Literacy
Enhancement Act that is scheduled for House floor consideration
tomorrow.   Here's a quick summary/status report, based on some materials
assembled by OMB and discussions with folks at the Department of Education.

This bill, sponsored by subcommittee chair Rep. McKeon, would consolidate
exsting federal employment, training, and literacy programs into three
block grants to states and localities for 1) adult employment and training
for disadvantaged workers, 2) disadvantaged youth (including high school
dropouts), and 3) adult education and family literacy.   While JTPA
programs for youth would be consolidated into the block grants, Federal
administration of Job Corps would be maintained.

The legislation would also reauthorize the Vocational Rehabilitation Act
for 3 years.

The bill not address vocational education programs (nor school-to-work
programs), which are now under the jurisdiction of a different
subcommittee.

The Administration is preparing to send up a SAP that compliments the bill
as incorporating many of the principles in the President's GI Bill for
America's workers, but noting generally concerns with provisions on adult
ed and voc rehab.  Among other features, the bil would require adult
training to be provided through skill grants, distributed via a statewide
employment and training delivery system.  The SAP follows a similarly
positive letter from the President made available at the Committee markup.

The Department of Education has raised concerns, not fully discussed in
the SAP, of accountability, principally having to do with the grounds for
state plan approval (mere technical compliance versus quality and promise
of meeting purposes of the act) and the ability to negotiate over
indicators of program performance.  Education is also concerned that the
bill needs to be more explicit on the role of the State Educational Agency
(SEA) in governance. DOL is concerned that the legislation does not
assure that consolidated state youth programs will include a summer jobs
component, and that the bill does not provide for adequate worker
representation on local boards.

The Administration's own Adult Education Act reauthorization proposal has
recently been introduced as HR 1562. My understanding is that the McKeon
bill has incorporated many of the key elements of the Administration


proposal.

I am not currently aware of any issues or controversies expected to arise
in the context of floor consideration tomorrow, but I will keep checking
around.

Hope this is helpful.


