RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mike Cohen   (Mike Cohen    [UNKNOWN)   )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-FEB-1999 08:20:40.00

SUBJECT:   boston guidance

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached are q's and a's for Boston.




DO YOU YAHOO!?
Get your free @yahoo.com address at http://mail.yahoo.com
 - bostqa.wpd==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D96)MAIL46100443G.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504302060000010A0201000000020500000087380000000200006B261323EA625EF4C5A316
8762918E2D9A635EF46360A5604DB5C35AE7FD88EDIF98E47D93BOEOAC7514E601EEF4EA376623
26B65D130559E49986904212B8BD65E7AC01550CE6B4AA6C8709A39F25CB59AA71C8F0982FC32D
                            Hex-Dump Conversion

                          Guidance for Boston Education Event


Q.   What will states/districts actually do with this money?

A.   That depends on the needs of each school, usually detennined after a careful audit of
     what's working and what isn't in each low perfonning school. In many cases, the funds
     will be used for purposes such as (1) providing intensive training to teachers, (2)
     providing additional time for school staff to implement a proven model of school
     improvement, such as Success for All or other programs with a track record of improving
     student achievement in reading and other basic skills, and (3) providing extra help and
     tutoring to students who are behind.

Q.   If 19 states are already doing something to turn around low performing schools, why does
     the federal government need to require it as a condition of receiving federal funds?

A.   No student should be trapped in a failing public school, no matter what state or school
     district the student lives in. And the federal government should not continue to invest in
     approaches that don't work. Thirty-one states do not yet have an accountability system
     in place that ensures that low perfonning schools will get the attention and support they
     need in order to improve, or that they will be closed down if they don't. Requiring states
     and school districts that receive federal education funds to have an effective system of
     holding schools accountable for results, and to take responsibility for all public schools is
     an effective and appropriate way to ensure that students get a good education and
     taxpayers get results for their investment.

Q.   How will the Education Department enforce this requirement, and the other
     accountability requirements the President has proposed. Will you cut off funds to states
     and districts that don't comply?

A.   First, these are perfectly reasonable requirements on states and school districts that
     receive federal education funds, and we do not expect a compliance or enforcement
     problem. While not all states are implementing the policies the President has called for,
     this is the unmistakable direction in which state and local education policy is heading.
     So we expect that these accountability requirements will speed up the trends we already
     see among the states. This is exactly what happened in 1994, when the Goals 2000 Act
     required states to raise academic standards in order to receive funding. Now, 48 states
     have set higher standards, and in the remaining two, this job is delegated to local school
     districts.

     Second, as in existing Education Department grant programs, the Secretary of Education
                                                        has a range of tools at his disposal to
                                                        ensure compliance with the tenns
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


                                                            and conditions of a grant. This
                                                            starts with discussion, persuasion
                                                            and infonnal negotiations, which is
                                                            generally sufficient to bring about an
                                                          . agreement between the Education
                                                            Department and a state. The
                                                            Secretary also has the ability, if
                                                            needed, to withhold a portion of the
                                                            funds a state or school district would
                                                            receive, starting with the
                                                            administrative funds that goes to the
                                                            state or local education agency, but
                                                            potentially including some or all of
                                                            the funds intended for schools. No
                                                            Secretary, certainly not this Secretary
                                                            of Education, would take that step
                                                            lightly, though he would if it were
                                                            necessary to ensure that taxpayer
                                                            funds were not spent year after year
                                                            on approaches that don't work.

Q.   Republicans are stressing flexibility and local control, while the President is calling for
     more accountability and more federal control. Are the two in conflict?

A.   The President is insisting on greater and more effective accountability, but he is not
     calling for more federal control. . This is not a debate about federal control vs. local
     control. States and school districts will remain completely in charge of setting academic
     standards, selecting the curriculum, setting promotion and graduation requirements,
     detennining teacher certification requirements and what tests new teachers must pass.
     They will still establish the policies and governance of their school systems, hire the
     teachers, set the school schedule, assign students and teachers to classes, without any
     federal control.

     Further, we do not believe there is a conflict between more accountability for results, and
     greater flexibility in how to achieve them. In fact, the two must go hand-in-hand. That
     is the approach this Administration has pursued over the past six years -- as we worked to
     help states and school district raise academic standards and hold schools accountable for
     results, at the same time we made federal programs more flexible, cut elementary and
     secondary regulations by 2/3, and provided waivers offederal requirements to states and
     school districts if these requirements interfered with state or local school refonns.

Q.   Will the President support the Ed-Flex bill that Republicans passed in the Senate last
     week?

A.   We are in favor of greater flexibility along with greater accountability. We would prefer
                                Hex-Dump Conversion

     to see an expansion of the Ed-Flex demonstration program (which permits 12 states to
     waive selected federal education requirements if they interfere with state or local school
     reforms) taken up as part of the upcoming reauthorization of the Elementary and
     Secondary Education Act. This approach would help ensure that a new Ed-Flex program
     reflects the ESEA that will be in effect for the next five years, rather than extending a
     flexibility program designed with the requirements of the old ESEA in mind.




Q.   Massachusetts has a test for new teachers, that some 60% failed last year. The
     President's has proposed a requirement to that school districts no longer hire teachers on
     "emergency certificates" or assign teachers to teach out of field. How are we going to
     get enough qualified teachers.ifso many can't pass a basic skills test? Doesn't the
     President's proposal to reduce class size only make the problem of finding enough
     qualified teachers even worse?

A.   Even though it will be difficult, it is wrong to continue to hire unqualified teachers. Our
     most disadvantaged students, in our most disadvantaged urban and rural schools, are the
     students most likely to have teachers who are not fully qualified or who are teaching
     subjects for which they lack adequate preparation. These are the students most in need
     of the best teachers, and they are the ones most hurt by this practice.

     Massachusetts and other states that have instituted competency testing for new teachers
     are doing exactly the right thing, because this is one important way to ensure that teachers
     have the knowledge and skills necessary to be effective teachers. A high initial failure
     rate is often a sign that our schools and colleges must do a better job, that prospective
     teachers need to work harder, and that we must do everything possible to recruit our most
     talented people into teaching.

     The President's budget will help recruit good candidates into teaching. It includes $35
     million to provide scholarships to 7,000 talented students who will commit to teach in
     under served communities. It includes $18 million for the Troops to Teachers program,
     to help 3,000 military retirees (who are more likely than other new teachers to have a
     background in math and science, to be minority and male, and to have a successful track
     record of working with young people) become teachers, and an additional $10 million to
     help 1,000 Native Americans become teachers and teach in tribal schools or other schools
     with high concentrations of Native Americans.

     The President's Class Size Reduction program will also help. While it does increase the
                            Hex-Dump Conversion

demand for teachers, it also provides funds to help meet the demand and to improve
teacher quality overall. School districts can use up to 15% of the funds ($180 million in
the current fiscal year) to recruit candidates for teaching (including providing scholarships
to prospective teachers), and to provide training to both new and experience teachers.
Further, smaller classes - which makes it possible for teachers to get to know their
students better and teach more effectively - will help make teaching a more attractive
career choice for many.

The Nation must hire some 2 million teachers over the next decade, to respond to
growing enrollments and the aging of the teaching force. Our emphasis must be on
making sure all of these teachers are well qualified. Scholarships and other recruitment
tools can and will help. In addition, at the local, state and federal level we must do
everything we can to make teaching an attractive career choice. Improved salaries will
help in many places. But so will more professional working conditions, conditions in
which teachers can work together with their colleagues, in safe working conditions, with
smaller classes, modem buildings and up-to-date technology, and with the support and
respect of parents and the entire community.
                                Hex-Dump Conversion

                               TOBACCO MENU OPTIONS

I. Issues

             MENU. What programs should be included on a menu and what percentage
              should be allocated between tobacco / kids?

             STRUCTURE. How should these menu items be defined?

             OFFSETS. How should the $2.9 billion federal share be offset?

II. Menu

Possible proposals include:

      50% Tobacco / 50% Kids. State a broad position allowing latitude in future negotiations
       (Tobacco could include prevention and enforcement as well as farmers; kids could
       include: child care, health (CHIP) and child welfare.)

      Tobacco Control/Farmers / Kids. A broad menu of three items. Non-tobacco
       growing states would not have to spend on farmers.

      Fixed Percentage on Tobacco Control with Menu of other Items. Additional items
       could include:

              Tobacco farmers
              Maternal and Child Health Bureau's Title V program
              Child Care and Development BlockGrant
              Child Welfare Programs (Title IV-B)
              SAMHSA grant programs
              Safe and Drug Free Schools program
              CHIP matching funds

Menu Requirements. (1) Funds from the grants may not be used as state match for Federal
programs (except CHIP); (2) there will be a MOE on a program-specific basis; and (3) federal
spending will be netted for amounts spent on federal programs (possible OMB proposal).

III. Structure

Tobacco Control Programs. To be determined is the level of specificity to these programs and
whether farmer assistance is included or is separate to ensure that dedicated monies assist
farmers. Tobacco control programs could be described in broad terms, such as:

       1. Activities for tobacco use prevention and control including community based
       programs similar to programs currently funded by the NIH and assistance to local
       governmental entities to conduct appropriate anti-tobacco activities; and
                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
         2. Counter-marketing programs designed to discourage the use of tobacco products by
         individuals, to encourage those who use such products to quit, and to educate the public
         about the hazards of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke implemented through
         contracts or grants to eligible entities.

Or, a more specific menu similar to McCain, which includes:

                 A media based counter advertising campaign to discourage the use of tobacco
                  products;
                 State, community and school-based education and prevention programs to
                  discourage the use of tobacco products;
                 Evidence-based tobacco use cessation programs, consistent with the most recent
                  tobacco use cessation guidelines issued by the Agency for Health Care Policy
                  Research or are approved as safe and effective for tobacco use cessation by the
                  FDA; and
                 Activities to enforce youth access restrictions in order to reduce the sale and
                  distribution of tobacco products to individuals under 18 years of age.

Assistance to Farmers. Legislation could allow states to direct funds to assist tobacco farmers
through:

                 Farmer State Trusts. States could make additional contributions to the Phase II
                  State Trusts recently agreed to by the industry and governors of tobacco growing
                  states. The 11 tobacco growing states will establish separate state trusts with $5
                  billion in industry payments; or
                 Authority to USDA. States could fund a program authorized in legislation, to be
                  designed by the Secretary of USDA, to assist tobacco farmers.

IV. Estimates and Offsets

The Administration's budget assumes that Medicaid costs were the basis for the states' recovery,
whereas CBO assumed that only half of the state settlement funds were attributable to Medicaid.
Moreover, CBO assumed that there is a 25 percent probability that HCF A will successfully
retrieve the funds from the states, while the Administration's budget assumes full r~covery. As
a result ofCBO's estimate, any bill that would waive HCFA's ability to recoup the Federal share
in exchange for a commitment by the States to use the Federal share to support shared state and
national priorities would require a $2.9 billion pay-for.


OMB: Estimated Effects of Recoupment Policy (in billions)
 FY            2000         2001          2002         2003          2004    2001-2004

                            4.6           4.7          4.8           4.8     18.9


CBO 1198 Baseline: Estimated Effects of Recoupment Policy (in billions)
 FY            2000         2001          2002         2003          2004    2001-2004

                            .68           .74           .76          .79     2.9
                                Hex-Dump Conversion
Possible offsets include:

1. Requiring the states to pay $2.9 billion to the federal treasury; or
2. Requiring the states to accept $2.9 billion less in federal block grants; or
3. Increase the excise tax on tobacco products to cover the lost federal share
(HHS is checking whether an excise tax triggers offset provisions contained
in the state settlement).
"

