RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan Orszag ( CN=Jonathan Orszag/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-FEB-1999 15:36:00.00

SUBJECT:   Memo to POTUS on Better America Bonds

TO: Elena Kagan    CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. 'Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP   @   EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Comments? We would like to get this in as soon as possible.==================== ATT
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:  0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D52]MAIL40761073W.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750439FOD0000010A02010000000205000000114B00000002000051E5540E6E1E43D1674DCE
5D6F9B2E1837A825B050F080024CAC5A4E00402AEB8A26E895AD3A212DFF66C9FD3D70ED88C955
843218BF99C90ED3DF6D921038B864237ABD2FB1E582D85EOB9676BFBE9598F977EA3FA3182628
A6584724852C066E509C2786153C66EB3ECBB5B0341C4D729F8F2D193D7DF24B986A82B052A053
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

                                         February 3, 1999


MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

CC:                    THE VICE PRESIDENT

FROM:                  GENE SPERLING
                       BRUCE REED
                       PAUL WEINSTEIN
                       JONORSZAG

SUBJECT:               "Better America Bonds"

        During last Friday's briefing for the Mayor's event, you expressed interest in the
details of your tax credit proposal to help states and local communities preserve open space,
clean-up abandoned industrial sites, create or restore parks, and improve water quality. The
purpose of this memo is to provide you more information on this initiative.

        Since the Vice President announced the "Better America Bonds" (BABs) proposal, you
and the Vice President have received widespread praise. Senator Daschle's staff has indicated a
desire in making its passage a priority, and a bipartisan caucus often Senators focusing on smart
growth issues has signified interest in the legislation. Over the past two weeks, we have briefed
House and Senate staff on BABs and we are planning -- in conjunction with White House
Legislative Affairs, OVP, and Treasury -- targeted briefings with staff from Senate Finance and
House Ways and Means. We have also received significant interest in BABs from the press and
other elected officials. (See attached document for specific comments of support for BABs and
the livability agenda.)

        As you know, communities are increasingly concerned about the loss of open space and
farmland, as well as declines in water quality, attributable to unchecked development and sprawl.
 BABs are modeled on your school construction proposal, allowing state and local governments
to issue zero-interest bonds to lenders who could claim a tax credit for the life of the bond in lieu
of interest. Under your proposal, the issuer -- either the state or locality -- would make no
payments on the bond until maturity (15 years in the future).

       Over the next five years, Better America Bonds will provide states and local communities
$673 million in tax credits to pay interest on approximately $9.5 billion of bonds issued for the
following activities:

      Preserve and Enhance Green Space. State, local and tribal governments, working
       together or in partnership with land trusts and other nonprofit organizations, can create or
       restore urban parks, preserve suburban green spaces, and protect threatened farmland and
       wetlands. Land can be protected either by acquiring title or purchasing permanent
       easements. Proceeds can also be used for reforestation, replanting and other types of
       environmental restoration or enhancement.
                                         .\utomated Records Management System
                                         Hex-Dwnp Conversion


           Protect Water Quality. Rivers, lakes, coastal waters, and wetlands -- and drinking water
            sources -- can be restored or protected through measures to reduce pollution runoff and
            land acquisition to reduce polluted runoff. Eligible projects include "passive" controls,
            such as settling ponds, or the creation of planted or forested buffer strips along waterways
            that filter contaminants from runoff.

           Clean Up Brownfields. Pressure to develop green space can be eased by remediating
            brownfie1ds -- abandoned industrial sites -- for new economic uses. Better America
            Bonds will supplement your existing Brownfields initiatives by providing new resources
            to assess and clean-up brownfields for use as open spaces or for development under
            limited circumstances.

            The allocation ofBABs would be made through an open competition, with state and local
     governments submitting plans to the EPA for initial review. EPA would consult with a
     subgroup of agencies on the Vice President's Community Empowerment Board that have
     programs and expertise in the relevant communities. This approach is analogous to the way
     HUD and Agriculture make decisions about Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities
     designations. Preferences will be given to regional proposals reflecting partnerships and
     comprehensive planning among local governments, particularly where cities partner with suburbs
     and rural areas on a coordinated strategy. This will ensure that the bond proceeds support the
     long-term economic and environmental goals of a broad range of communities.

             Administrator Browner has made passage ofBABs a top priority. The Administrator has
     done extensive outreach to the Mayors, environmental and land trust organizations, the National
     Realty Committee, and the National Association of Home Builders. So far, the response has
     been positive. The Mayors are particularly excited about this program because they can apply
     for the authority to issue the bonds directly.

             You should know that some people have raised concerns that Better America Bonds and
     school modernization bonds are overly complex and will not provide true interest-free borrowing
     to the communities that have used them because issuers will have to offer the bonds at a discount
     in order to attract buyers.

             Your economic advisors believe that if we provide the private sector a large enough
     incentive, they will create a relatively efficient market for this type of debt. That is why the
     financing mechanism for BABs is very similar to the mechanism for your school modernization
     proposal. Since these two initiatives will provide tax credits on about $35 billion in bonds, we
     believe that the private sector will develop the expertise necessary to make this financing
     mechanism an effective means to help state and local communities build more schools, preserve
     green spaces, clean-up brownfields, and provide clean and safe drinking water.




                                                     2
                                      Automated Records Management Systen1
                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

         WIDESPREAD SUPPORT FOR PRESIDENT CLINTON AND VICE
        PRESIDENT GORE'S PROPOSAL FOR BETTER AMERICA BONDS

          Jim Marshall, Mayor of Macon, Georgia (D): "This is a great idea and if this doesn't
          sail through Congress, we've got a bunch of fools up there."

         Dave Armstrong, Mayor of Louisville, Kentucky: "If the Administration proposal gets
          through Congress. Louisville undoubtedly would seek the zero-interest financing through
          the bonds to fund anti-sprawl programs as they are developed. It's a good start. It's an
          opportunity over the next decade for cities like Louisville and other cities across America
          to build on things to bring people to the cities, and to keep people in the cities .... "

         The Denver Post, January 20,1999: "Congress should support a pair of Clinton
          administration proposals, outlined in President Clinton's State of the Union speech, that
          would help Colorado and other fast-growing states conserve parkland, open space and
          wildlife habitat.. .. Better America Bonds might provide a mechanism for cash-strapped
          communities to do so. In addition, cities such as Denver could use the funds to
          supplement money they are already investing to transform abandoned or vacant properties
          into municipal parks and urban trails."

         The Tampa Tribune, January 18, 1999: "Vice President Al Gore is correct to believe
          there are votes to be won by combating urban sprawl... A major part of the White House
          plan is a five-year, $700 million program in which state and local governments would be
          allowed to issue no-interest 'Better America Bonds' to lenders, who would claim a tax
          credit for the life of the bond rather than receive interest.. .. we hope members of Congress
          ultimately support this conservation initiative."

         Roanoke Times & World News, January 17, 1999: "The White House proposes offering
          'Better America Bonds' that might help to mitigate the damage .... The bonds would give
          communities another resource to save treasures that are threatened -- but this would be a
          small downpayment on what is due."

           Capital Times (Madison, WI), January 14, 1999: "[T]he new Clinton-Gore program
           can help our community in several ways. One of the program's centerpieces is a
           five-year, $700 million tax credit program to support 'Better America Bonds,' aimed at
         , preserving greenspace, cleaning up contaminated urban sites called 'brownfields,'
           creating or restoring urban parks and protecting water quality. These funds can augment
           the county's $30 million Stewardship Fund, a I O-year program that the county executive
           proposes to protect Dane County's rivers, streams, lakes, wetlands, woods and prairies."

         The Atlanta Journal, January 13, 1999: "If ever a Clinton administration program had
          metro Atlanta's name written all over it, it's the one Vice President Al Gore announced
          this week to promote 'smart growth' for America's cities ... [T]he program has one other
          element, 'Better America Bonds,' which would not require federal expenditures but still
          could have an enormous impact on U.S. cityscapes."


                                                    3
                               Hex-Dump Conversion
   San Antonio Express-News, January 18, 1999: "The new 'Better America Bonds'
    -- $700 million in federal tax credits to generate $9.5 billion in state and local bonds
    -- could be used to restore urban parks, preserve suburban green spaces or protect
    threatened farmlands or wetlands. Or to clean up urban brownfields. Or for water quality
    by creating planted or forested buffer strips along waterways to filter contaminants from
    runoff.... Such incentives could catalyze a culture change in how communities act --
    giving more credibility to conservationists and advocates of 'smart growth' and
    strengthening the hand oflocal officials who want to form constructive collaborations."

   The Bond Buyer, January 12, 1999: "A California public finance banker familiar with
    the school bond program praised the Administration's plan, because expanding the uses
    of tax-credit bonds will enhance the market for such debt. Heather Ruth, president of
    The Bond Market Association, called the proposal 'fascinating,' noting that her
    organization was not consulted about it. 'The purposes for which the bonds would be
    authorized are purposes which can currently be financed by tax-exempt bonds,' Ruth said.
    'Obviously the goal here is to make it more attractive than traditional bonds ... I am sure
    many state and local governments regard this as an opportunity.'"

    Chicago Daily Herald, January 12, 1999: "Gore's plan also calls for the government to
    encourage preservation of green space by backing zero-interest bonds for states or cities.
    Investors buy these 15-year 'Better America' bonds and receive a share of $700 million
    in tax credits, rather than interest. We support this initiative. In suburban Chicago, open
    fields and forests are quickly being bulldozed to make room for fast-food restaurants,
    strip malls and crowded housing developments. Creating open space for recreation,
    wildlife and aesthetic deviation from asphalt should be a priority."

   The Spokesman-Review (Spokane, WA), January 12, 1999: "What's lacking is
    financing for a better style of growth and redevelopment. Gore's proposal, therefore, is a
    welcome act of leadership."

   E.J. Dionne, Washington Post, January 15, 1999: "The core of the administration's
    plan is 'Better America Bonds' ... The sprawl issue would seem a winner, in part because
    of the success of so many smart growth and anti-growth initiatives in November's
    elections. "

    Jeffrey Baratta, Vice President at Union Bank of California, January 12, 1999:
    Making the Better America Bonds available to individual investors is "a great move .... It
    will probably help in liquidity and create a greater secondary market."




                                             4


