RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-FEB-1999 22:27:42.00

SUBJECT:   Revised comments to Edley draft

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
EK:

I've tried my best to incorporate Bruce's points here, though only in the
summary points. You may not want to spend too much time on my
line-by-line comments.  In most instances, they don't add much more anyway.

jc3


Clara:

Forgive the tardiness, but here are my comments on the initial draft of
the race/crime chapter circulated last week.  Since they're extensive, a
bit repetitive, and not limited to line edits, allow me to summarize my
major concerns:

1. Contradiction on whether the system is fair or unfair.      Most
importantly, the draft suffers from a series of contradictions about
whether we believe the justice system is fundamentally fair or unfair to
minorities. We believe that the facts show that, if you control for
criminal offending, the system is essentially fair, but that it doesn't do
enough to protect minorities in high-crime neighborhoods. There are
several things we need to do to convey this.    First, the opening of the
crime chapter should include a key set of facts that makes clear the rates
of minority victimization and offending. Without such facts, it is almost
impossible to engage in a broader discussion of race and crime -- and it
is difficult to distinguish whether issues should be dealt with as matters
of policy or perception.    Second, given these facts, the draft should
characterize America's race/crime problem as both a lack of opportunity and
 responsibility ... too little opportunity for minority youth to avoid
crime, stay out of jail, and get ahead ... and too lit.tle responsibility in
the form of high crime, public disorder, and broken communities.
Beginning the race/crime discussion as such, we can begin to understand
why minority communities mistrust a justice system that -- while not
fundamentally unfair or intentionally discriminatory -- doesn't meet their
public safety needs, despite incarcerating so many persons. And we begin
to lay the groundwork for solutions that address these issues (i.e., more
opportunity for youth, improved public safety) and build trust (i.e.,
engaging the community) .



2. More focus on the need to build stronger communities. The draft
should focus more on the importance of building strong communities.    That
means more than simply picking up garbage, rehabbing housing, and
targeting resources.  Although these things matter, they are not the
biggest predictors of violent crime.   Falling crime rates in some of our
worst neighborhoods have proved this.   So, too, has the Earls/Sampson
study on Chicago neighborhoods, which found that communities with a strong
sense of shared values and people willing to reinforce those values -- wh
ether black or white, rich or poor, uptown or downtown, etc. -- had 40
percent less violent crime. This is a powerful study that should be more
prominently and positively featured in the draft.   It shows that community
members who act responsibly and in the interest of their neighbors have a
huge impact on crime and violence.   It shows that even the best law
enforcement is no substitute for strong communities. And, as is the case
with the Boston Gun Project, it shows that one entire communities --
police, prosecutors, parents, and priests -- organize to reinforce certain
behaviors, they can literally bring murder and gun violence to a
standstill.

3. Concept of community justice not clear.   I don't think the .discussion
of community justice makes clear exactly what policies the Administration
is calling for. We are probably better served by discussing how community
policing has revolutionized policing and public safety in America, and how
its two component parts -- solving crime problems and engaging the
community -- can help revolutionize our entire criminal justice system.
More importantly, these two concepts -- more than the term "community
justice" -- capture what it will take to address the paradox of America's
race/crime problem: that, with respect to the criminal justice system,
minorities are both fundamentally underserved and overrepresented.

4. Wrong tone for discussion of "hot button" issues. While I recognize
the desire to touch on the difficult issues of racial profiling and police
brutality.   I think the draft's language will be viewed by our friends in
law enforcement as inflammatory.   Not only are the vast majority of law
enforcement officers decent, hard-working public servants who put their
lives on the line every day, but -- as a result of community policing --
they have become the harbingers of change in the criminal justice system.
In many cities, police-led efforts to work withe community have made the
justice system more responsive, resulted in new prevention programs, and
increased the flow of information to the public. Condemning them and
their practices with a broad brushstroke strays from the known facts, and
doesn't contribute to our goal of building trust.   Equally important, I
don't believe our own federal law enforcement bureaus -- who I'm sure
don't think they engage in racial profiling -- are prepared to live under
the executive order on racial profiling proposed in the draft.   In many
ways, dealing with this issue at the federal level (i.e., INS and Customs
enforcement at the nation's borders) is even more difficult than locally
(traffic stops and drug enforcement) .

Also, with respect to the section on racial disparities in the rates of
incarceration, i think this entire discussion is inconsistent with point
#1.  It ignores the disparities in criminal offending and suggests we
excuse away behavior. We simply shouldn't.

5. More emphasis on President's record and its impact on minorities.
Finally. the draft should include discussion and examples of falling crime
rates in minority communities.   It should mention the dramatic drop in
youth gun homicides, mostly among minority youth, and it should include
anecdotes with specific and well-known minority neighborhoods (e.g.,


Washington Heights in New York City, where the number of murders has
dropped from a peak of 100+ per year to about 10 now).  Also, we should
take credit for major policy shifts that have benefited minorities -- such
as taking on the gun lobby at a time when more teenagers were being killed
by guns than by any natural cause; and transforming the nature of policing
across the nation.  Finally, the President's leadership in appointing an
unprecedented number of high-caliber, minority law enforcement
professionals (Holder, Noble, Johnson, Gonzales, etc.) is worth
highlighting, too.



Here are some additional, specific comments:

1.  Page 1, paragraph 4, 3rd sentence: Replace with, "Since 1993, the
violent crime rate has dropped by more than 20 percent nationwide,
including a 28 percent drop in the homicide rate, which is at its lowest
level in 30 years." (1997 National Crime victimization Survey, Bureau of
Justice Statistics) .

2.  Page 2, paragraph 2, between 3rd and 4th sentence: We should think
about adding a sentence along the lines of, "Although African Americans
represent 12 percent (?) of the overall population, they have represented
approximately half of all murder victims for the past 30 years." (BJS
crime stats ... Scott should have this chart)

3.  Page 2, paragraph 3. This is an important point that needs to be
clearer and perhaps expanded. We need to make clear from the outset what
we know -- what the facts are -- about rates of victimization and
offending by race.   I recall that Chris Stone's paper to the Advisory
Board has a good discussion on this topic; perhaps it should be
incorporated. And the recent BJS homicide study (12/98) including
facto ids showing that African Americans were 7 times more likely than
whites to be murdered, as well as 8 times more likely than whites to
commit murder.   Perhaps we should come to agreement on the 5-10 most
important facts here and break them out as bullets. And perhaps we should
also include the findings from the GAO and DOJ studies, mentioned at the e
nd of page 26, showing that -- if we control for the type of criminal
offense committed -- rates of arrest, prosecution and conviction do not
differ significantly by race. Again, the point being that we should make
the facts of minority rates of victimization and offending very clear up
front

4.  Page 3, paragraph 1, last line:  I believe this number is include in
the DOJ/lnterior report on crime in Indian Country, and that it might be
that violent crime is up by more than 80%. (Scott should have this in his
copy of the final report on crime in Indian Country.)

5.  Page 3, last paragraph, last 2 sentences:  I'm not sure this is
right ... or what we want to emphasize here. Don't we want to emphasize the
cutting edge findings from Earls/Sampson Chicago Study that a strong,
shared sense of community (collective efficacy) is a better predictor of
violent crime than the usual demographic data -- by 40 percent, in fact.

6.  Pages 4 and 5, the first full paragraph and the two following it:  I
would drop this discussion of perceived unfairness and high rates of
incarceration from this section on criminal victimization and law
enforcement need, and look to incorporate it into the section on Building
Fairness (starting at page 20).


7.   Page 5, final paragraph and sentence: A couple of comments on this
sentence ... (1 if the GAO study shows that, if we control for criminal
offending, the rates of arrest, prosecution and conviction don't differ
greatly by race, than what are the assumed "racial disparities" that are
even greater in the juvenile system ... or do disparities only really exist
in the juvenile system? If we're trying to make a point about the
juvenile system, let's cite the facts and make it.    If not, let's drop the
inconsistent rhetoric .... We can't say throughout this chapter that the
system is both fairer than people think ... yet unfair ... and (2) with
respect to the following sentence, the sad truth is that we've already
lost a generation of minority youth -- victims and offenders -- to the mix
of crack/gangs/guns (discussed on pages 10 and 11), and this sad chapter
accounts for many of the difficult issues surrounding crime and race.
perhaps this is a story that should be told more explicitly here.

8. Page 6, first full paragraph, drop everything after the 4th sentence:
Again, either we believe the system is fundamentally fair or unfair, but
it can't be both.  I would argue that we want to say the system is
fundamentally fair, but that it can be improved ... that the relationship
between law enforcement and some minority communities is not as strong as
it could or should be ... and that law enforcement and the community both
lose when this is the case.    Consistent with this point, I wouldn't
generalize that unfair policies, racial biases and police brutality
undermine the criminal justice system.    Instead, I would point out that in
some communities racial tensions, past riots, incidents of police
brutality, police shootings, etc., have led to historically strained
relationship between police department and some minority communities, and
that these strained relationships can and must be overcome.    Perhaps a
specific example of a community that overcame racial unrest/tension would
help make the point.

9.  Page 6, 2nd and 3rd full paragraph: Do we really want to
introduce/coin the term "community justice" here? I'm not sure the term
"community justice," without further explanation, is clear.  Instead, I
would suggest that, in the last sentence of the 2nd paragraph, we replace
"community justice" with "community policing," and then drop the opening
sentence of the third paragraph. Later in the workplan we can talk about
applying what we've learned from community policing to other components of
the criminal justice system -- neighborhood DAs, community corrections,
special youth/gun/drug courts, etc.

10.  Starting withe last line on page 6 and over to page 7:   I'd replace
this w/a paragraph along the lines of:

"Before I ran for President, I traveled across the country and visited
different cities where local officials were leading the way in solving
some of the nation's most difficult domestic problems. One of the places
I visited was Charleston, SC, where Police Chief Reuben Greenberg was at
the forefront of the community policing movement.    Through community
policing, Chief Greenburg was both driving down the crime rate in public
housing and strengthening the relationship between local police and
community residents ... (add more specifics here on what Charleston has
done ... and we can add more here on Charleston overcoming a difficult
history of police mistrust) ."

I would then add a paragraph on our policing initiative ... something like:

"That is why when I became President one of my top priorities was to help
our cities hire more police and expand the community policing philosophy.
I was proud to work with an unprecedented coalition of law enforcement,


teachers, clergy, local officials and other community leaders to pass our
initiative to put 100,000 more community police on the street. Today, we
have nearly reached our goal of funding 100,000 more police officers and
helped expand community policing to thousands of police departments across
the country.  Our efforts are making a difference. Crime and the fear of
crime have dropped to their lowest level in a quarter century ... "

11.  Page 7, 2nd paragraph, last sentence:  Strike everything after
"community policing," and replace with -- "applying the lessons learned
from community policing to other areas of the criminal justice system,
such as local prosecutors' officers, our courts, local jails, etc."

12.  Page 7, "Community Justice" subheading and subsequent paragraph:
Replace "Community Justice 'Hot Spots'" w/ "Targeting Crime 'Hot Spots. '"

13.  Pages 7 and 8, bullets describing "Hot Spots" initiative:  I would
expand the first bullet on our 21st Century Policing Initiative to include
more details on this initiative, and add bullets with other programs that
would be specifically targeted. I would drop the 2 bullets on
comprehensive community plans; they are meaningless in terms of message
and substance ... perhaps something like this:

* The federal government will target funds from its 21st Century Policing
Initiative to help communities with high-crime neighborhoods to hire and
redeploy up to 50,000 additional police officers, acquire the latest
crime-fighting technologies, and engage their entire community in the
fight against crime.

* The federal government will target key prevention programs, including
afterschool programs and programs for at-risk youth ...

* What else?   (i.e., gun enforcement ... drug testing ... ?)

14.  Page 8, 1st full paragraph:  Rewrite this paragraph to be focused on
how targeting resources will allow high-crime, minority neighborhoods to
develop comprehensive anti-crime strategies, and to engage their entire
community -- schools, prosecutors, clergy, etc. Drop all references to
economic development.

15.   Page 8, penultimate paragraph: Drop entirely.

16.  Page 12, first paragraph: We should quote David Kennedy's article
from the NIJ journal; it's very powerful and persuasive.

17.   Page 12, 2nd paragraph, 3rd and 4th sentences:  I don't think this
rhetoric on the drug war works; we should drop it here and elsewhere.    The
truth is that much of the perceived unfairness and/or disparate impact in
the drug war is tied to government's response to the crack cocaine
epidemic.   If we wanted to be brutally honest we'd point out that the
crack epidemic did in fact cost us a generation of minority youth -- both
as victims and perpetrators -- and that well meaning
legislators/government officials of all races supported the drug war. The
more important point to make, I believe, is that drugs and related crime
have devastated minority communities, and that we can never let what
happened with crack happen again.   Instead, we must support a balanced
drug strategy that supports tough enforcement, more treatment, better
prevention ... etc.

18.  Page 14, bullet at top of pace:     Change to "Building stronger
cormnunities,"



19.  Page 16, 1st paragraph, last sentence:     Drop entirely (economic
development reference) .

20.  Page 17, 1st paragraph ... question: What do these numbers mean? How
do they comport w/our earlier findings by GAO and DOJ that, if we control
for criminal offending, there are no substantial differences between the
races?

21.  Page 19, bullet/subheading: Replace with, "Reinforce right from
wrong by promoting appropriate punishments when kids first get into
trouble."

22.  Page 19, bottom paragraph, 4th sentence:    After "including alcohol,"
add, "or to get money to buy drugs."

23.   Page 20, 1st paragraph, 2nd sentence: We shouldn't use this
reference to only 12 percent of prisoners receiving treatment; Justice has
disclaimed it and believes its inaccurate.    I think the more important
point to make here is that numerous studies show -- convincingly so --
that most persons on probation, parole or in prison have a drug
history/habit, but that we don't do everything we can ... we don't use the
full power of the justice system ... to reduce their drug use and
criminality. Also, this section provides an opportunity to laud the
President's record on promoting drug testing/treatment, drug courts, etc.

24.  Page 20, 2nd and 3rd paragraphs:   I'd drop these entirely; I'm not
sure they add anything.

25.   Page 21, first full paragraph:  I can't believe we want to get into a
discussion of OJ and jury nullification. What would we say? Also, as I
mentioned before, I wouldn't generalize that police "experiences,
incidents, and policies" lead "law abiding persons of color to believe
that they are targeted or threatened by law enforcement.   I think that's
inflammatory and inaccurate. As I mentioned before, I believe it's more
accurate to point out that in some communities the police have a
historically strained relationship with minorities.   If we want to explain
why this is the case, than we should take the time to do it right.   It's
not simply because of recent police policies or racial profiling; recent
police policies, in fact, have done much to improve relations with
minority communities. Rather, I believe it has much more to do with
30-years of changes in some of our minority communities (population moving
out, concentration of poverty and related social ills), tensions from
riots during the civil rights era, the professionalization of urban police
forces and the resulting gap between the police and the policed, the
nature of the crack epidemic, the relatively rapid diffusion of guns in
minori ty communi ties ... etc .

26.   Page 22, 2nd paragraph, penultimate sentence ... through the end of the
chapter:   I think these four sections on racial profiling, police
brutality, incarceration, and diversity in law enforcement are
fundamentally problematic for a variety of reasons.     First and foremost,
in one fell swoop, we say that these are difficult issues that need to be
addressed, but we haven't made a convincing case for them.     Again, either
we need to make the case that the system is fundamentally fair or unfair,
and go from there.   If the justice system is fundamentally fair, as I
believe we should be saying, than we should say these are isolated
problems that are important because of their disproportionate impact on
perceptions and attitudes of the system's overall fairness -- not because
they're implicitly widespread.
'..


      More specifically, I have the following concerns w/each of the sections ...

      Racial profiling:  As I understand it, we are not in a position to propose
      the executive order recommended in the chapter. DOJ has, for some time,
      been reviewing their own policies, but they have concerns, especially with
      respect to INS (I believe, for instance, that some courts have held that
      the use of ethnicity is sometimes okay for law enforcement purposes) .
      Secondly, Treasury -- especially with respect to the Customs Service -- is
      sure to have concerns as well. With respect to data collection, I'm not
      sure if there's any point in supporting the Conyer's bill.  It was killed
      by the police groups last year and will easily be killed again this year.
      Thus, if we really want to do something on improved data collection, let's
      just direct the AG to work with law enforcement to do it now; we don't
      really need a legislative language.

      Police Brutality:  I would reverse the emphasis of the current section by
      leading with the fact that there are very few case of police brutality
      (less than 1 percent of police encounters), and laud the Administration's
      record on bringing federal civil rights and pattern or practice suits when
      necessary. Then I would go into the fact that we must have zero tolerance
      for police brutality ... that it undermines the work of most honest,
      hardworking officers ... poisons the trust between them and the people
      they're sworn to protect ... etc.

      Disparities in Sentencing/Incarceration:    I would reverse the emphasis in
      this section, too.    I would open with the GAO and DOJ studies showing
      that, if we control for criminal offending, rates of arrest, prosecution
      and conviction do not differ greatly by race.    Perhaps we could also
      include Eric Holder's report from several years ago that comes to the same
      conclusion for federal crack and gun sentencing.    I would then talk about
      how, over the long term, we can't be satisfied with a system that
      incarcerates so many Americans, especially so many minorities ... that
      destroys so many families ... disenfranchises whole communities ... makes so
      many people unemployable.    We can't simply be satisfied with high rates of
      incarceration; we must actually work to reduce criminality and
      recidivism. One way to do this is by using the power of the criminal
      justice system to get offenders to kick their drug habits. We can do this
      by making an unprecedented commitment to drug test, treat, and
      appropriately punish the millions of probationers, parolees and prisoners w
      ith drug habbits .... etc.

      Finally, I'm not sure what if anything I would include on the
      disproportionate minority confinement of juveniles or the death penalty.
      The draft seems to indicate we'll have more to say on these topics.

      Diversity in Law Enforcement: Two quick points ... we really should be able
      to tell a more positive story here.  I'm sure our policing initiative has
      done much more to promote diverse police forces than we're acknowledging.
      Also, the President has a strong record of appoint minority law
      enforcement professionals; perhaps they're worth mentioning (Ron Noble,
      Jim Johnson, Eric Holder, Eduardo Gonzales ... ?).
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 089 - FOLDER -001


[02/04/1999]


