 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Amy weiss ( CN=Amy Weiss/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-FEB-1999 16:23:10.00

 SUBJECT:        school construction

 TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 what's the answer beyond react?
 ---------------------~ Forwarded by Amy Weiss/WHO/EOP on 02/03/99 04:22 PM




          Henry, Tamara
            II               II


         02/03/99 04:26:00 PM
 Record Type: Record

 To: Amy Weiss/WHO/EOP
 cc:
 subject: school construction




 Amy,
 Also need to know how different this is - other than the fact the
 proposal applies to all school districts and extends the amount of time
 school districts have to spend the money.

 Tamara


 Chairman Archer's proposal would relax the so-called "arbitrage
 rebate" rules for bonds issued to finance the construction of public
 schools. As a result, the State and local governments issuing the bonds
 would face lower costs and greater flexibility regarding construction of
 public schools. Accordingly, school districts would have more funds to
 use
 for new schools, new equipment, and new teachers.  Chairman Archer's
 proposal means
 More money for school districts
 Less paperwork for State and local governments
 Greater flexibility to school districts regarding issuing
 bonds and constructing public schools

 According to the most recent revenue projections, the proposal's revenue
 cost is $1.4 billion over five years.

 CHAIRMAN ARCHER'S SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION PROPOSAL



Arbitrage Rebate
State and local governments may issue bonds to finance school
construction (and for other governmental purposes), the interest on which
is exempt from Federal income tax.   Because the bonds are tax-exempt, the
issuer (the State or local government) pays a lower interest rate to the
bondholders. The result is lower borrowing costs for State and local
governments.
The Internal Revenue Code imposes several restrictions on tax-exempt
bonds.    One significant restriction is arbitrage rebate:  the issuer of
a tax-exempt bond is required to rebate to the Federal government any
profit that the issuer earns from investing tax-exempt bond proceeds in
higher yielding securities (i.e., "arbitrage"). Of course, as in other
areas of the tax law, a variety of exceptions and special rules may
apply.  Small issuers (i.e., governmental units with general taxing
powers that issue no more than $5 million of bonds) are not subject to
arbitrage rebate.   For State and local governments issuing public school
construction bonds, the small issuer exemption may be increased to $10
million (this provision was added by the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997). In
addition, tax-exempt bonds issued to finance the construction of
governmental buildings (such as schools) are subject to a relaxed rebate
rule, generally giving the issuer two years to spend the bond proceeds on
construction before becoming subject to rebate.
Conceptually, the arbitrage rebate rules make sense. Absent arbitrage
rebate restrictions, issuers of tax-exempt bonds would have an incentive
to issue more bonds than needed and earlier than needed. The issuer
would simply invest the bond proceeds in higher yielding taxable
securities until the funds were needed.   Still, the actual arbitrage
rebate rules are complex and expensive to comply with.
Chairman Archer's Proposal
Chairman Archer's proposal would make it easier for State and local
governments issuing public school construction bonds to comply with the
arbitrage rebate rules.   Generally, the proposal would provide issuers
with four years to spend the bond proceeds on construction of public
schools (rather than being subject to the current two year rule generally
applicable to construction of governmental buildings).   Since the issuer
would have less rebate to pay to the Federal government, school districts
would have more funds to use for new schools, new equipment, and new
teachers.


