 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD j   )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-FEB-1999 15: 11: 42.0,0

 SUBJECT:   equal pay memo

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D80]MAIL46501534R.036 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX RUMP:

 FF575043FA040000010A02010000000205000000213C0000000200000B3FCB4A584D2B942EE8CF
     Hex·Dump Conversion




                                            February 9, 1999


MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

FROM:                      BRUCE REED
                           LARRY STEIN


SUBJECT:                   Meeting with Senator Harkin and Pay Equity Advocates

        The President and Vice-President have spoken out in favor of equal pay and supported
Senator Daschle's Paycheck Fairness Act which strengthens the remedies available to women
under the Equal Pay Act. The Administration has not supported Senator Harkin's bill which
provides for comparable worth, a more controversial method that requires companies to
equalize wages between "equivalent" jobs. You will be meeting with Senator Harkin and
representatives of groups who favor comparable worth and will likely encourage the
Administration to endorse the concept of comparabl~ worth. As a fall back, the groups will
push for strengthening of the Daschle bill and may seek reinsertion of a provision on pay
disclosure that was dropped out last year at the Administration's request. This memorandum
provides background on the Administration's strategy on the equal pay issue, compares Daschle
and Harkin's bills giving the legislative outlook for each bill, and offers some options and
recommendations.

1.        Background

        The last major piece of equal pay legislation, the Equal Pay Act signed by President
Kennedy, became law more than 35 years ago. Since that time, the debate over how to
diminish the pay gap between men and women has frequently declined into disputes over how
large the gap actually is, what its causes are, and whether comparable worth is a desirable
policy. In the last few years, the Administration has gained strong public support by taking
steps to further equal pay, while not endorsing comparable worth. Among the actions the
Administration has announced in the last two years: endorsement of the Daschle bill (see below);
a $14 million equal pay initiative in the FY 2000 budget for the EEOC and the DOL's Office of
Federal Contractor Compliance (OFCCP); publication of a CEA report that shows a significant
wage gap between male and female workers; commitments by federal agencies to conduct
self-audits; and the creation of an annual report on pay differences to be published by DOL.
The President and Vice-President have held a variety of events to announce these steps and raise
                                TIex·Dump Conversion

public awareness of the issue, including mentioning equal pay in the State of the Union,
conducting a radio address on the topic this year, and hosting two events last year.


II.          The Daschle Bill

        The Administration has endorsed "The Paycheck Fairness Act," introduced by Senator
Daschle and Congresswoman DeLauro, to strengthen laws prohibiting wage discrimination.
The measure is included this year as a one of the Democratic Leadership Initiatives. Key
aspects of the bill include:

                  Increased Penalties. The legislation would provide full compensatory and
                punitive damages as remedies for equal pay violations, in addition to the
                liquidated damages and back pay awards currently available under the Equal Pay
                Act.

                Non-retaliation provision. The bill would prohibit employers from punishing
                employees for sharing salary information with their co-workers. Without the
                ability to learn about wage disparities, it is difficult for employees to evaluate
                whether there is wage discrimination.

                Training, Research, and Pay Equity Award. The bill would provide for
                increased training for EEOC staff; more research on discrimination in the payment
                of wages; and would establish an award to promote employers who have
                worked to eliminate pay disparities.


      III.      Harkin's Bill

              Last year, Senator Harkin introduced a comparable worth bill called the "Fair Pay
      Act ofl997." (It doesn't appear that he has reintroduced the bill this year.) The
      highlights of this legislation include:

      ·         Comparable Worth. Harkin's bill amends the Fair Labors Standards Act to
                prohibit the paying of unequal wages for work on "equivalent jobs" i.n
                occupations dominated by employees of different sex, race, or national origins.
                The legislation defines "equivalent jobs" as "jobs that may be dissimilar, but
                whose requirements are equivalent, when viewed as a composite of skills, effort,
                responsibility, and working conditions." It exempts from this provision wage
                differences on the basis of seniority, a merit system, or a quality/quantity system.
                  Hex·Dump Conversion

·      Data Collection. The bill requires employers to submit wage data to the
       EEOC.        Employers must submit data not only with respect to job category but
       also with respect to sex, race, and national origin. Furthermore, the EEOC is
       authorized to publish this data and may provide specific employer's reports to
       the public. This provision also is very controversial. Senator Daschle's bill had
       originally contained a requirement for greater collection of wage data, but the
       Administration felt this would draw a great deal of fire from Republicans and the
       business community and it was replaced with Sense of the Senate language that
       the President should increase the amount of information available on wage
       disparities.

·      Non-Retaliation Provision. Harkin's bill also contains a non-retaliation provision
       and a provision to permit the awarding of expert fees.

·      Education, Training, and Technical Assistance.    The bill also provides for
       research, education, and technical assistance.

IV.   Legislative Outlook

        Senator Daschle's bill has 20 cosponsors currently (Sen. Harkin has yet to
cosponsor, although he has in the past). On the House side, Congresswoman
DeLauro's bill, H. R. 541, has 34 cosponsors. Both of these bills are part of the
"Democratic Leadership" package of bills. Senator Harkin's bill had 8 cosponsors
in the last Congress, while the House version garnered 64 cosponsors. (By contrast,
last Congress, Senator Daschle brought 23 Democrats on board, while
Congresswoman DeLauro's bill had 95.) The Harkin-Norton bill is unlikely to
attract more cosponsors because of lack of support from the leadership, lack of
strong lobbying efforts by interest groups, and its controversial nature. The
Daschle-DeLauro represents the bill with the greatest ability to move, to draw some
bipartisan support, and to have some chance of passage.

        As a political matter, the Daschle bill offers Democrats the ability to raise
the issue on the floor, highlight our commitment to the issue, and spotlight
differences between supporters and opponents. If the bill fails to pass, the vote
would give members a record of fighting the wage gap and demonstrate that on a
moderate bill where there is a national consensus, opponents of equal pay denied
passage. Whether the bill passes or not, the attention such a fight would receive
would focus attention on the problem and broaden the constituency for further
measures, including, possibly, for Senator Harkin's bill. In contrast, endorsement
of the Harkin bill at this time would likely drive members away from the issue
altogether in fear that they will be tarred as supporting government wage-setting
and radical interference in the labor market.

       It is also clear that without a commitment from the interest groups,
                    hltomatcd Records Management System
                    Hex· Dump Conversion

    members, and the Administration to work together on legislation, we will lose the
    opportunity to raise the profile of this issue in any fashion. It is worth
    remembering that, while many Democrats espoused the principle of fair pay for
    women and participated in numerous events, no one tried to raise the issue on the
    floor. Without consensus support for our legislative and outreach strategy, the
    issue will be a victim of in-fighting and fall off the political radar screen.
    V. Options & Recommendation

            By backing Senator Daschle's bill as a first step, the Administration has
    gained an excellent position from which to lead a national debate on the wage gap
    and advocate for policies that will lead to more fairness in the workplace. In
    contrast, endorsing comparable worth at this point would likely breakdown the
    chance to build momentum on the issue, and spark only a debate over big
    government interference with the market and wage-setting. Indeed, just last week
    a Wall Street Journal op-ed attempted to attack the Daschle bill on the grounds
    that it promoted comparable worth, while giving only partial attention to the
    existence of a wage gap -- a shift in focus that would be greatly accelerated by
    Administration support for Harkin's bill. We believe that the Administration
    should keep opponents of equal pay on the griddle by keeping the nation's attention
    focused on the existence of the wage gap and the common-sense first steps we all
    should be able to agree to in att~cking it.

            We suggest two other points that may be useful for the discussion. First, the
    Administration's approach has been successful in advancing the ball and keeping
    momentum in favor of the issue. For example, in addition to endorsing the Daschle
    bill, the Administration has:

                  Supported a $14 million equal pay initiative in the FY 2000 budget for
                  the EEOC and the DOL's Office of Federal Contractor Compliance
                  (OFCCP);

    ·             Issued a CEA report that shows a significant wage gap between male and
                  female workers;

                  Committed federal agencies to conduct self-audits, and the creation of an
                  annual report on pay differences to be published by DOL starting this
                  year;

    ·             Discussed equal pay in the State of the Union, conducted a presidential
                  radio address on the topic this year, and hosted two events last year.

           Second, to demonstrate that we remain committed to the fight to erase pay
    disparities, you may want to suggest some intermediary steps the Administration
    could consider, short of endorsing Harkin. While it would be a stretch to support
                             Hex- Dump Conversion


             comparable worth, perhaps we could look more closely at increasing disclosure by
             employers; encouraging, through a voluntary program, employers' attempts to
             remedy pay disparities (this would be an expansion of.it provision already in the
             Daschle bill); and, strengthening the Daschle bill. The last option is already being
             considered by Senator Daschle's office and the groups have submitted
             recommended changes to the bill. We should agree that we will continue working
             with the groups in finding ways to make the Daschle bill more attractive to them.


