 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Michael waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:II-FEB-1999 08:49:09.00

 SUBJECT:     fyi

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Paul D. Glastris ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
                             Clinton's dumbest education idea
                             ENDING "SOCIAL PROMOTION" WON'T CURE WHAT AILS
                             AMERICAN SCHOOLS.

                             BY JOAN WALSH

                             When President Clinton vowed in his State of the
                             Union address to "end social promotion" --
 passing
                             schoolchildren to the next grade regardless of
 their
                             achievement -- he bravely declared himself
                             opposed to a concept that has absolutely no
                             supporters. "Social promotion" is a concept much
                             like "welfare as we know it." Nobody likes it,
                             nobody wants to defend it and the president's
                             promise to end it places him squarely on the
 side of
                             the angels      and the voters, according to
 pollsters.
                             Exactly where Clinton likes to be.

                             So why are former Clinton supporters in the
                             education community furious at the president's
                             promise? "Because he knows better," says Kati
                             Haycock of the Education Trust, which advocates
                             to improve education for poor children. "When he
                             was governor he knew education systems as
                             thoroughly as anyone. He's just pandering."
                             Nobody supports social promotion, Haycock notes,
                             but the likely alternative    forcing millions
 of
                             students to repeat a grade in school -- is
 worse.

                             It's rare that educational research is unanimous
                             about anything, but on the issue of retention,
 it's
                             close. There is near consensus among scholars
 and
                             researchers that retention doesn't help, and
 often


                      hurts, the children who repeat a grade.
Chicago's
                      attempt to end social promotion, which Clinton
                      cited approvingly in his State of the Union
address,
                      is actually an expensive, undocumented
experiment
                      that, despite $100 million annually for remedial
                      programs, has resulted in at least 24,000 stude
nts
                      being left back over the last two years. Several
                      states and cities have already ended social
                      promotion and vastly increased retention rates,
with
                      dubious results.

                      Despite that research and experience, ending
social
                      promotion has become the cure-all for the
nation's
                      education ills. The goal unites a broad
spectrum of
                      politicians and social critics who normally
disagree.
                      Conservative writer Charles Murray, whose 1984
                      book "Lqsing Ground" blamed permissive 1960s
                      policies for causing the 1980s urban underclass,
                      linked social promotion with welfare as an
example
                      of a liberal   practic~   that actually hurt those
it was
                      intended to help. "A student who did not want to
                      learn was much freer not to learn," Murray
wrote,
                      and faced "no credible sanctions for not
learning. "

                      But Sandra Feldman of the American Federation of
                      Teachers -- a group Murray likes no better than
                      welfare-rights advocates -- also blasts social
                      promotion. In her first major speech to the
National
                      Press Club after taking office, she blamed the
                      practice of "sending students on 'to the next
grade
                      even though they weren't really ready" for the
                      epidemic of students leaving high school without
                      basic skills. The AFT has come out against
social
                      promotion, arguing that if students don't meet
basic
                      standards, they should be retained.

                      And of course, politicians to Clinton's right
have
                      tried to make ending social promotion their
cause.
                      Just before he left office last month, former
                      California Gov. Pete Wilson signed two bills to
end


                      social promotion in California -- but they
passed the
                      state's Democrat-controlled Legislature
                      unanimously, a measure of the notion's
bipartisan
                      popularity. Texas Gov. George W. Bush is a
                      longtime foe of social promotion, but
 significantly,
                      the plan passed by the Texas Legislature sets
 tough
                      new standards for promotion, yet allows teachers
                      and parents leeway to avoid leaving students
back
                      if they'd be harmed by it.

                      How did ending social promotion become the
                      education reform flavor of the week? "It's part
 of
                      the same 'get tough' mentality you see on
 crime, on
                      welfare," says Ernest House, a University of
                      Colorado education professor who has studied the
                      issue closely. "But on school kids, it just
doesn't
                      work.   II




                      CLINTON'S DUMBEST EDUCATION IDEA   I   PAGE 1, 2, 3


                      Although Charles Murray traces the social
                      promotion controversy to the 1960s, its roots go
                      back to the early days of the century, when
                      students began staying in school well past
                      childhood, instead of leaving after a few years
 for
                      farm or industrial work. As students who might
                      have dropped out began staying in ·school longer,
                      many lagged behind their better educated or more
                      privileged peers, and the practice of holding
back
                      those who weren't achieving began to spread.

                      But as Richard Rosenblatt explained in a recent
                      issue of phi Delta Kappan magazine,
                      turn-of-the-century educators then began to
worry
                      about rising numbers of students repeating
grades.
                      In 1908, Rosenblatt found, the Russell Sage
                      Foundation sounded alarms about the growing
                      amount of education money being wasted on
                      students going through the same grade twice.
Some
                      researchers found that as many as two-thirds of
                      students in certain school districts had been
left
                      back. Education reformers began charting the
                      negative effects of retention and calling for
more


                     individualized instruction to allow students to
                     advance with their peers -- in other words,
social
                     promotion. By 1938, a National Education
                     Association survey found, most school districts
                     practiced some version of social promotion.

                     The pendulum began to swing back in the 1950s,
                     Rosenblatt observed, as critics blamed social
                     promotion for declining achievement. In reality,
                     many school districts, and individual schools,
had
                     always held back large numbers of failing
students.
                     In the 1960s and '70s, advocates for poor and
                     minority children did take aim at retention,
finding
                     that black children were more likely to be left
back,
                     and that retention hurt their later school
                     performance.

                     But the 1980s, which saw the reversal of many
                     liberal social policies at the national, state
and local
                     level, brought the large-scale return of
retention.
                     While Clinton cites the fledgling Chicago
                     experiment to back his crusade against social
                     promotion, he'd be better off looking at what
                     happened in New York, which abolished social
                     promotion in 1981, but abandoned the program as
                     a failure in 1983. Despite investing more than
$50
                     million in 1,100 new teachers, New York left
back
                     more than 25,000 students in those two years.

                     Unfortunately, their achievement didn't improve,
                     says Ernest House, who evaluated the program.
                     And years later, research found that New York
                     students retained during that experiment were
more
                     likely to drop out than comparable low-achieving
                     students who weren't left back. African-American
                     boys who were retained were 37 percent more
                     likely to drop out, House notes, and other
studies
                     show similar bad results for black males who've
                     been retained in other districts. Black and
Latino
                     students are disproportionately left back under
the
                     current retention policies.

                     House and others believe Chicago is destined to
                     repeat New York's mistakes. While Chicago school
                     officials claim their program has increased
overall
                     student achievement,   there has been no


                      independent evaluation, House notes. "It's
                      astonishing that a program that is so
controversial
                      and costs so much money has not been
                      independently evaluated after three years," he
says.
                      New York, too, proclaimed its 1981 program an
                      early success, based on internal data, but
outside
                      evaluators disputed those early gains, leading
New
                      York to abandon the experiment. The Consortium
                      on Chicago School Reform recently took issue
with
                      the school district's data, finding that recent
                      improvement in student test scores could not be
                      attributed to its retention experiment. And
while
                      Chicago boasts that most students referred to
its
                      summer programs manage to move on to the next
                      grade level, thanks to the extra help, a full 46
                      percent do not. Chicago school district
officials did
                      not return phone calls seeking comment on their
                      program.

                      Programs to end social promotion don't have to
                      lead to widespread retention. Many schools have
                      adopted a policy of abolishing social
promotion, but
                      they put resources into identifying students at
risk
                      of repeating a grade early in the school year,
and
                      offer tutors and other special help. La Ballona
                      Elementary School in Culver City, Calif., for
                      instance, has done such a good job with its
program
                      to identify lagging students that last
September,
                      then-Gov. Wilson chose it as the site to sign
                      legislation ending social promotion in
California.
                      "Yes, some kids are going to be held back,"
Wilson
                      acknowledged at the press conference. But not at
                      La Ballona. The Los Angeles Times reported that
                      only two or three students a year are actually
                      retained, despite their ambitious program. The
                      principal called retention "a terrible option."

                      Several cities, .including Corpus Christi,
Texas, and
                      Long Beach, Calif., have abolished social
                      promotion without vastly increasing retention.
                      Corpus Christi tests at-risk students every
three
                      weeks to make sure theY're keeping up. Most
                      educators say retention should be one option


                     among many considered for students who can't
                     achieve at grade level. "The 'expert opinion' on
                     retention changes every 10 years," complains
                     Barbara Karvelis, principal of San Francisco's
                     Edison Elementary School. "Each case is
                     individual, and you can't have one policy.
You've
                     got to consider the student's age, gender, their
                     parents' views, whether they were absent a lot."
                     The handful of studies that have found positive
                     benefits to retention have mostly been in
                     well-funded, suburban schools, where the small
                     number of students who are retained are more
                     likely to get the special help they need than
at urban
                     schools where higher numbers fail.


                     CL~NTON'S   DUMBEST EDUCATION IDEA   I   PAGE 1, 2, 3


                     If retention doesn't work, how can educators
best
                     reduce the large number of students who fail to
                     perform at grade level?

                     .Maybe the biggest disappointment of the Clinton
                      administration, especially in a time of budget
                      surpluses, is its failure to vastly increase
funding for
                     pre-kindergarten programs. The benefits of
                     preschool, especially for low-income children,
have
                     been well-documented. Grade retention rates are
                     much higher for children who haven't attended
                     preschool. But where programs like Head Start
                     tried to give a boost to the poor, they were
never
                     fully funded.   Ironically, their success
resulted in a
                     jump in preschool attendance for middle-class
and
                     affluent kids, while the low-income kids who
need
                     preschool most are only half as likely as
wealthier
                     kids to get it today. Although states would
have to
                     get involved in establishing universal
                     pre-kindergarten programs -- and several already
                     have -- the Clinton administration could have
put
                     much more political, budgetary and regulatory
                     muscle behind the notion.

                     Kati Haycock of the Education Trust says the
                     Clinton administration has fallen down most in
the
                     area of monitoring Title I funds,        the federal
dollars


                     school districts get to help poor and
low-achieving
                     students. School districts who receive Title I
dollars
                     are now allowed to show overall school
                     improvement, rather than monitoring how poor and
                     low-achieving students are doing, Haycock notes.
                     She and others believe Clinton should have
                     developed a national initiative to recruit good
                     teachers to urban school districts. The new
practice
                     of reducing class size has, paradoxically, hurt
many
                     urban kids, because good urban teachers are
fleeing
                     to new classrooms in higher-paying, less
demanding
                     suburban schools, leaving urban kids with poorly
                     trained, uncredentialed teachers. "The research
                     shows that if you could provide low-income kids
                     with teachers as well-trained as those who
teach in
                     suburban districts, you'd wipe out half the
                     achievement gap between those groups of kids,"
                     Haycock says.

                     Anti-retention advocates also say devoting more
                     resources to reading skills in the early grades
would
                     be more effective than retention. In Chicago,
the
                     advocacy group Designs for Change has called
                     upon the school district to invest the $100
million it
                     spends on its retention program in a
combination of
                     early childhood education, better reading
instruction
                     and early identification of failing students.
11   We
                     oppose social promotion and retention," says Sue
                     Davenport of Designs for Change.

                     Of course, the Clinton plan is mostly symbolism.
                     Although it triples federal funding for
after-school
                     programs and tutors,   to help children who
already
                     have or may soon be retained, that will still
only
                     provide $600 million for the entire nation, when
                     Chicago is spending $100 million in one city.
"what
                     rises to the top of the president's agenda is
what
                     pollsters tell him sells," says Haycock.      "This
won't
                     make a difference. It's chump change."
                     SALON I Feb. 11, 1999


