RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-FEB-1999 15:06:13.00

SUBJECT:   G-8 Paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I've cut and pasted into this email the draft Education would like to send
over to the NSC today for use in the discussions with the other G-8
countries. MIke Smith is also reviewing this version this afternoon.

Comments are due to ED by c.o.b today.

Bruce/Elena -- do you want to see the final paper before it goes over to
the NSC?



U.S. Comments on Proposals for Human Capital Discussion
at G-8 Heads of Government Meeting in Cologne
June, 1999

        The United States strongly endorses the inclusion of investment in
human capital as a theme of the G-8 summit in Cologne. We believe that
the LeadersO, discussion of human capital should be explicitly linked to
the summitD,s central focus on building a new financial architecture for
the 21st century. Toward that end, we propose that the Leaders agree that
the economic superstructure they are working to construct will only be
sound if it rests on a foundation of well-educated and well-trained
populations in their respective nations and in the other countries of the
world.  The Leaders could note that for nations, continuous investment in
human capital is essential to stimulating sustainable economic growth and
reducing social and economic inequality., Similarly, they could note that
for individuals, educational attainment is an increasingly powerful
determinant of income and quality of life.

The United States believes that the LeadersO, discussion of these issues
will be most productive if it is organized around a unifying theme. We
suggest that theme could be preparing citizens for success in the
information age. A useful starting point for a session devoted to that
theme could be a brief initial discussion of the essential skills that all
adults will need to thrive in the knowledge-based societies of the
twenty-first century. The Leaders could then turn to effective strategies
for helping all citizens master and continually update those skills
throughout the continuum of lifelong learning.


I.  Defining the Skills for Success in the Information Age
        All of the nations of the G-8 face the challenge of educating
students for life in a global economy and an information society that are,
in many respects, still emerging. A critical element of meeting that
challenge is defining the knowledge and skills that will be the keys to
high quality employment in the future.   The Leaders of the G-8 could
advance that effort by outlining the core skills that their countries have
designated as priorities for the next century. While the purpose of this
inquiry would not be to negotiate a comprehensive consensus statement on
the skills for success in the information age, the final communiqu? could
usefully highlight points on which there is particularly strong
agreement.
        This discussion of essential skills for the future would allow the
Leaders to exchange ideas on a number of common concerns, including the
need for entrepreneurship as outlined in the German and UK proposals. The
Leaders might also agree, to suggest a few further examples, on the
importance of preparing students to work cooperatively in groups with
persons of diverse backgrounds, and on the need to provide students with
advanced skills in mathematics and literacy and with the ability to use
personal computers.
        The future peace, prosperity and stability of an increasingly
interdependent world will, of course, depend on more than effectively
preparing citizens for success in the labor market.   To highlight the
D&non-economicD8 importance of investment in human capital, the United
States also proposes that the Leaders should discuss ideas and values that
will form the foundations of democratic citizenship in the 21st century.
Among them might be:   respect for the political, civil, and human rights
of all people, a commitment to voting and participation in the political
process, and an appreciation for the values of tolerance, pluralism and
diversity.
Building Human Capital in the Information Age
        The Leaders could turn from this initial discussion of the skills
for success in the information age to an exchange of ideas on strategies
for helping all citizens master and continually update those skills
throughout their lives. The United States proposes that the Leaders focus
their discussion of effective policies for investing in human capital on
~hree broad areas:   primary and secondary education, higher education and
the private sector.

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION
The United States strongly endorses the UK proposal for a discussion of
investment in modernization of education and raising standards, including
consideration of efforts to raise the level of basic skills and effective
ways of measuring student achievement against rigorous academic
standards. The United States also endorses the emphasis contained in both
the German and UK papers on developing strategies for helping individuals
from low income or other high need groups to improve their educational
performance.   The Leaders could calIon the OECD to continue and expand
its effort to develop high quality comparative international measures of
student achievement.
The United States believes that the LeadersD, discussion of the mo
dernization of education should also include a focus on strengthening the
teaching profession for the 21st century.  The Leaders could usefully
consider varying approaches to a number of critical issues, among them
teacher recruitment, training, compensation, and professional
development. To illustrate their commitment to helping teachers prepare
students for life in an increasingly interdependent world, the Leaders
could commit to increase support for exchanges of teachers among the
nations of the Eight.
Finally, the United States believes that the LeadersD, discussion of the


modernization of primary and secondary education should also highlight the
use of educational technology ( particularly distance learning
technologies, multimedia software applications and low-cost, portable
hardware ( as promising tools for improving teaching and learning. The
Leaders could consider effective policies for closing the D&digital
divideD8 among elements of their populations with and without access to
the Internet and other important technological resources.
Internationally, the Leaders could commit to consider ways to work
together and through international institutions to help developing
countries utilize educational technology in addressing their own pressing
educational needs.

HIGHER EDUCATION
While the United States believes that the importance of universities in
promoting dynamic economies would be a useful topic for discussion at
Cologne, we also believe that the LeadersD, consideration of higher
education should not concentrate exclusively on the role of universities
as centers of research and the training of highly qualified personnel. We
suggest an additional focus on the importance of improving access to
higher education for all citizens, particularly for- those from tradi
tionally excluded groups.
In the nations of the G-8 and in other developed countries today,
completion of post-secondary education provides a greater boost to future
earnings than any other degree of educational attainment. By the time
they are in their 30s and 40s, for example, university-level graduates in
OECD countries earn 30-80 percent more than their fellow citizens whose
highest degree is a high school diploma or its equivalent.    Partly as a
result of this earnings premium, college-going rates have significantly
increased in many developed nations since 1990.   During the same
timeframe, the cost of higher education has gone up as well. At Cologne,
the leaders could usefully consider ways to increase participation in
higher education in an era of rising costs.

THE PRIVATE SECTOR
        The United States strongly supports the proposal outlined in the
German discussion paper for consideration of the vital role that private
enterprises playas investors in human capital. We agree that the
workplace training is an increasingly important and- often very effective
means of providing employees with new skills or helping them to update
existing ones. Accordingly, we propose that the Leaders also discuss
effective strategies for promoting high-quality training for both employed
and displaced workers, including through partnerships between business,
government and labor.
        The United States suggests that the Leaders should also discuss
private sector engagement in efforts to improve primary, secondary, and
higher education.  The Leaders could highlight ways that the business
community has a been a positive force for school reform in their
respective countries and could encourage the private sector to view
support for education as an investment in the knowledge and skills of the
workers and customers of the future.


Proposed outcomes
A declaration of the importance of investment in education and human
capital;
A joint statement highlighting a number of commonly agreed-upon skills for
economic success and values for democratic citizenship in the emerging
interdependent, information-driven global economy;
An invitation to the OECD to continue and expand its effort to develop
high quality comparative international measures of student achievement;


A commitment to increase support for teacher exchange among the nations of
the Eight;
A commitment to consider ways to work together and with international
institutions to help developing countries utilize educational technology
in addressing their own pressing educational needs.

Format
        To increase public attention to the critical concerns that the
Leaders will be addressing in their discussion of human capital at
Cologne, the United States proposes that the session be at least in part
open to the press. We also suggest that the session could feature an
exchange·with an international panel of experts and practitioners on one
of more of the subjects that the Leaders will be discussing.
Possibilities include education researchers, teachers, students, and
CEOD,s.


