     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TlME:17-FEB-1999 15:40:04.00

     SUBJECT:   revised draft long-term care

     TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Ruby Shamir ( CN=Ruby Shamir/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Draft 02/17/98 2:30pm
     Jeff Shesol

     PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
     REMARKS ON LONG-TERM CARE TAX CREDIT
     DOVER, NEW HAMPSHIRE
     February 18, 1999

             Acknowledgments: Gov. Shaheen; Beth Dixon; Karen Goddard; David Robar;
     other panelists TK

              I want to thank the Governor for her remarks, and I especially
     want to thank her for all sheD,s doing to improve the quality and
     availability of health care here in New Hampshire.   I think her proposals
     are good ones. And I think they will go a long way toward helping the
     people of New Hampshire meet the challenges of health care in the 21st
     Century.

             Today, our panelists will discuss a number of these challenges:
     from the rights of patients to the concerns of small businesses providing
     coverage; and from the health care needs of children to those of the
     elderly and people with disabilities.  My administration has been working
     for six years now to make progress in all these areas; and my latest
     balanced budget renews that commitment. We remain focused on the future.
     And that is why I want to talk this morning about meeting the greatest
     challenge of the new century: the aging of America.  As the Baby Boom
     becomes the Senior Boom, long-term care will become a growing need.   So it
     is more important than ever that we help families provide that essential
     kind of care for their loved ones.  In my balanced budget, I have proposed
     and paid for a long-term care tax credit of $1,000 to help families do
     exactly that.

             I will have more to say about that proposal in a moment.   But
     first, let me put it into a larger picture, and say that a long-term care
     tax cut is exactly the kind of tax cut we should be making.   As you know,
     we are engaged in a great national debate right now about how to use the
     budget surplus. Now, we can all agree that America should have tax cuts.
     But there are two very different ways we can go about it.   First, there is
     the old way -- failed and full of risk -- that some Republicans are trying


    to resurrect.   They are saying: splurge today, save tomorrow. That is
    not my approach. My approach says invest today, save for tomorrow. My
    kind of tax cut is one that doesnD,t destroy our fiscal discipline, but
    preserves it.   My kind of tax cut is not indiscriminate, but is, instead,
    targeted ·to meet peopleD,s real needs for the future.  Above all, my kind
    of tax cut allows us to meet our responsibility to future generations --
    and to invest the lion's share of the surplus in saving Social Security
    and Medicare first.

            Even some Republican moderates are coming to see the wisdom in
    this approach, in targeted tax cuts.  I look forward to working with them
    to make the right choices for future generations -- to make sure we donD,t
    squander our historic opportunity to save Social Security and Medicare,
    and pay down the debt. As I said in my State of the Union Address one
    month ago, we can make good on that opportunity -- while providing tax
    relief like USA Accounts, and while making targeted tax cuts in areas from
    urban investment to clean energy technology, and from child care to
    long-term care. That is the way we should use our surplus: We should
    invest it.  Invest it in AmericaD,s future.

            The long-term care tax cut I proposed last month is the right kind
    of investment.  It will help meet the needs of one of vulnerable Americans
    who cannot fend for themselves.  It will help ease the burden of the
    millions of households now caring for elderly relatives and neighbors and
    people with disabilities.

            providing long-term care at home is, more and more often, a common
    choice, but it is rarely an easy one.  Since this kind of care is rarely
    covered by private insurance or Medicare, out-of-pocket expenses can be
    high.  Moreover, caregivers who hold jobs outside the home -- and that is
    a vast majority -- may have to take unpaid leave or work fewer hours to
    fulfill all their responsibilities.

            We have taken steps to ease the burdens on these families in a
    number of ways: by strengthening Medicare, by extending the trust fund, by
    promoting prevention and improving nursing homes.   But the aging of
    America in the 21st Century will demand more of us.   The long-term care
    tax credit represents an important step -- helping to meet the unique
    needs of individual families, empowering-them to do what is best, showing
    them how very much we value the work they do.

             Our parents worked and saved and sacrificed for us in our youth;
    adult children are working and saving and sacrificing for their parents in
    old age.   It is the cycle of life and one we should recognize and reward
    as a nation.

            There is more we must do to keep America strong and healthy in the
    21st Century, and the Governor talked about some of those things. We
    should also join together across party lines to pass a strong, enforceable
    PatientsD, Bill of Rights -- as well as the landmark legislation proposed
    by Senators Kennedy, Jeffords, Roth, and Moynihan to allow people with
    disabilities to keep their health insurance when they go to work. We must
    ke


