    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:19-FEB-1999 17:25:30.00

    SUBJECT:   Revised Weekly 2/19

    TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
      Stem-Cell section revised===================~ ATTACHMENT        1 ====================
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D93)MAIL475717451.036 to ASCII,
     The following is a HEX DUMP:

    FF57504386110000010A020100000002050000008F56000000020000A04578AD3EA982EEFCCC4A
    D3B3BB5E13542DCAA7FB8EF32E36682DCD3EAD780D42F9B9D80855F3331B04ECA541DA816B1E44
    E69684D15C7BE9717424860C1CDE7D2D6C3834E93A6AOD707E6D860963982BAD6EF6B75B02C2C9
    19C4D1B9F367CF4F38EE83C6EB4539187A9132E53318B4A3F50CA995A83CC700663179A8FBOOAB
                              Hex-Dump Conversion




                                        February 20, 1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                     Bruce Reed
                          Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:                 DPC Weekly Report

        Health Care -- Children's Health Insurance Outreach Event: Next Tuesday, you
and the First Lady are scheduled to participate in an event highlighting major new
initiatives designed to help target and enroll the over 5 million children who are eligible
for but not yet enrolled in CHIP or Medicaid. Although 47 States have taken
advantage of the CHIP program and all 50 States have Medicaid programs for children,
the success of our children's health initiative will be depends on our ability to identify
and enroll eligible children. At the event, you will unveil a new national toll-free
number (1-877 KIDS NOW) for children's health outreach, a major media campaign
(which includes the airing of PSAs on NBC, Univision -- the Hispanic television network,
and Black Entertainment Television, as well as radio ads in 47 States), a series of private
sector commitments (such as printing the new 1-800 number on Safeway grocery bags),
and the next generation of efforts by your Federal Interagency Task Force on Children's
Health Outreach. You will be joined at this event by the chair and vice chair of the
NGA, Governors Carper and Leavitt, who will be in town for the National Governor's
Association Conference.

        Health Care -- Jeffords-Kennedy Disability Update: One issue that is gaining a great
deal of bipartisan support, particularly in the Senate, is the Jeffords-Kennedy-Roth-Moynihan
Work Incentives Improvement Act. The Senate has already held hearings on this legislation
and is planning a March 4 markup. It is apparent that there are many Republicans and
Democrats who are interested in this legislation in the House, although they are still
discussing who should be the lead sponsors. Because of the interest in and bipartisan
support for this legislation, we are looking for an opportunity for you to publicly urge the
Congress to move to pass this legislation early this year.

       Health Care -- Patients Bill of Rights Update: Senator Kennedy, Senator
Daschle, and Congressman Dingell have requested that we assist them in encouraging
consumer and provider groups to make an orchestrated effort to push the Congress to
take strong and early action on the Patients Bill of Rights. In response, we will be
meeting with a broad array of these organizations early next week to organize them
around the concept of a enforceable bill, and to also help define the difference between a
strong and an unacceptably weak bill.
                        Hex-Dump Conversion


        Health Care -- Stem Cell: Next Tuesday, at her Appropriations Committee
hearing, Secretary Shalala is expected to be questioned about the Department's
statutory interpretation the Congressional ban on human embryo research does not apply to
stem cell research, since the cells cannot be considered embryos as they do not have the
capacity to develop into a human being. This hearing follows a letter signed by 70 members
of Congress that raising serious objections to this interpretation and suggesting that it not only
serves to thwart the law, but could well encourage researchers to engineer lethal defects into
embryos in order to use the tissue for research purposes. The disease and patient advocacy
community is strongly supportive of our interpretation. However, it is clear that we need to
better emphasize our commitment to implement safeguards that ensure that the cells obtained
for this research have no direct link to human embryos. There is bipartisan support for this
position, but Mr. Porter and Senator Spector have indicated their desire to develop legislation
that codifies how we are going to implement these safeguards. We do not plan on signaling
our openness to any such compromise language for next week's hearing, but we are drafting
legislation to be available should the need arrive.

         Crime -- Gun Tracing: On Sunday, the Treasury Department will release its second
report on the Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative (YCGII) now underway in 27 cities, as
well as announce the inclusion of 10 more cities. Through YCGII, ATF is working with
other federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies to systematically gather and analyze
evidence from recovered crime guns to investigate and make cases against illegal gun
traffickers. The new report contains data on crime guns from each participating YCGn cities
and includes the key findings:
       Confirms that kids and guns is a serious problem in all 27 cities. Crime guns
       recovered from juveniles account for 11.3 percent of the crime guns submitted to ATF
       and were recovered more frequently from 16 and 17 year-olds than persons over age 26.
       Crime guns recovered from youth ages 18 to 24 years-old constituted about a third (32.4
       percent) of all trace requests -- the most of any age grouping in the adult and juvenile
       categories;

     Handguns prevalent amongst youth and across all age groups. About 8 out of 10
     crime guns traced were handguns, with most crime guns concentrated among relatively
     few makes and calibers -- particularly amongst juveniles and youth;

     Many crime guns used by kids moved rapidly from legal sale to illegal market.
     Between 25 to 36 percent of firearms recovered from juveniles, and 32 to 49 percent of
     guns recovered from youths were guns bought legally less than three years before
     recovery. This indicates that a significant portion of legally purchased guns are
     quickly diverted to kids and youths through illegal trafficking.

     ATF doubled the number of trace requests handled from YCGII cities. The
     number ofYCGII trace requests handled by ATF doubled from the previous report, from
     37,000 to over 75,000 traces.


                          Automated Records Management System
                          Hex-Dump Conversion                                                          3

     Treasury is in the process of adding new ATF agents in the participating 27 cities, and your
     FY 2000 budget includes additional funds to do the same in the new 10 cities being selected
     by ATF. These include: New Orleans, LA; Oakland, CA; San Francisco, CA; Dallas, TX;
     Tampa, FL; Charlotte-Mecklenberg, NC; Louisville, KY; Portland, OR; Omaha, NE; and
     Denver, CO. On a related note, you should know that some of the cities filing lawsuits
     against gun manufacturers and dealers have depended on ATF's crime gun tracing data as
     evidence of illegal gun trafficking in their communities.

             Welfare Reform -- NGA Resolution: The Governors have an extensive resolution
     related to the implementation of welfare reform and although welfare is not one of the
     planned topics of discussion during Monday's roundtable, you may be asked about this issue
     by individual governors. The NGA resolution calls for greater flexibility on a number of
     issues in the pending welfare regulations.       It also calls upon Congress and the
     Administration to uphold the commitment in the 1996 welfare reform law for five years of
     full block grant funding.

             The Governors are seeking several major changes in the pending TANF regulations
     including: allowing greater flexibility for programs funded with state Maintenance of Effort
     funds; narrowing the definition of assistance under TANF so that supports for working
     families won't be subject to the federal time limit, work requirements, or reporting
     requirements; providing states maximum flexibility to continue their welfare reform
     waivers; streamlining data reporting; and allowing more flexibility in the definition of
     administrative costs. We are still reviewing HHS's proposed changes, we believe we will
     be able to address many of the governors' priority concerns. We will provide you with a
     more detailed analysis of these issues once we have had additional conversations with
     Secretary Shalala .

           . We believe we should work with the governors to preserve full funding for the
     TANF block grant. While some in Congress have indicated that the $3 billion in
     unobligated TANF funds may be a good way to pay for other priorities, we disagree.
     Since the TANF block grant is fixed, we believe it is prudent for states to reserve some
     funds should economic conditions change. In addition, states may need to invest more as
     work requirements increase and as more and more of those remaining on the rolls are the
     'hardest to employ'. We also understand that different states are in different situations --
     nearly half the states have obligated all of their FY 1998 funds.

            Welfare Reform -- Urban Case/oad Trends: On Thursday, The Brookings Institution
     released a study on welfare caseload trends in the 30 largest cities which shows that welfare
     caseloads are declining rapidly in America's cities, though the rate of decline in some places
     lags behind the statewide decline and hence some cities are becoming home to an increasing
     share of welfare caseloads. Specifically, welfare rolls in the 30 largest cities declined by 35
     percent between 1994 and 1998, while caseloads declined 44 percent in their respective
                             Au{oll1a{cd Records Management System
                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                        4

     states. The share of state caseloads in these 30 cities grew from 45 to 53 percent, but there
     is considerable variation: while nearly half the states saw an increasing concentration of
     welfare recipients, nearly one-third experienced no change in concentration, and one-quarter
     actually saw a decreasing concentration. Not surprisingly, there is a close correlation
     between slower rates of caseload decline, increasing concentrations ofwe1fare caseloads and
     high levels of poverty -- in the 14 cities with increasing concentrations of welfare caseloads,
     15 percent of the population, on average, lives in high poverty neighborhoods, which is
     nearly triple the rate of high poverty neighborhoods in the cities with a declining share of the
     welfare caseload.

            Caseloads with the fastest caseload decline (over 50 percent) include Milwaukee,
     Jacksonville, Denver, and Portland while cities with the slowest caseload decline (between
     18 and 26 percent) include Los Angeles, EI Paso, Philadelphia, and New York. The
     Brookings report recommends additional welfare to work funding for the cities and
     highlights our W.elfare-to-Work program as an important source of these funds. The
     Welfare-to-Work formula funds are distributed to states and communities based on their
     number ofwe1fare recipients and residents in poverty.

            Children and Families -- Foster Care: Rep. Ben Cardin (D-MD), the ranking
     Democratic on the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Human Resources,
     introduced legislation recently to provide additional support to the nearly 20,000
     young people who each year "emancipate" from foster care at age 18. As you know,
     your FY 2000 budget provides nearly $300 million over five years in enhanced support
     for these young people. The Cardin legislation differs somewhat from our proposal
     and will likely cost more, but our goals are similar and we will work closely with
     Cardin over the coming months. The ranking member of the Subcommittee, Rep.
     Nancy Johnson (R-CT), shares an interest in this issue and plan to hold a hearing on
     March 9, at which the Administration will testify.

             Livability -- Better America Bonds: We have begun outreach efforts to the bond
     community regarding your administration's Better America Bonds (BABs) proposal. Last
     week, EPA Administrator Carol Browner met with Bond Marketing Association -- as well
     as several individual firms including Lehman Brothers, Goldman Sachs, Bear Steams, and
     Paine Webber -- to discuss BABs. While the groups expressed interest in the BABs
     proposal, they did express concern that both the School Construction bond proposal and
     BABs indicated that the Administration was abandoning the existing private activity bond
     structure. The Administrator stated that is not the Administration's intention. We plan to
     follow up with these groups to secure their support for BABs and reiterate that your
     administration supports private activity bonds as indicated by your agreement last year to
     increase the bond cap and your signing of a 1993 law to make the Mortgage Revenue Bond
     program permanent.




                               j, ulomaled Records
                                                Management System
                               Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                                                5

             Consumer Protection -- Child Seat Belt Announcement: The National Highway
     Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has the final rule ready for you to announce -- a
     new universal method for installing child safety seats in cars and light trucks. This
     rule will require each new child seat to have three attachments -- one on top and two at
     the base, and by 2002, will require all new cars and light trucks to be equipped with
     standard anchors in the back seat designed specifically to link to the child seat
     attachments. NHTSA estimates that currently about 80 percent of child seats are
     improperly connected putting children at risk. This rule is expected to prevent as
     many as fifty child deaths and 18,000 injuries each year. You announced the
     proposed rule in your radio address on February 15, 1997. There has been a good
     deal of press reports anticipating the new rule, including articles in the Washington
     Post and on AP. You are tentatively scheduled to announce this new rule in your
     radio address on February 27,1999.



