        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: Clara J. Shin ( CN=Clara J. Shin/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ) )

        CREATION DATE/TIME:19-FEB-1999 14:40:17.00

        SUBJECT:   race report: compact language

        TO: Shirley S. Sagawa ( CN=Shirley S. Sagawa/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: mike_cohen   mike_cohen @ ed.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN ) )
        READ:UNKNOWN

        TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
        READ:UNKNOWN

        CC: MaryEllen C. McGuire ( CN=MaryEllen C. McGuire/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        CC: felicia.wong ( felicia.wong @ npr.gov [ UNKNOWN)   )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)    )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        CC: Marjorie Tarmey ( CN=Marjorie Tarmey/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
        READ:UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       please find attached a revised version of the education Compact section of
       the President's Race Report.  Changes were made to reflect the concern
       that the Compact proposal was inconsistent with our ESEA reauthorization
       proposal.  Please forward comments to me by Tuesday, February 23. Thank
       you.


        - edcompact2-19.wpd==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
       ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

       TEXT:
       Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D58)MAIL40928445W.036 to ASCII,
        The following is a HEX DUMP:

       FF575043DC1300000l0A020100000002050000008E4500000002000081CF36571FC475DDAD23E6
       A063C9FCDD81CF3657B4AE93B4B848FBB25D31FD157F4C24CB7248332FF16D1FB029451001D9C5
       F0095895848B8966D94E3FOC20985F12F3E0031B9B8848F6DCDOB8EA04ED7999B6CBOOIC08815D
       610F232838E4A708865075BOA91E382598653282DCCA8781CBC317IB71E7466340721546DD4E7D
       19EBFFC098D3425E80A7CAA39DAF40940BB962D25B5661AA5EDA63D82CA9D89242FOA754AFBC5E
       BIB52280A84D15B86ADAA1C99F63C899151DB244E9674DE96AOB6CDCAOF8D097F2DFBDFE283B35
       E9AE6ACBDA3BOOA8D6210D73B535696F87427B794EC8506BE48402CB5EOB72ED16AE28585376DF
       ,
       .t



                                             Automated Records Management Sy§h!ifl
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

                                        CENTERPIECE OF THE FEDERAL WORKPLAN:
                                 . THE COMPACT FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN EDUCATION

                     For more than three decades, the Elementary and Secondary Education Act has been the
            ,foundation of our nation's support for millions of students and their schools. In my January,
             1999 State of the Union address, I proposed that we fundamentally redirect that effort to put far
             greater emphasis on spurring concrete improvement in results, while creating far stronger systems
             of accountability, not just to federal taxpayers, but to communities and families. I also proposed
             targeted federal resources to help turn around failing schools, to reward progress in raising
             achievement levels, to put high quality teachers in high poverty schools, to end so-called social
             promotion, and to expand after-school and other academic support programs. And I proposed
             that we build in accountability at all levels to focus not only on improving education overall, but
             also on narrowing the gaps between poor and rich, rural and urban, minority and white.

                    This is a good start. Now we must build on it to provide the world-class education and
            schools our nation and all our children need to continue to prosper into the 21st century. While
            these reforms are motivated by several concerns beyond racial justice, I believe they contain the
            right ingredients to form the centerpiece of our education workplan for building One America.
            I know that this important shift in policy will not occur overnight or without extended debate,
            but I believe that in the end there will be a consensus that our nation's ideals and prosperity
            require a new determination to make quality education for all a reality, not just a slogan.

                     I believe we can and must build upon these broad-based reforms. We must make
            targeted efforts in those communities where racial disparities in achievement and resources
            present an especially tragic and worrisome picture that simply isn't the America we want.
            Federal leadership can be a catalyst, but our efforts will fizzle without broad-based community
            involvement. Local control is essential. We need to enlist the participation of willing
            jurisdictions and private sector partners in a Compact for Equal Opportunity in Education. Quote
            simply, [all of us?] need to join in a new covenant to benefit America's children, with the goal of
            eliminating racial disparities in K-12 achievemen~. Just as our Welfare-to-Work Partnership has
            helped move tens of thousands of families off of welfare and into good jobs, the Compact can be
            a coalition to bring determination, creativity and resources to bear on this central obstacle to
            securing the opportunity all our children deserve.

                    Let me give you an idea of how this new partnership might work..

                           School systems would commit to measure and close the racial disparities in
                           achievement, and adopt measurable goals and a strategy for achieving them.
                           Corporations and other community actors would commit to specific forms of
                           support for the strategy.

                           The strategy would have a timetable, and a report-card style system of public
                            Hex-Dump Conversion

               accountability. [These report cards will help ensure that our policies focus not just
               on the administering and maintenance of schools and programs, but also on
               ensuring that those schools and programs achieve the results that they are
               supposed to.] There should be carrots and sticks so that everyone involved, from
               students to school boards, has all the right incentives to succeed.

               The federal government should support the Compact by offering the broadest
               possible flexibility in its grant programs, based on the accountability for results
               and on the judgment of expert panels that the strategy proposed by a school
               district (or state) has the ingredients most likely to yield success, including support
               for quality teaching, high expectations, and quick-response takeovers of failing
               schools.

               Ultimately, my hope is that the federal government will be able to offer substantial
               new funds to Compact communities, tied to results, to further support ambitious
               gap-closing reforms.

         We know that this results-based approach to education can work. We have seen states
and school districts use this method to help all of their students achieve more. Let me give you
an example. Dade County, Florida, which includes the city of Miami and is one of the most
racially diverse school districts in America, had 45 critical, low-performing schools. But in two
years, they raised their math and reading scores so much that all 45 were off the list. And they
did this by focusing on results. Dade County officials and teachers refused to accept the
proposition that because these students were poor or lived in tough neighborhoods, they could
not learn.'

         We should all follow this results-oriented approach. I proposed it in response to a tragic
irony that is at work in American education: too often, the children who need the most are least
likely to get it. In part, this is because of long-standing inequities in educational funding
formulas, especially the traditional reliance on local property taxes. Schools in a sea of poverty are
too often overwhelmed, or nearly so, by the extraordinary challenges they face. Students who
live in low-income neighborhoods often bring the many burdens of their lives and their
communities to school with them. Simple calculations of expenditures-per-pupil don't capture the
subtleties, including: homeless ness, family crises, or hunger; crime in hallways, streets and homes;
and the simple, grinding pressure of poverty that may make family support harder to come by.
Add to those problems the aging inner-city school buildings, disparities in teacher training, high
proportions of students with special language needs -- and you have a recipe for disaster.

       up until now, we have generally tackled this problem with piecemeal, fragmented

        IFrom President's remarks to the Students, Teachers, Parents and the Community of
Jackson Mann Elementary School, Brighton, Massachusetts, February 2, 1999.
                          TIcx-Dump Conversion

approaches, including efforts at the federal level. Over the decades, the intentions have been
good, and the progress has sometimes been meaningful. Early in my Administration, we worked
with the Congress to enact Goals 2000 and a major reform of the bedrock Federal grant program
intended to help states and districts educate poor children, the so-called Title I program. Now
funded at almost $8 billion per year, the program is distributed by a formula related to the
number of poor children, and the law now tells participating states that they must raise standards
and use tests or some other assessment measures to hold themselves accountable for making
progress in improving education outcomes for poor children. I believe that these reforms are
moving us in the right direction. There are important signs of promise and progress. But the
pace is too slow, and our ambitions must be still higher.

        We have tolerated racial disparities and underachievement in education for too long. I
share the burning impatience felt by many parents, civic leaders and educators who are fed up
with the status quo and demanding more for our children. Together, we must forge a new
federal-state partnership to break the cycle of disadvantage. and eliminate gaps in student
achievement. Still more piecemeal programs -- federal or state -- will not bring about the
sweeping changes needed to close the substantial racial gaps in opportunity and achievement,
making public schools work for all of the public.

         Let me be clear: this is not Washington encroaching on local authority. In my years as a
governor, working both within my state and on national policy, I came to fully appreciate that
education is primarily a state and local responsibility. But I have also seen that sometimes a
child's opportunity can be limited by the resources a local community can raise with a property
tax, or the accident of whether the state is wealthy or poor, generous or stingy in aid to local
schools. [And I have seen that] Federal education programs are often too confining, with their
red tape and narrow categorical purposes. And across the board, I have seen education treated as
an island, cutoff from the mainland of challenges in the surrounding community. We have
worked hard in the last several years to tackle these problems, but I am determined to do more.
Yes, education is primarily a state and local responsibility -- but to be successful, all citizens --
public and private -- must work together to support our children, their families and communities.
  And as I have said many times, this is an issue too important to get ensnared in jurisdictional,
administrative or partisan bickering. When it comes to the education of our children, politics
must stop at the schoolhouse door.

TEXT BOX:

       As part of the Compact, the federal government would provide new, greater
       flexibility but in return demand greater results, focused on closing the racial
       disparities. It springs from my belief that, given an equal chance, all our children
       can succeed. It is my hope that the flexibility built into this proposal will spur
       emulation, innovation and tailoring of approaches to fit local needs. For example,
       I expect but would not require that each Compact for Equal Opportunity in
                                       Automated Records Management System
                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

                 Education include such things as: (a) strategies focused on putting high-quality
                 teachers in high-need schools, and plans to reduce disparities in other resources;
                 (b) ways to engage families, businesses and other local institutions; © strategies
                 for breaking through the red tape of various federal, state and local programs in
                 education as well as related fields, and ways to build partnerships across
                 jurisdictional lines of school districts and local government agencies; (d) creative
                 responses to the needs of immigrant children with limited English skills; (e) ways
                 to promote higher expectations for achievement and to take aggressive action
                 when there is failure; (f) practical mechanisms to identify educationally bankrupt
                 schools or even districts, triggering receivership; and (g) plans for accountability at
                 all levels, so that performance is measured fairly and has consequences.

                 These are not mandates. I am proposing neither a formula nor a cookbook.
                 Communities that are not interested in a new Compact to close achievement gaps
                 can simply ignore this challenge, and learn from the bold efforts of others.

          END TEXT BOX

                 As the Advisory Board on Race said in its final report to me, "To a great extent, we
          know what to do to promote educational equity and excellence; we just have to have the courage
          as a nation to do it. If we are successful here, fundamental change will follow." In the long-term,
          if we eliminate gaps in student achievement by race, we will ensure minority access to college
          and to a better future, and we will promote integration by making all public schools, and
          therefore the communities they serve, attractive to all Americans.


