RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-FEB-1999 15:25:37.00

SUBJECT:   Memo on equal pay for Podesta

TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a new draft of the equal pay memo. Caroline Fredrickson has
signed off. We added some language on efforts we have been making on data
co11ection.==================== ATTACHMENT  1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D48]MAIL45613595I.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP,

FF575043FA040000010A02010000000205000000F9440000000200006BDF96EC7838BC15BBD246
AB0976DF715A74822CBOA17205D78EA30375DC41EF16F794358D10FB462FF9503F12C608C04856
5A51D165AEC24E9DB87E26C9268C94795804CA8FF59F2B32AOA1959413AFB01C434ADBC10616DE
6D5945EFFEEDFBB2C51D35703960DE0677026A8DA079B62D845C4579C95616573C30C3EDA0499C
                                          Hex-Oump Conwrsion



                                       February 24, 1999


MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

FROM:                 BRUCE REED
                      LARRY STEIN


SUBJECT:              Meeting with Senator Harkin and Pay Equity Advocates

         The President and Vice-President have spoken out in favor of equal pay and supported
Senator Daschle's Paycheck Fairness Act which strengthens the remedies available to women
under the Equal Pay Act. The Administration has not supported Senator Harkin's bill which
provides for comparable worth, a more controversial method that requires companies to equalize
wages between "equivalent" jobs. You will be meeting with Senator Harkin and representatives
of groups who favor comparable worth and will likely encourage the Administration to endorse
the concept of comparable worth. As a fall back, the groups will push for strengthening of the
Daschle bill and may seek reinsertion of a provision on pay disclosure that was dropped out last
year at the Administration's request. This memorandum provides background on the
Administration's strategy on the equal pay issue, compares Daschle and Harkin's bills giving the
legislative outlook for each bill, and offers some options and recommendations.

I.     Background

        The last major piece of equal pay legislation, the Equal Pay Act signed by President
Kennedy, became law more than 35 years ago. Since that time, the debate over how to
diminish the pay gap between men and women has frequently declined into disputes over how
large the gap actually is, what its causes are, and whether comparable worth is a desirable
policy. In the last few years, the Administration has gained strong public support by taking
steps to further equal pay, while not endorsing comparable worth. Among the actions the
Administration has announced in the last two years: endorsement of the Daschle bill (see below);
a $14 million equal pay initiative in the FY 2000 budget for the EEOC and the DOL's Office of
Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP); publication of a CEA report that shows a
significant wage gap between male and female workers; commitments by federal agencies to
conduct self-audits; and the creation of an annual report on pay differences to be published by
DOL. The President and Vice-President have held a variety of events to announce these steps
and raise public awareness of the issue, including mentioning equal pay iri the State of the
                                         Hex..l)ump Conversion

Union, conducting a radio address on the topic this year, and hosting two events last year.

       It may also be relevant to your meeting that the same groups that are lobbying on
behalf of Senator Harkin's bill have also been lobbying for improved disclosure of pay data
by employers. One specific area of contention has been attempts by the Department of
Labor's Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) to request pay
information by letter from some 5000 contractors selected for compliance reviews.
OFCCP currently collects this data onsite at a later stage of the compliance process. OMB
has balked at this request, primarily concerned about imposing an undue burden on
employers. The Department of Labor has recently requested OMB delay its review for 90
days. At a meeting this week with pay equity groups and Josh Gotbaum, Josh promised to
re-examine the matter. In addition, he noted the Administration had a variety of potential
mechanisms for obtaining wage data from employers, including the EEOC and the Bureau
of Labor Statistics, and we wanted to fashion the best overall plan for obtaining useful
data. The DPC, NEC, OMB, OPL (women's office), EEOC, and DOL held a meeting on
Friday to begin this process of determining what are the most effective and politically
plausible means for improving data collection from employers.




II.    The Daschle Bill

        The Administration has endorsed "The Paycheck Fairness Act," introduced by Senator
Daschle and Congresswoman DeLauro, to strengthen laws prohibiting wage discrimination.
The measure is included this year as one of the Democratic Leadership Initiatives. Key aspects
of the bill include:

           Increased Penalties. The legislation would provide full compensatory and
           punitive damages as remedies for equal pay violations, in addition to the
           liquidated damages and back pay awards currently available under the Equal Pay
           Act.

          . Non-retaliation provision. The bill would prohibit employers from punishing
            employees for sharing salary information with their co-workers. Without the
            ability to learn about wage disparities, it is difficult for employees to evaluate
            whether there is wage discrimination.

           Training, Research, and Pay Equity Award. The bill would provide for
           increased training for EEOC staff; more research on discrimination in the payment
           of wages; and would establish an award to promote employers who have
           worked to eliminate pay disparities.
                                     Hex-Dump Conversion         .

[Data Collection. Senator Daschle's bill had originally included a provision that
required the EEOC to collect reports from employers with 100 or more employees of
wage information, analyzed by the race, sex, and national origin of the employees.
It was felt that this provision would raise very strong objections from the business
community and the measure was not included in the bill the Administration
endorsed.]                                         .

III.    Harkin's Bill

        Last year, Senator Harkin introduced a comparable worth bill called the "Fair Pay
Act of 1997." (It doesn't appear that he has reintroduced the bill this year.) The
highlights of this legislation include:

       Comparable Worth. Harkin's bill amends the Fair Labors Standards Act to
        prohibit the paying of unequal wages for work on "equivalent jobs" in
        occupations dominated by employees of different sex, race, or national origins.
        The legislation defines "equivalent jobs" as "jobs that may be dissimilar, but
        whose requirements are equivalent, when viewed as a composite of skills, effort,
        responsibility, and working conditions." It exempts from this provision wage
        differences on the basis of seniority, a merit system, or a quality/quantity system.


       Data Collection. The bill requires employers to submit wage data to the
        EEOC.        Employers must submit data not only with respect to job category but
        also with respect to sex, race, and national origin. Furthermore, the EEOC is
        authorized to publish this data and may provide specific employer'S reports to the
        public. This provision is very controversial. As noted above, Senator Daschle's
        bill had originally contained a requirement for greater collection of wage data, but
        the Administration felt this would draw a great deal of fire from Republicans and
        the business community and it was replaced with Sense of the Senate language
        that the President should increase the amount of information available on wage
        disparities.

       Non-Retaliation Provision. Harkin's bill also contains a non-retaliation provision
        and a provision to permit the awarding of expert fees.

       Education, Training, and Technical Assistance.         The bill also provides for
        research, education, and technical assistance.

IV.    Legislative Outlook

      Senator Daschle's bill has 20 cosponsors currently (Sen. Harkin has yet to
cosponsor, although he has in the past). On the House side, Congresswoman



                               Automated Records Management System
                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

      DeLauro's bill, H. R. 541, has 34 cosponsors. Both of these bills are part of the
      "Democratic Leadership" package of bills. Senator Harkin's bill had 8 cosponsors
      in the last Congress, while the House version garnered 64 cosponsors. (By contrast,
      last Congress, Senator Daschle brought 23 Democrats on board, while
      Congresswoman DeLauro's bill had 95.) The Harkin-Norton bill is unlikely to
      attract more cosponsors because of lack of support from the leadership, lack of
      strong lobbying efforts by interest groups, and its controversial nature. The
      Daschle-DeLauro represents the bill with the greatest ability to move, to draw some
      bipartisan support, and to have some chance of passage.

              As a political matter, the Daschle bill offers Democrats the ability to raise
      the issue on the floor, highlight our commitment to the issue, and spotlight
      differences between supporters and opponents. If the bill fails to pass, the vote
      would give members a record of fighting the wage gap and demonstrate that on a
      moderate bill where there is a national consensus, opponents of equal pay denied
      passage. Whether the bill passes or not, the attention such a fight would receive
      would focus attention on the problem and broaden the constituency for further
      measures, including, possibly, for Senator Harkin's bill. In contrast, endorsement
      of the Harkin bill at this time would likely drive members away from the issue
      altogether in fear that they will be tarred as supporting government wage-setting
      and radical interference in the labor market.

             It is also clear that without a commitment from the interest groups,
      members, and the Administration to work together on legislation, we will lose the
      opportunity to raise the profile of this issue in any fashion. It is worth
      remembering that, while many Democrats espoused the principle of fair pay for
      women and participated in numerous events, no one tried to raise the issue on the
      floor. Without consensus support for our legislative and outreach strategy, the
      issue will be a victim of in-fighting and fall off the political radar screen.


      v.   Options &   Recommendation

              By backing Senator Daschle's bill as a first step, the Administration has
      gained an excellent position from which to lead a national debate on the wage gap
      and advocate for policies that will lead to more fairness in the workplace. In
      contrast, endorsing comparable worth at this point would likely breakdown the
      chance to build momentum on the issue, and spark only a debate over big
      government interference with the market. Indeed, a recent Wall Street Journal
      op-ed attempted to attack the Daschle bill, on the grounds that it promoted
      comparable worth, while giving only partial attention to the existence of a wage gap
       -- a shift in focus that would be greatly accelerated by Administration support for
      Harkin's bill. We believe that the Administration should keep opponents of equal
      pay on the griddle by keeping the nation's attention focused on the existence of the
      wage gap and the common-sense first steps we all should be able to agree to in

                                   AutOmated Records Management System
                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
     attacking it.

              We suggest two other points that may be useful for the discussion. First, the
     Administration's approach has been successful in advancing the ball and keeping
     momentum in favor of the issue. For example, in addition to endorsing the Daschle
     bill, the Administration has:

                     Supported a $14 million equal pay initiative in the FY 2000 budget for
                     the EEOC and the DOL's Office of Federal Contractor Compliance
                     (OFCCP);

                    Issued a CEA report that shows a significant wage gap between male and
                     female workers;

                     Committed federal agencies to conduct self-audits, and the creation of an
                     annual report on pay differences to be published by DOL starting this
                     year;

                    Discussed equal pay in the State of the Union, conducted a presidential
                     radio address on the topic this year, and hosted two events last year.

             Second, to demonstrate that we remain committed to the fight to erase pay
     disparities, you may want to suggest some intermediary steps the Administration is
     working on, short of endorsing Harkin. First, DPC, NEC and OMB have begun a
     process to look for ways to increase wage disclosure by employers. We are hoping
     to find a mechanism the groups could support by early April. Depending on what
     method we chose, this new Administration measure could be implemented by
     executive action or included in Senator Daschle's bill. Senator Daschle is planning
     on including some data collection provision in his bill and will introduce the bill on
     April 8, Equal Pay Day. Second, we will look at other ways to strengthen the
     Daschle bill. Senator Daschle's office is already considering this and we have
     reached out to the groups seeking recommendations. We should agree that we will
     continue working with the groups in finding ways to make the Daschle bill more
     attractive to them.


