  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME:26-FEB-1999 14:17:00.00

  SUBJECT:   Jim Pinkerton's column

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Paul D. Glastris ( CN=Paul D. Glastris/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  Washington Isn't Fit to Be a Sub Teacher



                    IF THE ANCIENT Trojans were well advised to beware of
                    Greeks bearing gifts, America's governors should be wary of
                    Washingtonians bearing funds.

                    "I want to work with you." So said President Bill Clinton
  to the National
                 Governors Association at the White House on Tuesday as he
  touted a host of
                 programs that would be directed by his Department of
  Education. Meanwhile,
                 from the other side of the aisle and the other end of
  Pennsylvania Avenue, Sen.
                 Pete Domenici (R-N.M.), chairman of the Senate Budget
  Committee,
                 proposed a $40-billion increase in federal education
  spending during the next
                 five years.

                 And so it goes. While 93 percent of the budget for K-12
  public schools comes
                 from state or local sources, Uncle Sam is determined to
  grab a larger share of
                 political brownie points, gripping the issue with both his
  Democratic left hand
                 and his Republican right hand. And why not? If the polls
  show that education is
                 a top-tier issue, why would any politician want to let go?
  Why let concerns
                 over competence get in the way of taking cred'i t?

                 Once upon a time, when regional disparities were far
  greater, perhaps the
                 federal government needed to step in. In 1950, for example,
  per capita income
                 in Mississippi was just 50.4 percent of the national averag
  e. But by 1980 it
                 had grown to 68.9 percent, and has continued to increase
  since.



                 But from a federal government perspective, it's always good
  to federalize an
                 issue. And so it was in 1958 that Republican President
  Dwight Eisenhower
                 and the Democratic Congress joined together to help win the
  Cold War by
                 passing the National Defense Education Act. And although
  most Republicans
                 opposed the creation of a cabinet-level education ministry
  in 1979, once
                 President Ronald Reagan found that he could not abolish
  "DoEd," he found a
                 new use for it: as a bully pulpit for conservative ideas on
  "excellence." In 1988,
                 another Republican, George Bush, pledged to be "the
  education president" and
                 the following year convened an education summit with the 50
  governors to set
                 "national goals" for America's students.

                 Of course, it was hard to see the added value that the feds
  could offer, other
                  than simply added funding, which has usually flowed toward
  the politically
                 muscular, not the educationally meritorious. Moreover, if
  national Republicans
                 wanted to start a bidding war over education bragging
  rights, national
                 Democrats were always ready to bid higher.

                 In Clinton's fiscal-year 2000 budget, he proposes about $35
  billion in federal
                 education spending, including initiatives for everything
  from constructing new
                 schools to hiring more teachers. All these seem like nice
  ideas; indeed, a cynic
                 might say these individually wrapped initiatives owe more
  to pollsters than to
                 policy wonks.

                  Consider, for example, the administration's proposal to
  spend $600 million to
                  "help" schools end the practice of social promotion. Has no
  one outside the
                  Beltway thought of a way to deal with that problem? Even
  Gov. Parris
                  Glendenning, a liberal Democrat from Maryland, a liberal
  state, told The
                  Baltimore Sun, "For a lot of-governors, there's a natural
  fear that goals and
                  standards might become federal regulations controlling
  local schools."

                  Republicans might take a principled stand against such
  micro-management, but
                  then again they might not. On Tuesday, Gov. John Engler
  (R-Mich.) told the
                  Senate Education Committee that if Washington wanted to imp
  rove education,


                   it would replace the current weed patch of
    special-interest-driven "categorical"
                   programs with a single "block grant" to each of the states.
    "Consolidate 600
                   programs, shrink the bureaucracy, cut the waste and put the
    responsibility
                   squarely on the governors' shoulders," Engler exhorted the
    Capitol Hillians.

                      Engler's argument squared with everything that's known
    about effective
                   program management in the '90s, but the committee's
    chairman, Sen. Jim
                   Jeffords (R-Vt.) would have none of it. Jeffords spent a
    quarter century in
                   Congress before he got to chair a full committee. From a
    Beltway perspective,
                   he would be a fool to cede his turf to 50 governors.

                   Happily, the schools nationwide are improving. Governors,
    realizing that their
                   careers are on the line, have muscled their legislatures
    into making real reforms,
                   even as Washington concentrates on what it does b
    ipartisanly best:
                   check-writing, cheer leading and, of course, credit-taking.


