RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Devorah R. Adler ( CN=Devorah R. Adler/OU=OPO/O=EOP [ OPO ] )

CREATION OATE/TIME:26-FEB-1999 13:57:46.00

SUBJECT:   draft of provider tax memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
for your review -- please call with questions --

Devorah

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D38]MAIL496334267.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750436B040000010A02010000000205000000204D00000002000003AA713CB400F22DFA9F3F
DOC60C793FB5E022764F01DC8EB5940D9CA1F8E407CF2635842FOE970A83CF0164C5C1AC4DOC7E
E52AC635593E04E4B32F3EC8546E94766FAB8B891AED8E9A33DA49996B13337C04702547E9346F
10FBF1E6025EC9101704A51E1713A9213A990D6040C5737F2CA4440879905BFE391B42E8B3E5FO
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

                                         February 26, 1999


MEMORANDUM TO JOHN PODESTA

FROM:

SUBJECT:       MEDICAID PROVIDER TAXES AND DONATIONS ENFORCEMENT

In the absence of any direction from the White House, HHS is planning to take the first steps
towards sanctioning those states that are apparently using illegal provider taxes and donations to
help maximize Federal Medicaid matching dollars (and minimize state expenditures.) HHS has
been threatening to take enforcement actions against states out of statutory compliance since the
beginning of the Administration, but for a variety ofreasons have not been very aggressive or
successful in doing so. The tax liability associated with these States is estimated to be $4.6
billion retrospectively and they are expected to incur an additional $427 million annually for each
year that we delay action. Because of the magnitude ofthis problem, as well as its implications
for tobacco recoupment and state relations in general, we are seeking your guidance on this issue.

BACKGROUND

Provider Taxes and Donations in Medicaid. During the late 1980s, many states established
financing schemes that had the effect of increasing their Federal Medicaid funds without using
additional state resources. Typically, states would raise funds from health care providers
(through provider taxes or "donations"), then pay back those providers through increased
Medicaid payments. Since the of ederal government pays at least half of Medicaid payments, the
provider taxes or donations would be repaid in large part by Federal matching payments. Using
this mechanism, the state was left with a net gain because it only had to repay part of the provider
tax or donation it originally received, The widespread use of these financing mechanisms
contributed to the extraordinary increases in Federal Medicaid expenditures in the early 1990s.
One report found that provider tax revenue rose from $400 million in six states in 1990 to $8.7
billion in 39 States in 1992. There was a similar increase in Federal Medicaid spending, which
more than doubled between 1988 and 1992, with a staggering average annual rate of over 20
percent.              .

Because provider taxes and donations were effectively siphoning off potentially billions of
dollars from the Federal Treasury, the Congress limited states' use of these schemes in a bill
enacted by President Bush in 1991. The subsequent regulatory interpretation of these limits was
negotiated with the states and the National Governors' Association in 1993.


States' continued reliance on impermissible provider taxes and our enforcement record.




                                     Automated Records Management System
                                             Hex.l)ump ConYelSion
    Since the publication of the regulations, there have been several actions but no initiation of the
    enforcement process. The Administration formally notified those states which appeared to be
    out of compliance that they were in danger of being audited in 1993 and 1996. The issue
    resurfaced in the Balanced Budget Act, which included a provision that legalized New York's
    provider tax. Because BBA singled out New York for special treatment and created an
    extremely troubling precedent, the President line-item vetoed this provision. Although the
    Supreme Court subsequently over-rode the line item veto, making New York's taxes permissible,
    there remain at least 15 states that are out of compliance with the provider tax and donation law.

    Recognizing the difficulty of attempting to collect all the potential state liabilities, the
    Administration (in late 1997) urged the Congress to pass legislation to give HHS the authority,
    (which it does not now have), to forgive past Medicaid debts if the states came into prospective
    compliance. Because Congress was split between some Members wanting no legislation
    (because the good guy states believe that HCF A should be aggressively pursuing "crooks") and
    the "bad guy" states (who saw no reason to rock the boat with legislation that explicitly still
    requires them to come into full compliance), the Congress ended up taking no action. As a
    result, it appears that numerous states are still utilizing "bad" taxes and donations primarily
    because they have little to no fear that HCF A will enforce the law. Even if they do, most states
    still figure they can come to appeal to the White House or the Congress for relief.

    HHS and Dol believe the current statute requires that they proceed with enforcement actions.
    HHS believes its lack of enforcement has undermined its credibility as an effective administrator
    of Medicaid. Moreover, Dol believes that continued inaction leaves the Federal Government
    open to qui tam suits.

    PROPOSED PLAN. Without any intervention from us, HHS plans to proceed with its
    enforcement plan. Under this plan, HHS will: (1) enforce the statute in those states that have used
    illegal taxes as part ofrecy1cing schemes, beginning with those states that are currently out of
    compliance; and then (2) move on to those states that have collected taxes which illegally target
    specific groups of providers. In order to do so, it will first have to audit suspected states and, if
    necessary, the individual state would be penalized (most likely through subsequent reductions in
    Federal Medicaid payments). [This can be, and usually is, a long, drawn-out process. States
    have the ability to appeal Administration decisions and can -- and frequently do -- take us to
    court if they disagree with our ruling. They also have the right to retain the disputed funds until
    the end of the appeals process. As a consequence, these disputes routinely take years to resolve.]

    PHASE ONE: ENFORCEMENT IN STATES THAT HA VE USED RECYLCLING SCHEMES

          Notification of states suspected to have operated recylcling schemes. In mid March,
           HHS expects to notify those states (Tennessee, Louisiana, Illinois, Missouri, Maine, and
           Hawaii) that have recylcled provider taxes in an effort to leverage more Federal funding
           that they will be audited and subject to a disallowance if found to be out of compliance.
          Audits of those states currently operating recycling schemes. Immediately after these


                                                      2
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
       letters are sent, HHS will begin audits in Tennessee and Louisiana, the two States felt to
       be most seriously out of compliance. There is strong evidence that they are operating
       "granny grant" schemes, which cycle impermissible taxes through nursing homes; HHS
       estimates that these two states alone have collected $500 million in impermissible taxes
       since 1992. The prospective liability from these states is projected to be over $100
       million a year.

      Audits of those states who previously operated recylcing schemes. In late April, HHS
       is planning to begin auditing Illinois, Missouri, Maine, and Hawaii, who had similar
       taxing schemes, but now appear to be in compliance. As mentioned above, without new
       statutory authority, HHS cannot forgive past actions that were illegal -- even ifthe states
       have moved aggressively to come into compliance. HHS estimates that these states have
       collected $1.6 billion in impermissible taxes since 1992.

PHASE TWO: ENFORCEMENT IN STATES THAT HA VE TARGETED PROVIDER TAXES

      Denial of waivers of the broad based and uniformity requirement. At about the same
       time, HHS plans to inform Alabama, Connecticut, Florida, Hawaii, Massachusetts, New
       Hampshire, Nevada, Tennessee, and Utah that because their waivers fail the statutory test,
       their requests for a waiver of the statutory requirement that provider taxes be broad-based
       and uniform are denied. Although Hawaii, Tennessee, Utah and Nevada have ended
       their tax programs, the remaining states have been collecting impermissible taxes while
       waiting for Federal approval of their waivers.

      Audit of states who have been or who are currently imposing targeted provider
       taxes. HHS plans to intiate audits of these States in late May and early June, beginning
       with those States that are currently out of compliance. HHS estimates that these states
       have collected approximately $2.5 billion in impermissible taxes since 1992, and will
       collect $326 million in 1999 and subsequent years.

In addition, HHS believes that almost every state in the nation has licencing fee schedules that
violate the broad-based and uniform tax requirement. This primarily results because states do
not consider such fees as "provider taxes" and thus subject to the restrictions. HHS currently
has no time frame under which to audit these states and bring them into compliance, and no
estimate of the amount that these states have collected in impermissible licencing fees.
However, when and if it starts enforcement actions in this area, we can expect a very aggressive
"push-back" from the National Governors' Association.

ISSUES
Given the amount of the money involved ($4.6 billion retrospectively and an additional $427
million annually), enforcing the provider tax and donation laws will be highly contentious.
Some advocates and many Governors charge that recouping these funds through reduced Federal
Medicaid spending could cause states to cut back on Medicaid eligibility. Moreover, HHS


                                                 3
                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
anticipates a difficult, resource-intensive process once the initial letters are sent, with low
prospects for recouping the money in the end. States, clearly, have opposed any effort to begin
enforcement -- but have shown no interest in our legislative proposal to forgive retrospective
liability in exchange for ending illegal practices.

However, OMB, DOJ, and HHS have repeatedly expressed concern over this lingering problem.
The lack of enforcement of this law will lead states to believe that we do not have the political
will to enforce this -- or any other -- Medicaid law. HHS also believes that to delay enforcement
further would undermine the authority of the Secretary, since HHS has been informing States of
its readiness to enforce the 1991 law for some time. In addition, our reluctance to act here could
have a direct bearing on the tobacco recoupment debate. States could understandably conclude
that our poor Medicaid provider tax enforcement record would suggest that they not take us
seriously on the tobacco recoupment issue. In other words, why should the states fear us on
tobacco recoupment when we have not enforced impermissible Medicaid provider taxes in the
last 6 years?

POLICY OPTIONS

OPTION ONE: Proceed along the enforcement time frame suggested by BBS. Under this
option, HHS will continue to advocate for legislation providing the Secretary with the authority
to forgive past Medicaid debts if the states came into prospective compliance.

Pros:
       Provides HHS with the necessary authority to enforce the statute as planned.
       Protects HHS from the criticism that they are unable to effectively administer the
        Medicaid program and promotes our effectiveness as an enforcement agency.
       Places the level of pressure on states that is necessary to pass legislation providing HHS
        with the authority to strike acceptable tax liability settlements with states.
       Non-enforcement is currently construed as tacit approval of these impermissible taxes.
       Makes the threat of tobacco recoupment more credible.

Cons:
     Assures multiple and frequent confrontations with states over outstanding provider tax
      liabilities.
     Highlights the fact that the Administration has failed to enforce the statute for 6 years and
      exposes us to the charge that states had little reason to believe that they were out of
      compliance.
     If fully enforced, some States may be placed in financial jeopardy which may undermine
      the level or scope of services offered to Medicaid beneficiaries.
     When the HCFA actuary and CBO are presented with tangible evidence (such as the
      issuance of a disallowance letter) that HHS will recoup funds, they are likely to score a
      percentage of the savings from the recoupment on our baseline, based on the individual
      state circumstances. These savings will then have to be offset in any legislation that

                                                  4
                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
        provides more flexibility in settlements to States.
       Because the likelihood oflegislation on this front is slim, we will be put in the difficult
        position of disallowing funds for past tax liability that we would have waived if we had
        the authority.

OPTION TWO: Initiate intensive advocacy for legislation that provides the Secretary
with more authority to negotiate with states who have outstanding bad taxes and request
that HHS implement its enforcement activities more slowly.

Pros:
       Helps shift some of the blame for the Administration's enforcement record onto Capitol
        Hill by resending the legislative language and publicly calling on Congress to help.
       Avoids an immediate confrontation with States who have outstanding tax liability.

Cons:
     Any legislation will not be seen as credible, given our history on this issue, and almost
      inevitably stagnate in Congress if pursued independent of outside enforcement pressure
      from HHS.
     Advocating for legislation will open us up to individual states being "fixed" in a
      piecemeal fashion, similar to the relief that New York received in the BBA.
     Ifpursued independent from outside enforcement pressure from HHS, states which are
      not seriously out of compliance will resent that others are allowed to continue their
      current recycling schemes. This will be reflected in the committees of jurisdiction.
     CBO currently assumes that we are recouping a percentage of the funds associated with
      impermissible taxes in their baseline and would score legislation that forgave all
      retrospective tax liability as a cost.

OPTION THREE:          Ask HHS for a much more comprehensive review of the issue prior to
                       initiating enforcement.

Recognizing the difficulties of enforcement and the likelihood of limited success, one option
would be to hold back on dedicating resources to this activity until we have an even better
understanding of the scope and degree of the problem. Such an action would be consistent with
the OMB Medicaid baseline, which assumes no recoupment savings in its current projections.

Pros:
       Avoids a major confrontation with the states at a time when we are also dealing with the
        issue of tobacco recoupment.
       Avoids a long shot battle to obtain necessary authority to sign off on settlements with
        states, which will inevitably require the expenditure of a good deal of political capital.
       Because of our past history and lack of enforcement, our failure to recoup funds from
        states that are out of compliance is currently not scoring on our baseline. Although
        recoupment has the potential to help the baseline, failing to recoup these funds will not

                                                   5
                                            Hex.()ump Conversion
       hurt it.

Cons;
     This undermines our present and future credibility when enforcing state violations of the
      Medicaid statute and sends a poor signal to our career staff charged with enforcement.
     Although the likelihood of an individual filing a qui tam suit is slim, it is theoretically
      possible that an individual with independent knowledge of a State recycling scheme could
      file a suit under the False Claims Act. No one has ever attempted to file a qui tam suit to
      recoup impermissible provider taxes.

RECOMMENDATIONS
HHS, OMB and DO] favor the first option of initiating the enforcement process on provider
taxes and donations -- although there is a willingness to simultaneously pursue the second option.




                                                 6


