       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

       CREATION DATE/TIME:26-FEB-1999 15:56:16.00

       SUBJECT:     latest IDEA memo

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP   @   EOP [ WHO ]. )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       The latest draft -- it incorporates comments that Barbara and I made
       earlier today.
       ---------------------- Forwarded by Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP on 02/26/99
       03:53 PM ---------------------------




                  David Rowe

                  02/26/99 03:44:15 PM

       Record Type: Record

       To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
       cc:
       Subject: latest IDEA memo




       Message Sent
       To: ______________________________________________________________
       Barbara Chow/OMB/EOP
       Sandra Yamin/OMB/EOP
       Barry White/OMB/EOP
       Tanya E. Martin/OPD/EOP
       Daniel J. Chenok/OMB/EOP


       ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
       ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

       TEXT:
       Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D46]MAIL476636262.036 to ASCII,
        The following is a HEX DUMP:

       FF57504340070000010A020100000002050000005056000000020000380BC347B90B42D470E22A
       38275E01094DDOD2FBODC687E3A50B42D456C2F93831DE3F0018D62050F9FC3C6BOBB49749F3AO
       CAA89E537FC9337347EFAEDCBOD234921E08DE69D4AE099DC2BAC10FE5EAA348463F62371COB35
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

From:

Subject: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)


OMB has before it for final clearance regulations to implement the 1997 amendments to the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). The initial proposed rulemaking in 1997
generated substantial adverse reaction from the majority in Congress, from schools, and from
States, primarily centered on the administrative burdens the draft rule would have imposed. The
current version is the result of a lengthy process of public comment and negotiation with
Congress and reflects substantial compromise from the earlier version. States and Congress
have also complained about the delay in publication of the final rule, Involved majority
Congressional staff have given preliminary indications that they believe this version of the rule is
an adequate response to their concerns, but they note that some members may still attack the rule
as overly prescriptive. Secretary Riley has publicly committed to publication by March 15th.

We believe the current rule offers a balance between protecting children with disabilities and
mitigating burden on the States and the schools within the context of a law which all agree is
burdensome. This memorandum explains the issues in more detail, describes the improvements
made to date, and at the end, summarizes the equally contentious issue of IDEA funding.

General Background

In 1975, Congress passed the Education for All Handicapped Children Act, which guaranteed a
"free appropriate public education" for all students with disabilities, and outlined the required
procedures States and local school districts must follow in implementing their Special Education
programs. That law, now known as the IDEA, has been amended several times since, most
recently in 1997.

The IDEA Amendments of 1997 were the result of detailed bipartisan negotiation with Congress.
 The reauthorization retained the civil rights component of the law by still requiring States to
provide all children with disabilities (also referred to as special education students) a free
appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs. This requirement applies
without regard to the cost of the services or the size of the federal appropriation. The 1997
amendments added a focus on improving educational outcomes for children with disabilities.
For instance, they required States to develop educational achievement goals for children with
disabilities, and to include children with disabilities on State and district-wide assessments.

IDEA has always been controversial because it imposes prescriptive and costly administrative
requirements on States. Because of these statutory requirement, States want the federal
government to pay a larger share of special education costs. In recent years, the controversy has
centered around IDEA's requirements regarding the discipline of special education students.
                                            Hex-Dump Conversion
States are not required to accept IDEA funding and its related federal mandates, but none have
seriously threatened to withdraw from participation.

IDEA Regulations

The regulatory development process has been lengthy and contentious. After publishing the
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) in October 1997, the Department of Education (ED)
received extensive criticism from State lawmakers, school officials, and the majority in
Congress. State lawmakers and school officials complained that the proposed rule was complex
and difficult to understand, limited flexibility at the 10calleve1, and created overly prescriptive
and costly requirements. The majority in Congress echoed these concerns, and charged that the
rules created policies inconsistent with the carefully worked out bipartisan agreements that
characterized the enactment of the IDEA Amendments of 1997.

In response to these concerns, the Department reviewed the rule's content across the board to
find ways to ease requirements where possible, and to make the final rule easier to understand.
The Department's rewrite of the rule involved extensive consultations with the Hill as well as
members of the public.

Even with the significant changes and improvements to final rule (see below), it should be noted
that the IDEA statute itself is complex and prescriptive. Thus, while ED was able to achieve
some regulatory relief in the rewrite of the final rule, the law itself is the source of the vast bulk
of the administrative burden.

While the NGA did not comment on the proposed regulations, ED notes that one individual
governor did, Pete Wilson of California. His issue concerned services required for young people
aged 18-21 who are incarcerated in prisons. According to ED, former Governor Wilson's
concern could not be accommodated because it was contrary to the IDEA statute.

ED hopes to publish a final rule in early March (publication is being delayed pending final
review ofthe issues). There has been intense pressure on the Department from Hill members
and school officials to publish the rules as soon as possible. Without rules, schools must
implement their special education programs based only on interpretations of the IDEA statute.
There is consensus agreement that special education rules are necessary to forestall litigation
resulting from local disputes over statutory interpretations.

Following recent negotiations and subsequent agreements with the Hill on the issues described
below, the Department believes, and we concur, that the final rule strikes an appropriate balance
between all of the interested parties, including those in the disability community, school officials,
State lawmakers, and members of Congress in both parties. However, Hill staff cannot
guarantee that all members will refrain from attacking the Administration on discipline or other
Issues.



                                                  2
                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
The Department's main substantive changes in response to criticism are in the provisions relating
 to: (1) discipline of a disabled student who is violent or troublesome; (2) in what kind of
classroom setting to place a child during a dispute over hislher current placement ("pendency");
and (3) the services required after a student graduates. Further, in the rewrite of the final rule
ED clarified its policy with regard to whether special education students should be included in
regular education classrooms. Each issue discussed below.

Discipline: The IDEA amendments allows school personnel to suspend students with disabilities
for up to 10 school days before the suspension is deemed a "change in placement." The
amendments define a "change in placement" as either (A) a removal of 10 consecutive days or
more; or (B) a pattern of short term removals that amount to a change in placement.

The amendments further require that when a "change in placement" occurs, the school district
must do three things: (1) reevaluate the educational services provided to the student, as
determined through a review ofthe student's Individualized Education Plan (IEP) by a group
composed of the special education teacher, parent, regular education teacher, and principal; (2)
establish a "behavioral assessment plan," for the student (i.e., a set of services and strategies
designed to address and improve the student's behavior), if one does not already exist; and (3)
determine whether the student's behavior is a manifestation of their disability. While these are
expensive and time-consuming requirements, they are statutory. The amendments do not,
however, define "10 days" as being consecutive or cumulative.

Past practice used a definition of"l0 consecutive days," a definition preferred by most school
officials because they would only have to provide the "change of placement" services in the most
extreme cases (i.e., an individual suspension of 10 or more school days). Under this standard,
school officials could abuse the "10 consecutive days" definition by repeatedly suspending a
student for less than 10 days in order to circumvent the "change in placement" requirement.
Furthermore, ED found that schools did not use the "pattern of short term removal" standard to
provide services, and therefore some children with disabilities were not being served
appropriately. In response to these concerns, in the NPRM ED defined "10 days" as meaning
"10 cumulative days in a school year" (e.g., five separate two-day suspensions in the same school
year would amount to 10 cumulative days). Thus, under the NPRM, schools would have been
required to provide "change in placement" services after the 11 th cumulative day of a suspension,
without regard to the pattern of removals concept.

School officials and the majority in Congress strongly objected to the "cumulative day"
definition because it would have triggered the expensive "change in placement" services more
frequently. As a compromise, the final rule no longer requires "change in placement" services
after the 10th cumulative day. Instead, after the 10th cumulative day, schools are required to
assess whether to provide a less burdensome, streamlined set of services designed to address the
behavior problems early in the process, rather than the extensive "change in placement" services.
 For example, under the final rule, schools will no longer have to determine whether the
student's behavior is a manifestation of their disability. Further, ED retained the full "change in


                                                 3
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
placement" review requirements for suspensions lasting 10 consecutive days, which is not
controversial. While this compromise results in significant cost savings to schools, disability
advocates are likely to view the streamlined services as inadequate.

In addition to these significant changes, the final rule also clarifies the following discipline issues
which were points of confusion in the proposed rule: (1) school officials can suspend disabled
children for more than 10 days in a school year; and (2) school officials do not need to provide
any services to disabled children during the first 10 days of a suspension.

Pendency: The IDEA statute sets up a hearing process to arbitrate between a parent and a school
when there is a disagreement over a child's placement (e.g., whether a child should be moved
from a special education class to a regular education setting). Until the disagreement is settled,
the statute requires the child to remain in his/her current placement unless the school and parent
agree otherwise.

The contentious provision in the proposed rule provides the following: in the event that a parent
seeks to change their child's placement, and the hearing officer agrees with the parent, the child
is immediately moved to the new placement. However, in the event that a school seeks to
change the child's placement, and the hearing officer agrees with the school, the child remains in
the original placement pending further review. Thus, hearing officer agreements with parents
carry more weight than the hearing officer agreements with schools. Public commenters were
concerned that this process did not treat parents and schools equally. However, this provision
was designed to equal the balance of power between schools and parents in the implementation
of special education services for children.

As a compromise, in the final rule this "pendency" provision does not take effect until the child's
case reaches the State hearing officer (a far less frequent occurrence). In all other cases, the
child would be placed according to the decision of the first hearing officer pending appeal.

High School Graduation: In the proposed rule, ED required that graduating students be
reevaluated to determine whether additional services should be provided, and provided
non-binding guidance that a student would have to graduate with a regular diploma (i.e., not a
certificate of attendance) in order for eligibility of services to terminate. ED included these
requirements because of the concern that some school districts were "graduating" students with a
less than regular high school diploma in order to stop providing services to them.            .

In response to complaints about the proposed rule's prescriptive graduation policies, the final
rule states that students with disabilities do not have to be reevaluated when they graduate with a
regular high school diploma. However, students with disabilities must continue to be eligible
for services if they graduate with less than a high school diploma.

Placement of Special Education Students in Regular Education Classrooms: A major focus of
the IDEA statute is on placing special education children, to the maximum extent possible, in a


                                                  4
                                               Hex-DiJmp ConvelSion
general education environment. The rationale behind this focus is to provide special education
students with an opportunity to socialize with regular education students and have the
opportunity to strive for the same academic goals as their nondisabled peers. Some commenters
on the proposed rule felt that including special education students in regular classrooms is too
disruptive, because it requires teachers to spend an disproportionate amount of time with the
special education students.

The final rule reflects the statutory requirements on this issue: (1) whenever appropriate, special
education students should be placed with their nondisabled peers; (2) schools can remove special
education students from general education classrooms if it is found that the student is not making
satisfactory educational progress, even with supportive special education services; and (3)
schools are prohibited from removing special education students from a classroom only because
the child requires a modification to curriculum currently being taught in that class.

Special Education Funding

Critics, most particularly the Governors, argue that federal funding does not live up to the IDEA
statute's commitment that the federal government will provide States with 40 percent ofthe
average per pupil expenditure for each disabled student. In fact, the IDEA makes no such
commitment. The statute only limits the maximum grant a State can receive in a year to this 40
percent level. The highest percentage ever reached was 12.5 percent in 1979; 1999 funding
should cover about 11.2 percent.

While federal funding for special education State Grants (the primary federal special education
program) has increased by $2.2 billion or 110 percent during this Administration, from $2.1
billion in FY 1993 to $4.3 billion in FY 1999, these increases were not requested by this
Administration. Congressional Republicans in recent years have seized on IDEA as a defining
issue on education, demonstrating their concern for the "mandate" and for the burden placed on
States, by providing large annual increases. We believe this pattern will be repeated for FY
2000.

Whatever amount we might propose for IDEA, the Republicans will always be able to offer
more, because they will not, at least initially, fund our other education and training priorities at
the levels we seek, such as Title I or the Workforce Investment Act. Instead, we argue that we
are in fact substantially aiding children with disabilities with many of our other high priority
investments. These children benefit from the smaller classes in our Class Size Reduction
initiative, from modem school facilities in our School Modernization Bonds proposal, and from
our early intervention initiatives such as America Reads and Head Start.

In the FY 2000 budget we propose a targeted increase for special education of $116 million for
early intervention programs and to help States take advantage of research on effective practices,
but virtually no increase for the major state grant. The total budget request for all parts of IDEA
is $5.4 billion, of which $4.3 billion is for the state grant.


                                                  5

                                       Automated Records Management System
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

    It should also be noted that the IDEA Amendments of 1997 imposed a "trigger" engaged when
    federal funding reached $4.1 billion, allowing an LEA to divert up to 20 percent of their
    maintenance of effort funding away from special education if the allocation exceeded that of the
    prior year. Therefore, federal IDEA increases do not increase spending on children with
    disabilities dollar for dollar.




                                                     6


