     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: "Cohen, Mike"       "Cohen, Mike"    UNKNOWN]     )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:26-FEB-1999 17:16:11.00

     SUBJECT:   Ed Flex

     TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]       )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     See attached <>
      - Edflex.doc==================== ATTACHMENT      1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to ,convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D27]MAIL43158726H. 036 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
     0000000000010000004200000000000000001000004500000001000000FEFFFFFF000000004300
     OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                         Hex-Dump Conversion


                                 Ed-Flex Amendments

Senate

1. Proposed Manager's Package (Republican)
 Clarifies that state cannot waive requirements on itself.

   Clarifies that, in order to be eligible, state mut have a process for providing technial
    assistance and taking other corrective actions consistent with Sec. 1116 of ESEA.


   Requires that astate show how its flexibility plan is coordinated with its
    comprehensive reform plan or, if it lacks such a plan, with its Title 1 plan.

   Clarifies that LEA's seeking a waiver must describe how the waiver will help
    improve student achievement.


   Requires SEA to periodically review performance of LEA that has been granted a
    waiver, and terminate the waiver if it determines that performance has been
    unsatisfactory.

   Requires SEA and LEA's to provide adequate public notice and opportunity for
    public comment regarding waiver applications.


   Clarifies that SE may not waive the standards and assessments required in Title 1.

   Clarifies that original 12 Ed-Flex states retain Ed-Flex under original requirements.
    (But it is not clear if, when these states reapply for continuation of Ed-Flex, they
    apply under new or old rules.).

   Requires biennial progress reports from Secretary to Congress regarding (a) federal
    requirements that have been waived, (b) state requirements that have been waived,
    and (c) the effects of waivers on implementation of state and local reforms and on
    student achievement.
    Note: all of the above are acceptable to ED

2. Proposed Democratic Additions to Manager's Package
 Require states to provide a detailed description of how it will evaluate student
   achievement, using disaggregated data, on an annual basis.
                                       Hex.l)ump Conversion

   Require state and local applications to describe how they will meet public notice
    requirements~


   Clarify that state applications must show how they will monitor student achievement
    in districts that receive waivers.

   Require annual, rather than periodic, reviews of performance in districts receiving
    waivers.

   Require states to show that waivers have led to increased student achievement in
    order to extend Ed-Flex status beyond initial 5 years.

   Require states to make public comments available for public review.

   Requires that the first biennial progress report from the Secretary be submitted within
    one year of enactment, and requires that progress reports must show how underlying
    purposes of federal programs are, or are not, being met.
    Note: All of the above are acceptable to ED.

3. Civil Rights Groups Amendments
 Clarifies that waivers may not be granted to Title 1 requirements regarding standards,
   assessments, components of schoolwide and targeted assistance programs,
   accountability, and corrective actions.
   Note: ED is ok with clarifying that requirements for standards and assessments
   can't be waived, but believes that provisions related to schoolwide and targeted
   assistance programs should continue to be subject to waiver (though no one has
   ever requested waivers from these requirements. The schoolwide provisions require
   that schools using a schoolwide approach use strategies that are based on proven
   practices, use highly qualified teachers, promote parental involvement, provide
   extended learning time to kids who need extra help, etc. The targeted assistance
   program (for schools th~t focus only on Title 1 kids, not the whole school), are
   comparable. ED believes these should remain subject to waiver because, other than
   requirements for allocating funds, these are about the only provisions left to be
   waived. Eliminating these would truly take the flex out of ed-flex.

   Requires that a state be in compliance with Title 1 standards and accountability
    requirements in order to be eligible for Ed-Flex.
    Note that the underlying bill requires that states (1) have met all standards and
    accountability requirements under Title 1 (some of which do not have to be met under
    law until 2001) or (2) show that they have made substantial progress toward that end,
    in order to be eligible. This proposal appears to replace both of these with a
    standard that is midway in between the two - the state would be required to meet
    those requirements whose deadline has passed when it applies, but would not require
    the state to meet deadlines still in the future.
    ED supports this. We think it is better than a proposal from House Dem 's (below)
    that would eliminate the "substantial progress" provision and therefore require
                                         .<ex-Dump Conversion
    states to meet some Title 1 requirements ahead of schedule-a requirement that
    would eliminate virtually all states from immediate contention.

   Requires Secretary to provide written, public explanation of the facts demonstrating
    that the State has met requirements in above amendment, if the Secretary approves
    state application for Ed-Flex.
    ED is ok with this in principal, though we generally don't support provisions that
    place requirements on the Secretary.

   Requires Secretary to terminate Ed-Flex ifhe determines that the state is no longer
    meeting Title 1 requirements, and requires state to show it is meeting current Title 1
    requirements when it applies for extension of Ed-Flex authority.
    ED is ok with this.
   Adds to public notice requirements by requiring Secretary to publish State application
    in Federal Register.
    ED is ok with making application widely available-but thinks it would be more
    effective to put it on the web than in the Federal Register.

Other Ed-Flex Issues in Play
 Some interest by D's to prohibit schoowide projects in schools below 35% poverty.

   Dodd ma)' pursue amendments to strengthen maintenance of effort provisions in
    order to ensure that states don't reduce services to low income students.

Other Possible Senate Amendments
 From Republicans, we are likely to see a Coverdell-type amendment, a voucher
   amendment and a block grant amendment, perhaps as a second degree to Class Size.

   McCain and Robb may offer Troops to Teachers.

   Feinstein is considering an amendment to end social promotion.
    NOTE: WE HAVE TO TALK FEINSTEIN OUT OF THIS. DASCHLE WILL
    HELP.

   There may be a Democratic amendment to require school report cards.

   Bingaman wants to do something on dropouts.
                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
House
 The Castle bill restricts the ability of states to waive provisions regarding the
   selection of schools to participate in Title I, to schools that are within 5% of the
  poverty rate for the lowest eligible school in a district.

   House Dems. want our support for amendments that would:
     Eliminate provision that makes states eligible for ed-flex if they are making
       substantial progress toward Title I standards and assessment requirements.
       ED prefers the approach the civil rights groups are taking, rather than this.
     Restrict waivers for school wide projects.
       Riley would probably support restricting schoolwide projects to schools that are
       at least 40% poverty.

       Sunset Ed-Flex upon enactment of ESEA.
        ED thinks we should strongly support this.


