     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:26-FEB-1999 17:28:59.00

     SUBJECT:   Complete Weekly Report

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     includes the items we revised for the daily=========·=========== ATTACHMENT   1
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D33]MAIL47460826M.036 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF5750436E100000010A020100000002050000007888000000020000B828AE6BE8BC3FB63B57F7
     A3F438C2AF3B379FC5B5AD4594417576FA27E9B2EDFA7D6E90F9A2C9847680B84BC3BC0787DBE5
     5A712132D5D017FEAAEDBEF82CE597BB355BFE45DEEC82FC428314B6BD583DC654893A636D3286
     52DA2AC97277A8FB7E457D21EDAF32241CCADE3C3DOED704A6A9B35353FDF7DE5CEB997E4D1778




                                       AIdmIated Records Management System
                                               Hex.()ump Conversion



                                            February 27, 1999

    MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

    FROM:                     Bruce Reed
                              Elena Kagan

    SUBJECT:                  DPC Weekly Report

            Health Care -- Medicare Commission prescription drug benefit update. Senator
    Breaux is now indicating that he would like to find a way to integrate a prescription
    drug benefit into his Commission's recommendations. Beyond believing that drug
    coverage is important to the program, he knows that including a viable benefit is critical
    to having any chance of enticing Laura Tyson and Stuart Altman to support his plan.
    Laura and Stuart have explicitly rejected Senator Breaux's option because they do not
    believe it assures access to affordable prescription drugs for all beneficiaries. More
    specifically, because the Senator is limiting his option to low-income beneficiaries and
    those in private health plans, it is clear that millions of beneficiaries -- particularly in
    rural areas -- might be left without access to any affordable drug benefit. This is
    because many rural areas will not attract private health plans to offer coverage. This
    helps explain why Laura and Stuart are so adamant that the traditional Medicare
    fee-for-service plan offer a drug coverage option as well. (They also believe that to
    ensure fair competition this benefit should be available in both traditional Medicare
    program and private insurers.) In response to Senator Breaux's request for assistance,
    Laura and Stuart are trying to design the parameters of a prescription drug benefit. It
    is likely to be a mid-range priced plan, in which the benefit is optional, has a 50 percent
    rather than a 75 percent subsidy, and a $250 or $500 deductible with a $1,500 or $2,000
    cap on the value of the overall benefit. (This is a much more modest package than a lot
    of the advocates were hoping for, but it is probably much more realistic from a financial
    and political perspective.)
            Health Care -- Prescription drug comments are raising concerns: You should be
    aware that your comments on Thursday about prescription drug benefits were construed by
    many as opening the door to a partial drug benefit that is strongly opposed by all your base
    Democrats and even Laura Tyson and Stuart Altman. We have responded that, consistent
    with the views of Laura and Stuart, an appropriately structured and modestly subsidized
    benefit (which assures the drug benefit would be affordable) would eliminate the need to
    make the coverage mandatory. As such, an optional drug benefit would allow those few
    Americans fortunate enough to have retiree health benefits to not be forced to purchase a
    Medicare drug benefit they do not need. One last point; opponents of a drug benefit (or those
    who wish to limit it) point to the fact that 65 percent of beneficiaries have a drug benefit
    already, so that a drug benefit would substitute public dollars for private dollars, and waste a



                                    Aabnated Records Management Sysler-
                                            Hex.[)ump Conversior
                                                                                                       2

    large amount of money. Ironically, a break out of this 'number illustrates why limiting the
    drug benefit to certain populations just does not work. Of the 65 percent of beneficiaries
    with some type of coverage, 20 percent already have Medicare or Medicaid coverage (so there
    would be no substitution of Federal dollars), another 28 percent have employer-based retiree
    health coverage, which is declining in unprecedented degrees and is tax subsidized, and 10
    percent have Medigap coverage, which is underwritten, expensive and declining. The
    remaining 7 percent are transitioning in and out of Medicare and Medicaid mostly. As a
    result, a decent drug benefit that is accessible to all beneficiaries would not substitute many
    Federal for private dollars, would be a far more substantive and affordable benefit, and -- as
    Laura Tyson says -- would be far more efficient from an economic perspective. Without a
    doubt, however, this issue is extremely complicated; we are carefully contemplating options
    and will be forwarding you additional information shortly.

            Crime -- Assault Weapons: The Justice Department is preparing to release a report
    from the National Institute of Justice on the impact of the 1994 assault weapons ban. The
    report's findings are encouraging about the effectiveness of the ban, but are limited due to the
    relatively short study period (24 rnonths post-enactment), with some analyses conducted with
    only one year of postban data. Among the key findings were:

           (1) Decline in criminal use of the banned guns. Law enforcement requests for ATF
           traces on assault weapons used in crimes decreased by 20 percent in the first year after
           the ban took effect, as compared to a 11 percent decrease for all guns.

           (2) Ban likely contributed to reduction in gun murder rate. Even controlling for other
           factors (e.g., pre-existing state assault weapons bans, juvenile handgun bans,
           California's three-strikes laws, New York's quality of life policing), the study
           estimates that gun murder rates were between 6.7 to 10 percent lower the year after the
           ban's enactment.

           (3) Reduction in assault weapons used to kill police. Murders of police by offenders
           armed with assault weapons declined from an estimated 16 perc~nt of gun murders of
           police in 1994 to early 1995, to 0 percent (none) in the latter half of 1995 and early
           1996. However, such incidents are extremely rare to begin with, and researchers
           could not conclude the ban's impact on the general reduction in gun murders of police.

           (4) Significant but temporary market effects. The ban triggered speculative, sharp
           price increases and additional production of the banned firearms prior to the law's
           implementation. The increases were followed by a substantial drop in prices once the
           law took effect returning prices to pre-ban levels. The report suggests that the market
           effects made the banned weapons less accessible to criminals.

           (5) No impact on reducing average number of victims per gun murder incident, or
           multiple gunshot wound victims.
                                     Hex-Dump Conversion                                             3


        Crime -- Diallo Shooting: This week, you inquired about the recent shooting in New
York City. On February 4, 1999, Amadou Diallo, an immigrant from Guinea, was shot in
front of his apartment building in New York City by four white officers of the New York City
Police Department. A total of 41 shots were fired, and Mr. Diallo died at the scene. The
officers did not find a weapon on or near Mr. Diallo. The four officers were part of a
specialized street crime unit reportedly searching for a rapist. Working with the White House
Counsel we have learned the following: (1) the FBI has opened an investigation into the
shooting arid is assisting with forensic analysis; (2) DOl's Civil Rights and Criminal
Divisions, and the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York have been working
closely with the Bronx District Attorney's Office on the investigation; and (3) the Community
Relations Service has conducted conciliation services in Harlem, including attending the
recent memorial service and demonstration on February 12. Additionally, for almost two
years, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of New York -- with the cooperation
of the New York Police Department -- has undertaken a review into whether the department
has engaged in a pattern or practice of police misconduct.

        Education -- Ed-Flex Bill and Class Size Amendment: The Senate is expected to
take up Ed-Flex on Tuesday. We are continuing our efforts to forge a bipartisan agreement to
strengthen the bill's accountability provisions. If we fail, Democrats will offer their own
accountability amendments. In addition, Senators Kennedy and Murray will offer an
amendment to authorize our class size initiative for the next six years. The Vice President
will join Murray in Washington State on Sunday to urge passage of this amendment, and we
intend to release a letter from you to Senators Lott and Daschle on Monday to reiterate this
message. Daschle is trying hard to keep other Democratic amendments to a minimum, so
that we can keep the focus on the class size issue.

        Education -- NAEP Reading Scores: On Thursday, the National Center for
Education Statistics will release state-by-state reading scores from the 1998 National
Assessment of Educational Progress "Reading Report Card." Earlier this month, Vice
President Gore and Secretary Riley announced the national scores from this report, which
showed that for the first· time in nearly 30 years of testing, there were small but statistically.
significant gains in average reading scores in the 4th, 8th, and 12th grades between 1998 and
1994: 4th and 12th grade scores returned to 1992 levels after a drop between 1992 and 1994,
but the new 8th grade scores were up even from 1992. The state-by-state data is still being
compiled, but the Education Department expects that most states will show improvements
over the past four years. Secretary Riley will hold a press conference in Washington D.C.,
and Vice President Gore will highlight New York and Connecticut scores in an event in New
York City.

        Education -- "Read Across America" Day: On Tuesday, the NEA is holding its
annual "Read Across America" day, celebrating Dr. Seuss' birthday and focusing the nation's
attention on the importance of reading.
                                      Hex-Dilmp Conversion
                                                                                                    4


         Education -- Release of National Title I Assessment: On Monday, the Department
of Education is scheduled to release the National Assessment of Title I , which is a
Congressionally mandated report examining the impact of the 1994 amendments to the
program -- namely, the progress being made toward the goal of having all children served
under Title I meet high academic standards. The National Assessment examines the progress
of students served by the program and the implementation of key Title I provisions at the
state, district and school level. The National Assessment will report on progress in
improving achievement for students emolled in high-poverty schools, in increasing the
number of Title I schools using standards-based refonn and in accelerating state and local
efforts to assist Title I schools. Revisions to the Title I program that were made as part of the
1994 ESEA reauthorization -- such as allowing schools to use their Title I funds for
schoolwide improvements and pool their funding from all sources -- have made it more
challenging for the National Assessment to track the use of Title I funds and blurred the
distinction between program participants and other children. At this time, we are still
working with the Education department to clarify what are the actual conclusions of this very
important report; according to the Department of Education, the results are somewhat mixed.

        Education -- Bipartisan discussions about a centrist education agenda: Senator
Liebennan and Senator Gorton are working with a number of centrist outside groups and
individuals to develop principles for a bipartisan approach to reauthorizing ESEA. They are
hoping to secure support for these principles from about 5 Democrat and 5 Republican
Senators, as well as some leading education experts from outside the Administration and
Congress. The principles are likely to include a focus on accountability, teacher quality,
public school choice, and some consolidation of existing federal education programs. These
principles are very much under development, but at this point would apparently not include
school construction, block grants, or private school vouchers.

        Welfare Reform -- Vice President's Welfare to Work Event: The Vice President is
scheduled to release on Monday the results of a new survey, conducted by Wirthlin
Worldwide, showing that businesses participating in the Welfare to Work Partnership have
now hired 410,000 welfare recipients. The survey shows that welfare recipients hired by
these companies are generally doing well: most companies (65 percent) report that welfare
hires stay on the job at the same rate or higher rates than other entry-level employees. The
survey also shows that welfare hires have opportunities to advance: 60 percent of the
companies report some promotion of fonner welfare recipients in the past year, which is
generally consistent with the companies' promotion rates for other hires. In addition, 77
percent of the companies hire individuals for promotion-track jobs, and 91 percent offer
training that could lead to promotion. The survey found a positive correlation between
fonnal mentoring programs and high promotion rates for fonner welfare recipients.
Companies that have entered into partnerships with community-based organizations to do
mentoring have the highest rate of promotion.
                                          Hex-Dilinp Conversion .
                                                                                                    5

        Welfare -- Reporting on Working Families in Poverty: On Thursday, the research
group Child Trends put out a report on working poor families. The report, based on 1996
Census data, found that children of working parents were much less likely to be poor. Only 9
percent of children whose parents work were poor, compared to 63 percent with parents who
didn't work. Thus, children in non-working families were seven times more likely to be poor
as children in working families. The study defined working as at least 20 hours per week for
a single parent family and 35 hours for a two parent family (the same as required by the
welfare law).

        The report also found that working does not guarantee an escape from poverty, at least
by the official poverty definition. The study found 35 percent of poor children have working
parents. However, the report used the official measure of poverty, which does not include as
income the Earned Income Tax Credit or non-cash supports such as Food Stamps. Many
analysts have calculated how EITC and Food Stamps help provide families with resources to
move above the poverty line. As the Council of Economic Advisers has reported, the EITC
lifted 4.3 million people out of poverty in 1997 and over half the decline in child poverty
between 1993 and 1997 can be explained by changes in taxes most importantly in the EITC.
The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities has calculated that a family of four can reach the
$17,100 poverty line through a full time minimum wage job ($9,800), the EITC ($3,700), and
Food Stamps ($3,600).

        Immigrant Benefits -- Declining Participation: The Urban Institute will issue a
report on Monday showing evidence of a "chilling effect" that has resulted in fewer immigrant
families, compared to citizen families, accessing an array of public benefits. The study found
welfare use by noncitizens declined by 35 percent from 1994 to 1997 while use by citizens
declined 15 percent. While Medicaid use by citizen households under 200 percent of poverty
did not change significantly, non-citizen family participation dropped 19 percent. Since most
legal immigrants were still eligible for benefits in 1997, these effects may be the result of the
publicity surrounding the debate over welfare and immigration reform leading people to think
they were ineligible or that accepting benefits would affect their immigration status. As you
know we have been working closely with the Department of Justice and HHS on these issues,
and we expect the INS will issue guidance in the near future to provide clarity on what type of
benefits an immigrant can accept without being labeled a "public charge." Clearer guidance
on public charge policies, along with our proposals to restore additional health, nutrition, and
disability benefits to vulnerable legal immigrants, will allow us to begin sending clearer
messages to immigrant families regarding their eligibility for benefits.

         Tobacco -- Cigar Use: The HHS Inspector General issued a report Friday calling for
the Federal' Trade Commission to require that cigars carry warning labels.              The
recommendation came in the context of a report focusing on the use of cigars among
teenagers. The report, based on focus group evidence, found that more than a third of
teenagers have smoked a cigar in the past 30 days and that 54 percent have smoked a cigar in
their life. According to the report, most teens who smoke cigars also smoke cigarettes, and
                                      Hcx-DiIInP Conversion ·
                                                                                                  6

some teens create modified cigars called "blunts" by removing the cigar's core tobacco and
replacing it with marijuana. As you may know, our budget imposes the same percentage tax
increase on cigars as on cigarettes. The FDA rule, however, does not apply to cigars,
principally because there is insufficient evidence of cigars' addictiveness to support the
assertion of regulatory authority.

        Economic Development -- Yankee Stadium: We have contacted Representative
Rangel's staff regarding the Congressman's interest in preserving Yankee Stadium and keeping
the Yankees in the Bronx for the forseeable future. It appears that the Congressman is
l.ooking for support to identify existing and new funds to improve transportation access (both
highway and rail links), and to promote commercial development in the area surrounding the
stadium. His staff indicated they are not looking to utilize federal funds to help rehabilitate
the stadium. Along with the NEC, OMB, and other relevant agencies, we will be discussing
whether there is an appropriate role for federal involvement and if so, what are some of the
possible tools and resources we can make available for the project.

       Children and Families -- Child Care.            The House Ways and Means
Subcommittee on Human Resources will hold a hearing on child care on March 16,
which is significant because the last Congress refused to hold even a single hearing on
the issue. The Administration will lead off the hearing testimony. Also, the
Subcommittee's ranking Democrat, Rep. Ben Cardin (D-MD), plans to introduce a child
care bill largely based on the Administration's proposals prior to the hearing.


