         RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

         CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

         CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-MAR-1999 18:36:55,00

         SUBJECT:   Re: please update to reflect today's report & send to me ASAP

         TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TEXT:
         ---------------------- Forwarded by Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP on 03/01/99 06:37
         PM ---------------------------




         Tanya E, Martin
         03/01/99 06:35:40 PM
         Record Type:    Record

         To:      Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP
         cc:
         Subject:         Re: please update to reflect today's report & send to me
         ASAP

         National Assessment of Title I Program. Today, the Department of
         Education released a Congressionally mandated report on the implementation
         of changes in Title I called for in the 1994 reauthorization. The report
         generally finds that we are seeing an increase in academic achievement for
         students in high-poverty schools, as states and districts begin to
         implement reforms to hold students to high standards, but there is still a
         substantial gap between these schools and others. The report confirms the
         need to close this achievement gap and provides provides more evidence of
         the need for the your accountability proposals in the next ESEA
         reauthorization.

         Specifically, the report shows since 1992, reading scores for 9 year-olds
         in the highest poverty public schools have improved, reversing a downward
         trend and bringing scores back to late 1980s levels.   An examination of
         the scores of the lowest-achieving 4th graders -- those most likely to be
         served by Title I -- showed that there were fairly substantial
         improvements in reading between 1994 and 1998.   Since 1992, math scores
         have improved for 9 year olds in the highest-poverty schools by almost one
         grade level. The lowest-achieving 4th grade students also showed
         substantial improvements in math scores.   Data reported by states and
         local districts also show progress in the percent of students in the
         highest-pover,ty schools that meet state and local standards in reading and
         math.

         The Assessment also points out that while the performance of students in
         high-poverty school is improving, the percentage of these students meeting
         basic standards in reading and math still lags far behind their peers.   In
         1998, the percent of high-poverty 4th grade students who met the O&basic08
         performance level was about half the national rate on NAEP reading tests
         and two-thirds the national rate on NAEP math tests.  The Assessment also
         shows that schools with high concentrations of poor students are most
         likely to be low-performing, that states and districts face challenges in
         turning these failing schools around, that the teachers in high-poverty
k



schools are not prepared to teach to high standards, and that a
significant number of Title I schools continue to allow non-certified
aides to provide classroom instruction.


