    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-MAR-1999 11:39:50.00

    SUBJECT:   HHS wants tp for Shalala for tomorrow's D Senate meeting

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
    READ:UNKNOWN

    CC: J. Eric Gould ( CN=J. Eric Gould/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    I propose we give her what we gave the President for the NGA, (with a few
    necessary changes in pronouns, etc. because of the change in speaker and
    audience).  I also put on the end the Q&A we did later that day regarding
    a response to governors who say they took Medicaid out of their suits.

    Can you let me know by 4:00 if this plan is OK by you? They need to get
    them into Shalala's briefing book before she leaves the office for her
    last meeting of the day. ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
    ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

    TEXT:
    Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D47]MAIL423043567.036 to ASCII,
     The following is a HEX DUMP:

    FF57504397050000010A020100000002050000000B2A000000020000528830D5648DCC9D7642CF
    8AE234B99D7C25ABDDC1744A5DCA23EODA5272D97FCAF3DF56CD783C30459213E76F7A5705856B
    081FA08CC5FDC5425A7F718035DB1082C6EA4624FEE4B23CF5AD5D6C064DF8B5146371B626A15F
                                         Automated Records Management System
     Talking Points                              Hex..[)ilmp Conversion

           The state tobacco settlement is a real step in the right direction.

           I know we all share a commitment to reducing youth smoking. Every day, 3,000
            children become regular smokers and 1,000 have their lives shortened as a result.

           We also all share a commitment to protecting tobacco farmers. The President is pleased
            that the states and industry were able to negotiate a package to compensate farmers and
            we remain committed to doing more to protect tobacco farmers and their communities.

           While the state settlement is a great first step, the President believe we must do more to
            protect children and reduce youth smoking. We will continue to push for legislation to
            increase the price of cigarettes so fewer young people start to smoke, hold the tobacco
            companies accountable for their youth marketing practices, and reaffirm the Food and
            Drug Administration's authority to regulate tobacco products. In addition, as you know,
            the federal government is bringing suit to recover from the tobacco companies the health
            care costs incurred by Medicare and other federal programs as a result of smoking.

           On the question of tobacco recoupment, we have an obligation under current Medicaid
            law to recoup the federal share of the tobacco settlement. As you know the federal
            government pays an average of 57 percent of Medicaid costs, and states routinely
            reimburse us for the federal share of Medicaid collections.

           But we want you to know that as the President has said all along, he is committed to
            working with you and with the states to change the law, to enact legislation to settle the
            federal government's claims in exchange for a commitment by the states to use tobacco
            money to prevent youth smoking, protect tobacco farmers, improve public health, and
            assist children. The President's budget specifically assumes no recoupment until FY
            2001 so that we can reach an agreement this year. I hope we can start work on this kind
            of legislation as soon as possible.

           The President will, however, vigorously oppose any legislation which would completely
            give up the federal share of the states' tobacco settlement -- without any commitment by
            the states to use these monies to prevent youth smoking, protect tobacco farmers, improve
            public health, or assist children. We know that most states want to do the right thing
            with this money, but we also know that Governors and legislatures will come under
            tremendous pressure to spend this on things that have nothing whatsoever to do with
            children or tobacco farmers or reducing youth smoking. Look at what happened in the
            Congress debate last year. It would be a national tragedy if this landmark state
            settlement went by without any real assurance that we are going to do everything we can
            to reduce youth smoking and help tobacco farmers.


                                           Automated Records Management System
     Q&A                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

     Q:    Why are you trying to recoup state funds when you are filing a federal lawsuit to obtain
           reimbursement for federal tobacco-related costs?

     A:    These two claims are separate and distinct. Under current law, the federal government
           cannot pursue Medicaid claims directly; states are under a legal obligation to pursue them
           and the federal government must recoup its share from the states. The Justice        .
           Department litigation will seek reimburse for federal claims outside of Medicaid, including
           tobacco-related health costs in Medicare, the Federal Employee Health Benefits program,
           military and veterans benefits, and the Indian Health Service.

     Q:    You say you want a commitment from the states to spend the federal share of the
           state tobacco settlement on certain shared national and state priorities. What
           exactly do you have in mind?

     A:    We are seeking a commitment from the states to use tobacco money to prevent youth
           smoking, protect tobacco farmers, improve public health, and assist children. The
           President wants to work with you and the states to devise a specific menu which meets
           these purposes, as we were able to do last year in the McCain legislation. We will have
           to rethink some issues this year -- for example the McCain bill had other spending for
           tobacco prevention and farmers and thus the menu did not include those items. The
           important thing is that we work together as we did before to construct a menu that works
           for all of us.

     Q:    Our state has agreed to spend all the tobacco funds we receive from the settlement
           to prevent youth smoking and promote public health. Why should my state have to
           change its plans to fit a bill written here in Washington?

     A:    We want to enact legislation that will enable states like yours to continue your efforts to
           reduce youth smoking and improve public health. We just want some assurance that
           every state will use these funds for these important purposes -- that is, to prevent youth
           smoking, protect tobacco farmers; improve public health, or assist children.

     Q:    Our legislature is meeting now and will have to make appropriations over the next
           two months. We can't wait for months for this legislation to be finished!

     A:    We understand your concerns, and couldn't agree more that we should reach agreement
           and enact this legislation as soon as possible.
                                             Hex-Oump Conversion

Q.   Isn't it contradictory to bring suit against the tobacco companies and try.to protect farmers?

A.   The President has repeatedly reaffirmed his commitment to protecting tobacco farmers
     and their communities and believes we can reduce youth smoking and also protect
     tobacco farmers. He is encouraged that the states and industry were able to agree recently
     upon a $5 billion package to compensate farmers. We will continue to work with all
     parties to ensure the financial well-being of tobacco farmers, their families, and their
     commumtles. Farmers who never marketed cigarettes to children and worked hard to
     sell a legal crop should be protected. Ifwe are successful in this suit, we could use some
     of the money to make sure farmers are protected.

Q:   How do you answer some governors' charges that their settlements were not for
     Medicaid costs because they took Medicaid out of their suit?

A:   The Justice Department has analyzed the issue of tobacco recoupment carefully and
     concluded that the settlement is for Medicaid Claims.

     First, states have an obligation under Medicaid law to pursue funds owed to the Medicaid
     program. Thus, states that sued for tobacco-related health costs should have included
     tobacco-related Medicaid claims in their suits -- as all or almost all did. Moreover, states
     cannot sue only for state Medicaid costs; they are obliged by Medicaid law to sue for the
     federal costs at the same time. Since the federal government pays on average 57 percent
     of Medicaid claims, the states are obliged to share those recoveries with the federal
     government.

     Second, the states gave up both state and federal Medicaid claims in exchange for the
     tobacco settlement funds. For example, the November 1998 settlement document
     releases the tobacco companies from all claims that the states "directly, indirectly,
     derivatively, or in any other capacity ever had, now have, or hereafter can, shall or may
     have" against the tobacco companies -- which includes Medicaid claims. Thus all states
     gave up their Medicaid claims in exchange for the settlement funds they received.
            "




