RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Devorah R. Adler ( CN=Devorah R. Adler/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-MAR-1999 16:01:29.00

SUBJECT:   vision

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Jeanne Lambrew ( CN=Jeanne Lambrew/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN)     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here you go -- please call with questions.

Devorah

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D38)MAIL44767566M.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504326070000010A020100000002050000006968000000020000DC3448FB2B9E39B1577483
8F17AA4677AOF134467E54D484595190A732EAA8BOE009039002B73299FE96F3492E723390597F
HEALTH                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
A.   PATIENTS BILL OF RIGHTS

     I. Legislative status. There is early momentum in both houses for a strong bill.. The
     House is clearly the most encouraging, and seems to be the best place to design a
     compromise for the short-term. Congressman Dingell has reintroduced his bill from last
     year and believes he can attract as many as 210 cosponsors. Congressman Ganske has
     also introduced a modified version of the Dingell bill which slightly alters the
     enforcement provision by dropping the punitive damages section. By any definition,
     however, it remains a very strong bill. It remains unclear whether the best strategy is to
     advocate for a normal committee markup or to encourage these two members to file a
     discharge petition to bypass this process. For the short term, Mr. Dingell will opt for the
     traditional Commerce Committee markup approach, reserving the right to utilize a
     discharge petition if that process gets bogged down. The goal is to have passed legislation
     that will be both strong and bipartisan by the August recess.

     II. Presidential Actions. The President could do a bipartisan event to highlight the fact
     there are Republicans and Democrats that have proposed strong and comprehensive
     legislation for a Patients Bill of Rights, rather than the piecemeal approach. We will
     continue to work with advocacy groups, such as the breast cancer community and
     physician associations, to gather their support for a comprehensive bill. In addition, the
     Vice President could join the Democrats when they unveil the Dingell Kennedy bill.

     III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. It is unclear how Speaker Hastert is
     going to work to ensure that the bill does not move too quickly and undermine the weak
     Republican caucus position from last year. We believe that he will want to have a
     bipartisan bill at some point, but we also believe that he wants to avoid a significant
     enforcement provision being included in any final bill.

B.   LONG TERM CARE

     I. Legislative status. On 1119/99, Senator Daschle introduced the Health Protection and
     Assistance for Older Americans Act. This bill includes a number of provisions of our
     long term care initiative, including the $1000 tax credit, the National Family Caregivers
     Program, and the OPM program, as well as all three of our Medicare buy-in provisions.
     Although we are working to expand the list of co-sponsors, this may be difficult, since
     Daschle included the Medicare buy-in as component of this legislation. We should also
     review options for Democratic sponsorship in the house; perhaps Congressman Cardin or
     Levin; Congressman Stark has already indicated interest. There is a hearing scheduled on
     the FEHBP long term care insurance proposal scheduled for March 18th. The
     Republicans are planning to invite representatives ofthe insurance industry, who are
     expected to oppose this part of our long term care initiative.
                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
     II. Presidential Actions. The President has asked the Vice President to host a series
     of forums around the country to highlight this issue, which he will continue to do.
     There may be some opportunities to highlight this proposal as it moves through the
     legislative process.

     III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. There is a fair amount of bipartisan
     support for this legislation. We are working with to determine which Republicans serving
     on House committees of jurisdiction are likely sponsors and develop an outreach strategy
     to sign them up.

C.   DISABILITY

     I. Legislative status.  One issue that is gaining a great deal of bipartisan support,
     particularly in the Senate, is the Jeffords-Keniledy-Roth-Moynihan Work
     Incentives Improvement Act.' The Senate has already held hearings on this
     legislation and is planning a March 4 markup. Senator Roth has asked that
     members refrain from amending the legislation in order to ensure its swift progress
     through the committees of jurisdiction. Although there has been no companion bill
     introduced in the House, Congresswoman Johnson and Congressman Lazio are likely
     sponsors. Interest among Democrats is high. Since Congressman Waxman has had a
     long involvement in this issue, he is a likely sponsor as well. We are stilI looking for
     sponsors for the tax credit and the assistive technology pieces of the initiative.

     II. Presidential Actions. The President and Vice President could issue statements,
     hold an event with supportive members of Congress, or host another Task Force
     meeting to continue to highlight this proposal as it moves through the legislative
     process. This policy can also be highlighted at the White House Conference on
     Mental Health.

     III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. This is one issue that has a great
     deal of bipartisan support. We should continue to highlight the bipartisan interest
     in this legislation to assure that we get a bill passed this year.

D.   ASSURING ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE AND HEALTH CARE SERVICES

     Jmprovjn2 Af;cess to Health Care Serv.ices for W Qrking Am~ricans. This ioitiative
     Illv~StS ~ ll>ilhon over ~ears III COmg.rehenS}V~ealth care dehvery, systems that
     tradllttlOnallYLProvide se IC~~tO tlie. u Illsured. e proPQ~al Jesponas 1;0 the growing
     ch@ Jenge.s the nahon' s ea care III astfllcture aces With the fncreaslllg number 01
     umnsured and limits on pu IC sector proVider payments.


     I. Legislative status. HHS is currently working with the Appropriations Committees to
     secure funding for this initiative.

     II. Presidential Actions. We should include this initiative on the tobacco recoupment
     menu.
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. This proposal bears some similarity
to a number of Republican proposals floated during health care reform. Republicans are
generally supportive of this policy, although States could be opposed since the money is
not being directed by them.

Health Options for Older Americans. This new initiative expands the health options
available for older Americans by: enabling Americans aged 62 to 65 to buy into
Medicare, by paying a full premium; providing vulnerable displaced workers ages 55 and
older access to Medicare by offering those who have involuntarily lost their jobs and their
health care coverage a similar Medicare buy-in option; providing Americans ages 55 and
older whose companies reneged on their commitment to provide retiree health benefits a
new health option, by extending "COBRA" continuation coverage until age 65. The
President's proposal is fully funded and does not burden the Medicare Program.

I. Legislative status. On 1/19/99, Senator Daschle introduced the Health Protection and
Assistance for Older Americans Act, which includes our Medicare buy-in proposals. This
legislation is considered to be part of the top 10 Democratic priorities. This policy has
been raised in the context of the Medicare Commission, and has the support of most of
the Democrats.

II. Presidential Actions. We should use the President, Vice President, and First Lady to
amplify our message on this issue, given recent trends that show there is an even greater
problem in this age group since last year.

III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. Most Republicans oppose this
proposal, since it is viewed as a Medicare expansion.

Encouraging Small Businesses to Offer Health Insurance. This new initiative
encourages small businesses to offer health insurance to their employees through: a new
tax credit for small businesses who decide to offer coverage by joining coalitions;
encouraging private foundations to support coalitions by allowing their contributions
towards these organizations to be tax exempt; offering technical assistance to small
business coalitions from the Office of Personnel Management.

I. Legislative status. Although we currently have no sponsors, there is bipartisan
interest in this proposal as well as business interest.

II. Presidential Actions. We should amplify this in speeches on the broader coverage
agenda, but the proposal is not large enough to be highlighted on its own. We should also
continue to reach out to the business community in order to obtain their support.

III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. This policy is generally supported
by the Republicans, because it is a tax credit. It is important to note that the Republican
version of the Patients Bill of Rights that the House introduced last year included a
     significantly flawed version of this proposal.               Hex-Dump Conversion

     Improving Access to Health Insurance through Medicaid and CHIP. The budget
     increases access to health insurance by restoring Medicaid and CHIP eligibility for legal
     immigrants affected by welfare refonn; extending Medicaid eligibility to foster children
     up to age 21; improving transitional Medicaid for people moving from welfare to work;
     and providing states with $1.2 billion over 5 years for children's health outreach activities.
     The budget also provides $144 million over five years for increased CHIP funding for
     Puerto Rico and the territories.

     I. Legislative status. This policy will be linked to unpopular Medicaid savings, but could
     get passed, since the policies are generally attractive to States.

     II. Presidential Actions. We should use the President, Vice President, and First Lady to
     amplify our message in this area. In addition, we are issuing guidance to States to
     encourage them to conduct outreach to families leaving the TANF program who are still
     eligibile for Medicaid.

     III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. Republicans are generally
     supportive of this policy, but for the wrong reasons. They think that it could open up
     CHIP for purposes of providing coverage to adults. Congressional Democrats generally
     do not like this policy for the same reasons. We intend to work with Congressional
     Democrats to find a more acceptable policy that costs the same amount.

E.   PUBLIC HEALTH

     Ryan White HIV/AIDS Treatment Grants and CBC proposal. The budget provides
     $1.5 billion for Ryan White, a 7 percent increase over 1999 funding levels. The budget
     also proposes an additional $50 million to address HIV and AIDS issues in minority
     communities.

     I. Legislative status. We are working with the appropriators and the Congressional
     Black Caucus to assure that there is sufficient funding through the budget process
     for AIDS treatment. It is likely that this will receive increases through the process.
     We will work closely with the advocacy community to assure that both ofthese.
     initiatives get sufficient attention.

     II. Presidential Actions. The President, Vice President or First Lady could highlight
     this initiative at events and remarks on health care, on its own and in conjunction
     with the race and health initiative.

     III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. Republicans tend to be
     supportive of Ryan White. It is unclear, however, whether they will support the
     CBC efforts.
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion   ·

      Mental Health Block Grants. The budget provides $359 million, a 24 percent increase
      over 1999 and the largest increase ever.
      I. Legislative status. We are working with members of the Appropriations Committee to
      ensure funding for these programs.

      II. Presidential Actions. These programs will be highlighted at the White House
      Mental Health Conference this June with the President, First Lady, Vice President
      and Mrs. Gore. The Surgeon General's report on Mental Health is also scheduled to
      be released this fall which will provide another opportunity to advocate Congress
      increase this program.

      III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. Last year, the Congress put in
      more dollars in this area than we proposed. If we can work with the Republicans
      throughout the year on mental health, they may well support our proposed increase.


      Race and Health Initiative. The budget includes $145 million for health education,
      prevention, and treatment services for minority populations.

      I. Legislative status. We are working with the appropriators as well as advocacy
      groups to assure that the Congress funds a strong initiative in this area.'

       II. Presidential Actions. Given the recent news about continuing disparities, we
       should contemplate ways for the President or Vice President to highlight the need
     . for this initiative through reports, grants, or other administrative actions we could
       take to narrow these disparities.

      III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. The Republicans were not
      particularly responsive to this initiative last year and wanted all of the increases to
      go into Community Health Centers. We will need to work closely with the groups to
      assure funding for this initiative.

F.    BIOTECHNOLOGY

      Genetic Discrimination. This policy prevents health insurers and employers from
      discriminating on the basis of genetic information.

      I. Legislative Status. This legislation prevents employers and health insurers from
      discriminating on the basis of genetic information. There is some bipartisan interest
      on this issue as well, mostly on the health insurance side. Senator Daschle, together
      with Senator Kennedy, is introducing his bill next week.

      II. Presidential Actions. The President could issue an executive order prohibiting
      discrimination against employees based on predictive genetic information or information
      about a request for the receipt of genetic services. We will continue to work with the
                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

advocates, including members of the breast cancer community, to secure their support for
this action.

 III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. The Republicans have proposed
 legislation addressing genetic discrimination for health insurance in their Patients'
.Bill of Rights legislation. It is possible that we can continue to work with them in
 this process.

Privacy of Medical Records. This proposal provides comprehensive privacy protections
to protect the confidentiality of medical records.

1. Presidential Actions. We could hold a bipartisan event with either the President
or the Vice President to highlight the need for Congress to pass strong privacy
legislation and the fact that HIPAA has already provided us with the authority to
establish privacy protections for electronic medical records. Assuming Congress
does not pass legislation by this fall, the President could also issue an executive
action on electronic claims in late fall to implement the actions these HIPAA
afforded us. We will also continue to work with the advocacy groups, including the
mental health and AIDS communities to garner their support and to publicly
validate that strong privacy legislation is necessary to protect individuals' civil
rights. It is important to note that we have yet to reach final agreement on our
position on the application of these privacy protections with regard to law
enforcement This issue is extremely controversial and will probably attract
attention as this issue heats up.

II. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. There are some Republican
efforts to pass privacy legislation, but to date most have been wholly unacceptable.
In fact, last year, the Republicans included privacy protections in their patients' bill
of rights that undermined current state protections without putting anything in
their place. There may be more desire to work in a bipartisan manner this year as
the date, but we should certainly highlight any major efforts to undermine current
protections.

Medicare Cancer Clinical Trials. The budget provides $750 million over four years for
a demonstration to give more Americans access to cutting-edge cancer treatments.

I. Legislative status. Senators Rockefeller and Mack are planning to introduce their
bill quite soon. We should contemplate how to move this in the context of any
broader Medicare reforms.

II. Presidential Actions. The President, the Vice President, or the First Lady could
highlight this effort in the context of broader cancer events, such as breast cancer
awareness month.

III. Relationship to Republican agenda and priorities. This proposal has bipartisan
                                  Hex-Dilmp ConvelSion

support. However, it is unclear if it will move in this Congress.


