RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-MAR-1999 18:32:52.00

SUBJECT:   Long Term Planning Memo-

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays   ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Most recent draft- includes Bruce's edits==================== ATTACHMENT    1 =======
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D71]MAIL42436766U.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504308070000010A02010000000205000000E53601000002000030D4A3214D5C405AC66ECO
B66A5AA781BE781EF7915C2080A99B887CC3EA297A2699FFDA3BC073786DD1402420A4EOD400B2
84739D2379D685627315B3A2F7FE0636C85A5CDC2A4ADAD66B50D9FADD719F7898CFA208B81313
lAFECAC6F60AF99324146FA2ADB19D4812E815E16094FD306E6FB37D9D2716C7009362E090CC5E
94C8EA9C5E7C6EF4EE6F3DD012A49EC90093EE266DOFC05C9987E8479E5CBCAEBA031B87E5CB14
B13FF372FAE56D376CAAA715CDA8EC985A087E41853E97654BDF9E33OFF78FCD31EE535D279E27
6B94E9DF20D2008D52712E7EOE1725357462285BE47774F6DE223CAA5FFC24629F85F73B708FC9
                                                 Hex-Dump ConvelSion


                                                 March 3, 1999


MEMORANDUM TO THE CHIEF OF STAFF

CC:                       Doug Sosnik
                          Karen Tramontano

FROM:.                    Bruce Reed
                          Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:                  Long Term Priorities


MAJOR PRIORITIES

1. Education:       Our major objectives on education over the next few months will be: 1) Win the
argument that accountability, class size, and school construction must be national priorities; 2) keep
Democrats united behind our accountability agenda; and 3) attack Republican efforts to regain credibility
on education, such as Domenici' s jumbo block grant and Coverdell' s education savings accounts.

      A. Education Accountability Act. Legislation to reauthorize the Elementary and Secondary
      Education Act which will require states and districts receiving federal funds to end social promotion,
      fix failing schools, end use of unqualified teachers, issue report cards and institute discipline codes.
      Programs that are part of ESE A include Title I, After-School, Class Size (see below), Bilingual, Safe
      and Drug-Free, Technology, Charters, and Teacher Quality

           I. Legislative Status: The administration plans to transmit its bill to Congress by the end of
            March. The reauthorization process is expected to run through much of 1999 and possibly into
            next year. The House has already started hearings on the bill. The Senate and House are
            expected to start mark-up this summer.

            II. Presidential Actions:
            - Announcement of bill transmittal, perhaps preceded by leaks on key unannounced
            components such as teacher quality.
            - Release of Dept of ED social promotions guide (ready anytime).
            - Release of Dept of ED study on choice initiatives.

            III. Republican Agenda: ESEA is the centerpiece of federal government's K-12 education
            policy. This is a top priority item for Republicans who will seek to have ESEA reflect their
            key education initiatives: flexibility and block grants.                            .

      B. Ed-Flex Demonstration Program. Legislation to expand Ed-Flex to allow all 50 states apply
      for authority to waive certain federal rules in exchange for showing results.
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

     I. Legislative Status: The Senate will begin debate on this bill this week, with a vote
      expected as early as the end of the week. The House Education and Workforce Committee is
      also planning to vote on its counterpart legislation this week. The President has indicated that
      he will sign an Ed-Flex bill that has strengthened accountability to better link the waivers to
      student performance.

      II. Presidential Actions:
      - None

      III. Relationship to Republican Agenda and Priorities: Republicans have made Ed-Flex
      expansion their number one priority. It is expected to be the first education vote this session.
      Flexibility is a key theme of their education agenda -- and they will claim passage as a victory.

C. Class Size. Legislation to authorize $11.4 billion more over six years to complete the hiring
100,000 teachers and reduce class size in the early grades to national average of 18. (Will still also
need to appropriate $1.4 billion in FY 2000).

      I. Legislative Status: Senators Murray and Kennedy plan to offer a class size amendment to
      the Ed-Flex bill next week to authorize the program for the remaining six years in the
      President's proposal. The President strongly supports this amendment. In the House, the
      Education Committee is expected to vote on its Ed-Flex bill this week. Class size will be
      offered, but is likely to be blocked on procedural grounds (non-germane).

      II. Presidential Actions:
      - March 6th radio address to release of Dept of Ed Class Size program guidance, and
      challenge senate to adopt Murray-Kennedy amendment.
      -Release of local allocation for Class Size program (note: not likely to be ready in next week).

      III. Republican Agenda: This is not a top priority for Republicans, but they funded the
      program in the last appropriations bill and are thus, on record in support. Republicans would
      prefer to make class size an allowable use of a block grant proposal.

D. School Modernization.. Legislation to create tax credits to support $25 billion in bonds to
help build, repair, or modernize up to 6,000 schools

      I. Legislative Status: Rep. Rangel will introduce the administration's school modernization
      proposal.

      II. Presidential Actions:
      - Release of local allocation for class size program (class size reduction will spur need for
      increased school construction).

      III. Republican Agenda: Republicans are now making school construction a priority item
      on their education agenda. House Republicans have a proposal to change arbitrage provisions
      for school bonds -- strongly supported by the school superintendents organization.




                                                2
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

   E. Education FY 2000 Appropriations Bill. Legislation to fund federal education programs,
   including after-school; turning-around failing schools; class size; Troops to Teachers; master
   teachers; GEAR-UP; Title I, Technology grants; choice initiatives -- charters, work-site and magnets;
   and Safe and Drug-Free schools.

         I. Legislative Status: House Appropriations Committee hearings in March.

         II. Presidential Actions:
         - National Teacher of the Year event in April..
         - FY 99 Grants announcements: after-school, charter school, teacher recruitment and teacher
         quality grants, Gear-Up, technology challenge grants, magnet, safe and drug free schools,
         Reading Excellence Act and school to work

         III. Republican Agenda: Republicans have made education a top priority and will likely
         support increased funding for charters and after-school. Republicans will fight larger battle
         over whether to block grant the funds for many of these programs.


2. Health Care.

    A. Patients Bill of Rights.

         I. Legislative Status:   There is early momentum in both houses for a strong bill.. The
         House is clearly the most encouraging, and seems to be the best place to design a
         compromise for the short-term. Congressman Dingell has reintroduced his bill from last
         year and believes he can attract as many as 210 cosponsors. Congressman Ganske has
         also introduced a modified version of the Dingell bill which slightly alters the enforcement
         provision by dropping the punitive damages section. By any definition, however, it
         remains a very strong bill. It remains unclear whether the best strategy is to advocate for
         a normal committee markup or to encourage these two members to file a discharge
         petition to bypass this process. For the short term, Mr. Dingell will opt for the traditional
         Commerce Committee markup approach, reserving the right to utilize a discharge petition
         if that process gets bogged down. The goal is to have passed legislation that will be both
         strong and bipartisan by the August recess.

         II. Presidential Actions:
         - The President could do a bipartisan event to highlight the fact there are Republicans and
         Democrats that have proposed strong and comprehensive legislation for a Patients Bill of
         Rights, rather than the piecemeal approach. We will continue to work with advocacy
         groups, such as the breast cancer community and physician associations, to gather their
         support for a comprehensive bill.
         - In addition, the Vice President could join the Democrats when they unveil the Dingell
         Kennedy bill. .




                                                  3
                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

      III. Republican Agenda: It is unclear how Speaker Hastert is going to work to ensure
      that the bill does not move too quickly and undermine the weak Republican caucus
      position from last year. We believe that he will want to have a bipartisan bill at some
      point, but we also believe that he wants to avoid a significant enforcement provision being
      included in any final bill.

B. Long Term Care.

      I. Legislative Status: ,On 1119/99, Senator Daschle introduced the Health Protection and
      Assistance for Older Americans Act. This bill includes a number of provisions of our
      long term care initiative, including the $1000 tax credit, the National Family Caregivers
      Program, and the OPM program, as well as all three of our Medicare buy-in provisions.
      Although we are working to expand the list of co-sponsors, this may be difficult, since
      Daschle included the Medicare buy-in as component of this legislation. We should also
      review options for Democratic sponsorship in the house; perhaps Congressman Cardin or
      Levin; Congressman Stark has already indicated interest. There is a hearing scheduled on
      the FEHBP long term care insurance proposal scheduled for March 18th. The Republicans
      are planning to invite representatives of the insurance industry, who are expected to
      oppose this part of our long term care initiative.

       II Presidential Actions:
     , - The President has asked the Vice President to host a series of forums around the
       country to highlight this issue, which he will continue to do. There may be some
       opportunities to highlight this proposal as it moves through the legislative process.

      III. Republican Agenda: There is a fair amount of bipartisan support for this legislation.
       We are working with to determine which Republicans serving on House committees of
      jurisdiction are likely sponsors and develop an outreach strategy to sign them up.

C.    Disability.

      I. Legislative Status: One issue that is gaining a great deal of bipartisan support,
      particularly in the Senate, is the Jeffords-Kennedy-Roth-Moynihan Work Incentives
      Improvement Act. The Senate has already held hearings on this legislation and is
      planning a March 4 markup. Senator Roth has asked that members refrain from
      amending the legislation in order to ensure its swift progress through the committees
      of jurisdiction. Although there has been no companion bill introduced in the House,
      Congresswoman Johnson and Congressman Lazio are likely sponsors. Interest among
      Democrats is high .. Since Congressman Waxman has had a long involvement in this issue,
      he is a likely sponsor as well. We are still looking for sponsors for the tax credit and the
      assistive technology pieces of the initiative.

      II. Presidential Actions:



                                              4
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion ·

        - The President and Vice President could issue statements, hold an event with
        supportive members of Congress, or host another Task Force meeting to continue to
        highlight this proposal as it moves through the legislative process.
        - This policy can also be highlighted at the White House Conference on Mental
        Health.

         III. Republican Agenda: This is one issue that has a great deal of bipartisan
         support. We should continue to highlight the bipartisan interest in this legislation to
         assure that we get a bill passed this year.

D.· Ensuring Access to Health Insurance And Health Care Services.

   Impn)Ving Access to l;Iealth Care S~rvtces for Working Americans. This i.oitiatiy'e invest~
   $1 b)liion oyer 5 years II) Imprehenslve health care delivery Syst\!lll~ that tradItionally nrovli e
   servlpes to the umn.sured. e proposal responds to th!( grpwmg ~hal ~nges the natIon s· hea t
   care mtrastructure taces WIt tfle increasing number ot umnsured an lImIts on public sector
   provIder payments.

        I. Legislative status: HHS is currently working with the Appropriations Committees to
        secure funding for this initiative.

         II. Presidential Actions:
         - We should include this initiative on the tobacco recoupment menu.

         III. Republican Agenda: This proposal bears some similarity to a number of Republican
         proposals floated during health care reform. Republicans are generally supportive of this
         policy, although States could be opposed since the money is not being directed by them.

   Health Options for Older Americans. This new initiative expands the health options
   available for older Americans by: enabling Americans aged 62 to 65 to buy into Medicare, by
   paying a full premium; providing vulnerable displaced workers ages 55 and older access to
   Medicare by offering those who have involuntarily lost their jobs and their health care coverage
   a similar Medicare buy-in option; providing Americans ages 55 and older whose companies
   reneged on their commitment to provide retiree health benefits a new health option, by
   extending "COBRA" continuation coverage until age 65. The President's proposal is fully
   funded and does not burden the Medicare Program.

        I. Legislative Status: On 1119/99, Senator Daschle introduced the Health Protection and
        Assistance for Older Americans Act, which includes our Medicare buy-in proposals. This
        legislation is considered to be part of the top 10 Democratic priorities. This policy has
        been raised in the context of the Medicare Commission, and has the support of most of
        the Democrats.

         II. Presidential Actions:
         - We should use the President, Vice President, and First Lady to amplify our message on
         this issue, given recent trends that show there is an even greater problem in this age group
         since last year.

                                                  5
                                                     Hex-DiJmp Conversion

     III. Republican Agenda: Most Republicans oppose this proposal, since it is viewed as a
     Medicare expansion.

Encouraging Small Businesses to Offer Health Insurance. This new initiative encourages
small businesses to offer health insurance to their employees through: a new tax credit for small
businesses who decide to offer coverage by joining coalitions; encouraging private foundations
to support coalitions by allowing their contributions towards these organizations to be tax
exempt; offering technical assistance to small business coalitions from the Office of Personnel
Management.

     I. Legislative Status: Although we currently have no sponsors, there is bipartisan
     interest in this proposal as well as business interest.

     II. Presidential Actions.
     - We should amplify this in speeches on the broader coverage agenda, but the proposal is
     not large enough to be highlighted on its own.
     - We should also continue to reach out to the business community in order to obtain
     their support.

     III. Republican Agenda: This policy is generally supported by the Republicans, because
     it is a tax credit. It is important to note that the Republican version of the Patients Bill of
     Rights that the House introduced last year included a significantly flawed version of this
     proposal.

Improving Access to Health Insurance through Medicaid and CHIP. The budget increases
access to health insurance by restoring Medicaid and CHIP eligibility for legal immigrants
affected by welfare reform; extending Medicaid eligibility to foster children up to age 21;
improving transitional Medicaid for people moving from welfare to work; and providing states
with $1.2 billion over 5 years for children's health outreach activities. The budget also provides
$144 million over five years for increased CHIP funding for Puerto Rico and the territories.

     I. Legislative Status: This policy will be linked to unpopular Medicaid savings, but
     could get passed, since the policies are generally attractive to States.

     II. Presidential Actions:
     - We should use the President, Vice President, and First Lady to amplify our message in
     this area.
     - In addition, we are issuing guidance to States to encourage them to conduct outreach to
     families leaving the T ANF program who are still eligible for Medicaid.

     III. Republican Agenda: Republicans are generally supportive ofthis policy, but for the
     wrong reasons. They think that it could open up CHIP for purposes of providing
     coverage to adults. Congressional Democrats generally do not like this policy for the


                                              6
                                                    Hex-Dump Conve:sion ·

          same reasons. We intend to work with Congressional Democrats to find a more
          acceptable policy that costs the same amount.

E.   Public Health.

     Ryan White HIV/AIDS Treatment Grants and CBC proposal. The budget provides $1.5
     billion for Ryan White, a 7 percent increase over 1999 funding levels. The budget also
     proposes an additional $50 million to address HIV and AIDS issues in minority communities.

          I. Legislative Status: We are working with the appropriators and the Congressional
          Black Caucus to assure that there is sufficient funding through the budget process
          for AIDS treatment. It is likely that this will receive increases through the process.
          We will work closely with the advocacy community to assure that both of these
          initiatives get sufficient attention.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - The President, Vice President or First Lady could highlight this initiative at events
          and remarks on health care, on its own and in conjunction with the race and health
          initiative.

          III. Republican Agenda: Republicans tend to be supportive of Ryan White. It is
          unclear, however, whether they will support the CBC efforts.

     Mental Health Block Grants. The budget provides $359 million, a 24 percent increase over
     1999 and the largest increase ever.

          I. Legislative Status: We are working with members of the Appropriations Committee
          to ensure funding for these programs.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - These programs will be highlighted at the White House Mental Health Conference
          this June with the President, First Lady, Vice President and Mrs. Gore. - The
          Surgeon General's report on Mental Health is also scheduled to be released this fall
          which will provide another opportunity to advocate Congress increase this program.


          III. Republican Agenda: Last year, the Congress put in more dollars in this area
          than we proposed. If we can work with the Republicans throughout the year on
          mental health, they may well support our proposed increase.

     Race and Health Initiative. The budget includes $145 million for health education, prevention,
     and treatment services for minority populations.




                                                 7
                                                     Hex-DiJmp Conve:sion ·

          I. Legislative Status: We are working with the appropriators as well as advocacy
          groups to assure that the Congress funds a strong initiative in this area.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - Given the recent news about continuing disparities, we should contemplate ways for
          the President or Vice President to highlight the need for this initiative through
          reports, grants, or other administrative actions we could take to narrow these
          disparities.

          III. Republican Agenda: The Republicans were not particularly responsive to this
          initiative last year and wanted all of the increases to go into Community Health
          Centers. We will need to work closely with the groups to assure funding for this
          initiative.

F.   Biotechnology.

     Genetic Discrimination. This policy prevents health insurers and employers from
     discriminating on the basis of genetic information.

          I. Legislative Status: This legislation prevents employers and health insurers from
          discriminating on the basis of genetic information. There is some bipartisan interest
          on this issue as well, mostly on the health insurance side. Senator Daschle, together
          with Senator Kennedy, is introducing his bill next week.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - The President could issue an executive order prohibiting discrimination against
          employees based on predictive genetic information or information about a request for the
          receipt of genetic services. We will continue to work with the advocates, including
          members of the breast cancer community, to secure their support for this action.

          III. Republican agenda: The Republicans have proposed legislation addressing
          genetic discrimination for health insurance in their Patients' Bill of Rights
          legislation. It is possible that we can continue to work with them in this process.

     Privacy of Medical Records. This proposal provides comprehensive privacy protections to
     protect the confidentiality of medical records.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - We could hold a bipartisan event with either the President or the Vice President to
          highlight the need for Congress to pass strong privacy legislation and the fact that
          HIPAA has already provided us with the authority to establish privacy protections
          for electronic medical records.
          - Assuming Congress does not pass. legislation by this fall, the President could also
          issue an executive action on electronic claims in late fall to implement the actions
          these HIPAA afforded us. We will also continue to work with the advocacy groups,

                                                 8
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

          including the mental health and AIDS communities to garner their support and to
          publicly validate that strong privacy legislation is necessary to protect individuals'
          civil rights. It is important to note that we have yet to reach final agreement on our
          position on the application of these privacy protections with regard to law
          enforcement This issue is extremely controversial and will probably attract
          attention as this issue heats up.

          III. Republican agenda: There are some Republican efforts to pass privacy
          legislation, but to date most have been wholly unacceptable. In fact, last year, the
          Republicans included privacy protections in their patients' bill of rights that
          undermined current state protections without putting anything in their place.
          There may be more desire to work in a bipartisan manner this year as the date, but
          we should certainly highlight any major efforts to undermine current protections.

    Medicare Cancer Clinical Trials. The budget provides $750 million over four years for a
    demonstration to give more Americans access to cutting-edge cancer treatments.

          I. Legislative Status: Senators Rockefeller and Mack are planning to introduce
          their bill quite soon. We should contemplate how to move this in the context of any
          broader Medicare reforms.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - The President, the Vice President, or the First Lady could highlight this effort in
          the context of broader cancer events, such as breast cancer awareness 'month.

          III. Republican Agenda: This proposal has bipartisan support.              However, it is
          unclear if it will move in this Congress.


3. Crime         We have two major strategic goals on crime over the next few months: First, an extended,
high-profile rollout of our new crime bill to build the case for another 50,000 police beyond the 100,000
mark we'll reach in May. Second, a continued effort to keep republicans on the defensive on guns by
stepping up our own efforts to crack down on illegal gun trafficking as the gun industry takes the tobacco
industry's place in the press's sights.

    A. 21st Century Crime Bill. The President's omnibus crime proposal will: add up to an
    additional 50,000 police on the street; give crime-fighting technologies to state and local law
    enforcement; provide more drug testing and treatment for offenders under criminal justice
    supervision; close the loophole on gun shows and extend the Brady waiting period; authorize
    new measures to combat international, juvenile, and white collar crime; and reauthorize popular
    anti-crime programs created in the 1994 Crime Act.

          I. Legislative Status: We are preparing to introduce the President's omnibus crime
          legislation immediately after the congressional recess. Although we do not necessarily


                                                    9
                                        Hex-Dilmp Conversion

expect the crime bill to move right away, we want to take the offensive before Republicans
gain any traction in attacking our budget or moving their own legislation.
   a. March: Commerce-Justice State appropriations hearings scheduled for March 9th,
   11 th and 17th. Also, the Senate Judiciary Committee plans to hold a hearing to
   criticize the our FY 2000 crime budget.
   b. April: The President's proposed legislation should be transmitted to Congress no
   later than the first week of April.
   c. June-July: Appropriations bills expected to be marked up by the full
   appropriations committees and sent to House and Senate floor for consideration.

II. Presidential Actions:
- March - April: Each week of this month we intend to build a drumbeat for the
introduction of our crime bill with a series of events and press leaks on key components.
We recommend that the President unveil the entire bill in a speech to a police academy
class over the Easter recess. Possible events/leaks include:
   - Health Care Fraud: Tougher criminal penalties for obstructing a fraud investigation,
   and a crackdown on illegal kickback schemes.
   - Telemarketing Fraud: Legislation to give federal law enforcement some power to
   block telephone service, telemarketing scam artists that we already have for illegal
   gamblers.
   - Bioterrorism: New penalties for possessing, using or failing to report biological agents
   and toxins. (The President should announce this to the Firefighters on March 15.)
   - Money Laundering: Treasury is finalizing a national strategy to crackdown on money
   laundering.
   - Gun Trafficking: New legislation to expand gun tracing of used firearms.
- May: During National Police Week (May 10-15), we propose that the President hold an
event to commemorate funding of the 100,000th police officer under his COPS initiative.
This represents one of the Administration's most important policy milestones -- on a par
with reaching a budget deficit ofzero. Additionally, thousands of police officers will
already be in town that week to attend the Fraternal Order of Police's Peace Officers
Memorial (5/15).
- June - August: Possible events/meetings with Mayors, law enforcement organizations,
and other such groups that are holding annual conferences throughout the summer to help
build support for the crime bill and continued funding for COPS.

III. Republican Agenda:
- Juvenile crime: Senate Republicans have re-introduced their juvenile crime legislation
from last session, and have signaled that they are prepared to take it directly to the floor
this spring. If they do, we should be prepared to propose the provisions in our crime bill
as an alternative. With more money for police and prosecutors, tough gun provisions, and
increased drug testing and treatment, our bill offers a broader and more popular alternative
that should help unify Congressional Democrats -- many of whom did not support our
juvenile crime bill.
- Drugs: Senate Republicans have also proposed the Drug-Free Century Act, which
generally increases spending for drug interdiction and enhances penalties for certain drug

                                         10
                                                       Hex-Dump Conve:Sloil

            offenses. As with the Republicans' juvenile crime legislation, we believe that our
            omnibus crime bill offers a more comprehensive alternative that should be consider if the
            Senate Republicans bring the Drug-Free Century Act to the Senate floor.

       B. Firearms Enforcement. The President's budget contains $28.8 million in new funds for
       additional ATF agents and federal prosecutors to enforce our firearms laws. These funds are
       closely linked to the President's proposal to close the gun show loophole, as well as to a
       proposed directive on enhanced gun enforcement that we expect the President to sign soon.

            I. Legislative Status: Appropriations hearings on the Treasury enforcement budget
            began in late February. Commerce-Justice appropriations hearings to fund additional
            federal prosecutor funding will be held in March. Consideration by the full
            appropriations committees and the full House and Senate will likely take place between
            June and July. Related legislation requiring all firearms sales at gun shows to include a
            background check will be included as part of the President's crime bill to be introduced in
            late March.

            II. Presidential Actions:
            - We have proposed that in his March 13th radio address, the President issue a directive to
            the Attorney General and Treasury Secretary to develop a strategy to strengthen federal
            firearms enforcement and prosecutions. Once the strategy is finalized, the President
            could release the strategy and again push to secure funding for this initiative.
            - We are also reviewing other gun legislation, including proposals to limit sales on one
            gun a month and to subject gun manufacturers to greater scrutiny.

            III. Republican Agenda: The firearms enforcement initiative will help us defend against
            the NRA's criticisms that U.S. Attorneys are not prosecuting enough firearms cases, and
            will provide us with an alternative to RepublicanINRA amendments in the
            Commerce-Justice-State appropriations bill to simply mandate more federal firearms
            prosecutions. Unlike other firearms initiatives, this proposal should receive some
            measure of bipartisan support.


 ADDITIONAL PRIORITIES

. 1.   Children and Families

       A. The President's Child Care Initiative. Subsidy expansion and Early Learning Fund
       through the Child and Development Block Grant; tax relief through the Child and Development
       Tax Credit (CDCTC); new stay-at-home tax re1iefthrough the CDCTC; new business tax credit;
       and after-school program expansion.

            I. Legislative Status: House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Human Resources
            hearing scheduled for 3116; Ranking Subcommittee Democrat, Rep. Ben Cardin, plans to
            introduce the pieces of the Administration's child care initiative in Ways and Means

                                                   11
                                                      H6x-Oump ConvelSlon

         jurisdiction, week of 3/8; increased funding for after-school programs will be addressed in
         appropriations.
         II. Presidential Actions:
         - Presidential announcement of child care block grant state spending numbers (TBD).
         - Presidential announcement of after-school grants for the 21 st Century Community
         Learning Center program (late Spring).

         III. Republican Agenda: Rep. Nancy Johnson (R-CT), chair of the Ways and Means
         Subcommittee on Human Resources, is likely to introduce her child care tax relief bill
         from last year, which includes expansion of the CDCTC and stay-at-home tax relief
         (which received broad support from moderate Republicans last year); other Republicans
         may introduce marriage penalty/stay-at-home tax pieces.

    B. Support for Young People who "Emancipate" from Foster Care. The President's
    budget includes $280 million over five years to: provide Medicaid coverage, enhance the
    Independent Living Program, provide new time-limited financial support, and increase the
    Transitional Living Program.

         I. Legislative Status: House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Human Resources
         hearing scheduled for 3/9; Ranking Subcommittee Democrat, Rep. Ben Cardin introduced
         legislation.

         II. Presidential Actions:
         - First Lady highly committed and may hold events in the Spring.

         III. Republican Agenda: Some Republicans have indicated an interest in pursuing child
         welfare block grant which the Administration opposes.

2. Civil Rights

    A. Hate Crimes Legislation. The President has called for legislation to strengthen the ability
    of the Justice Department to prosecute hate crimes based on race and religion by removing
    needless jurisdictional requirements and give the Department the power to prosecute hate crimes
    committed because of the victim's sexual orientati~n, gender, or disability.

         I. Legislative Status: The bill will be reintroduced by Senator Kennedy, with Senator
         Specter as a cosponsor, sometime in March.

         II. Presidential Actions:
         - A scheduling request has been submitted for the President to host a White House event
         with the bi-partisan Senate and House co-sponsors ofthe Hate Crimes Prevention Act, on
         the occasion of its re-introduction in Congress. MTV is prepared to release a poll on the
         day of the event relating to youth and hate crimes.



                                                12
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

          III. Republican Agenda: There has been some Republican criticism that including
          women as a category in the bill would lead to federal intervention in all assaults against
          women. Senators Hatch has indicated he will not support the bill at the present time.
          Senators Specter and Gordon Smith have agreed to sign on. Senators Chafee and Jeffords
          may sponsor the bill as well.

     B. Equal Pay. We have supported Senator Dashcle's "Paycheck Fairness Act," which would
     increase remedies available for women under the Equal Pay Act. We are also in the process of
     analyzing whether we could support legislation furthering the concept of comparable worth and
     whether the Administration can take steps to collect additional wage information from
     employers.

          I. Legislative Status: Senator Daschle's bill (S. 74) has 20 Democratic cosponsors
          currently. _ On the House side, Congresswoman DeLauro's bill, H. R. 541, has 34
          cosponsors. Senator Harkin's comparable worth bill had 8 cosponsors in the last
          Congress, while the House version garnered 64 cosponsors.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - There is a request for the President to hold a roundtable event on fair pay on April 7.
          This roundtable would include women discussing their stories of being paid unequal
          wages and would discuss the effects on family income of the wage gap.

          III. Republican Agenda: Republicans will likely continue to oppose Senator Daschle's
          bill. If we were to support Senator Harkin's comparable worth bill, it would likely become
          a high profile target for Republican attacks.

3. Community Empowerment

     A. Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC). President Clinton and Vice President Gore
     propose to increase the cap on the LIHTC by 40 percent to create an additional 150,000-180,000
     new rental housing units for low-income American families over the next five years.

          I. Legislative Status: Last year, over two-thirds of House and Senate members were
          co-sponsors on bills to raise the cap on the LIHTC -- more support than on any other tax
          legislation.

          II. Possible Presidential Actions:
          - Bipartisan event after reach certain threshold of cosponsors.

          III. Republican Agenda: Finance Chairman Roth's staff have privately indicated that
          LIHTC will pass if there is a tax bill this year.


4.   Food Safety


                                                  13
                                                     Hex-Dilmp COilve:sion .

A. Food Safety Budget. Build support for Food Safety Initiative included in Administration
budget.
     I. Legislative Status: The budget will be subject to congressional hearings beginning in
     mid-March.

     II. Presidential Actions:
     - We are looking for events that highlight new technologies in the food safety area,
     particularly demonstrating possible improvements that come in prevention and
     surveillance that come from better research.

     II. Republican Agenda: Republicans have traditionally opposed new spending in this
     area. Last year we were able to obtain most of our requested initiative funding following
     a Senate floor battle. We will likely have a similar dispute this year.

B. SAFER Act. Highlight the SAFER Meat and Poultry Act sponsored by Senator Harkin
which gives Department of Agriculture the ability to recall products and impose civil fines.

     I. Legislative Status: The bill has been introduced and is included in the Democratic
     Leadership initiatives package of bills.

     II. Presidential Actions:
     - The bill is best promoted in tandem with our other efforts on food safety, for instance in
     a July 4th radio address urging passage of our budget.

     II. Republican Agenda: The bill in the past has been opposed by Republicans.

C. NAS Study. Respond to the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) study of food safety
and use the President's Council on Food Safety to promote structural reforms of the food safety
system. (The NAS study called for a unified framework for food safety programs with a single
official with control over all federal food safety resources.)

     I. Legislative Status: None

     II. Presidential Actions:
     - Within the next two weeks we hope to be able to release the President's Council
     response to the NAS report. It is likely to get some attention, but is not worthy of a
     Presidential event.

     III. Republican Agenda: Republicans have generally not supported changing the
     Administrative structure of the food safety system.

D. Food Import Bill. There are discussions on the Hill for a reintroduction of our food
import legislation which gives FDA greater authority to halt imports from countries that do not
have adequate food safety inspection systems. Senator Collins (R- ME), a key committee
chair, has reached out to FDA and suggested she could support a new bill that would allow FDA

                                             14
                                                      Hex-DiJmp Conversion

   to halt imports if there are repeated violations or a likelihood of reoccurrence of an imported
   product. FDA would then require assurances that the violating company or nation fix the
   problem before allowing further imports.

        I. Legislative Status: The Administration has not yet indicated to Senator Collins
        whether we would support her compromise bill. Ifwe decide to, there is some likelihood
        that it could pass. Otherwise, the import bill could be subject of further hearings but is
        unlikely to leave committee.

        II. Presidential Actions:
        - None

        III. Republican Agenda: Senator Collins has held hearings on the problem of imported
        food and will likely continue to work on the issue. Republicans have indicated that under
        the Administration bill they are worried that farmers in the U.S. will be faced with new
        farm regulations. They believe the Collins compromise bill lessens the need for new U.S.
        rules.


5. Immigration

   A. Public Charge Issue. The INS is expected is to release a proposed regulation that
   clarifies the basis upon which a immigrant may be found a "public charge" for the
   purposes of exclusion, adjustment of status and deportation. Studies and anecdotal
   evidence demonstrates that legal immigrants and sometimes U.S. citizens who are eligible
   to receive federal public benefits such as Medicaid and benefits under the Children Health
   Insurance Program (CHIP) are not applying for those benefits because they fear that they
   will be penalized under immigration laws. State and local governments, immigrant
   advocacy groups, health care organizations and others are seeking guidance on this issue.
   At this time, legislation is not contemplated and Republicans do not have any specific
   response to this issue.

   B. NACARA Regulations. The Department of Justice is expected to issue a final
   regulations on the Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA)
   section that allows Salvadorans and Guatemalans to apply for hardship relief in
   deportation and removal proceedings. The President will likely address this issue when
   he travels to Central America next week, however, it is unlikely that the regulations will
   be finalized by that time. At this time, Republicans are split on this issue. Senators
   Hatch and Abraham joined several Democrats in a letter to the Attorney General urging
   the adoption of a final rule that presumes "extreme hardship" for this group.
   Representative Lamar Smith and other Republican members of Congress sent a letter to
   the President opposing such an approach.

   C. Mandatory Detention. As a result of the implementation of the new immigration law
   that requires mandatory detention of criminal aliens, INS detention centers have

                                                 15
                                                         Hex.i)iJmp COilvelSion ·

     experienced extreme overcrowding. DOJ/INS is drafting a legislative, administrative and
     budget strategy to deal with this issue. The supplement includes additional funding for
     INS detention centers. Commissioner Meissner testified before Representative Lamar
     Smith, Chairman of the House Immigration Subcommittee, who was critical of the INS
     and the Administration.

     D. English Language and Civics Education Initiative. Earlier this year, the Vice
     President announced that the President's FY 2000 budget includes $70 million for an
     English Language and Civics Education Initiative to help states and communities provide
     expanded access to high quality English language instruction, linked to practical
     instruction in civics and life skills including ways to navigate the workplace, public
     education system, and other key institutions in American life. With $70 million, the
     initiative will provide services to approximately 150,000 adults in FY 2000. This initiative
     may be carried out under the existing demonstration authority. However, we are
     exploring the legislative and appropriations options for this program. This could be a
     part of Presidential or Vice Presidential event on One America.


6. Livability

     A. Better America Bonds. A new financing tool generating $9.5 billion in bond authority
     for investments by state, local, and tribal governments. The President's budget will propose tax
     credits totaling almost $700 million over five years to support Better America Bonds which can
     create or restore urban parks, protect water quality, and cleanup brownfields.

          I. Legislative Status: Congressmen Matsui and Doggett are interested in introducing the
          BAB legislation in the House and Senator Baucus is interested in doing the same in the
          Senate. We are trying to identify Republicans to cosponsor the legislation as well. We
          have held several large briefings on BABs with Members on both sides of the aisle,
          targeting Members from the tax and environmental cornmittees.

          II. Presidential Actions:
          - Possible Announcement of introduction of bill if bipartisan.

          III. Republican Agenda: This legislation will only occur if their is an agreement on
          tax legislation between Democrats and Republicans, after some kind of compromise
          on Social Security.


7.   Political Reform

     A. Bipartisan Campaign Finance Reform. The Administration supports the
     McCain-Feingold and Shays-Meehan legislation that would ban "soft money" and increase
     disclosure of independent expenditures.


                                                 16
                                                    Hcx-DiJmp Conversion .

        I. Legislative Status: Shays-Meehan passed the House last year and with the increase
        in Democratic Members should be able to muster a majority again this year. The Senate
        sponsors are taking a House-first approach.

        II. Presidential Actions:
        - Invite sponsors to the White House.

        III. Republican Agenda: The Republican Leadership strongly opposes this legislation.
        Speaker Hastert has placed this bill on the back burner. Getting the bill to the floor may
        require another successful discharge petition.


8. Tobacco

   A. Proposal. Raise the price of cigarettes and other tobacco products; re-affirm full FDA
   authority to regulate tobacco products; support critical public health care efforts to prevent
   youth smoking; protect farmers and farming communities; work with states and Congress to
   enact tobacco legislation to settle Federal Medicaid claims; and recoup federal health costs from
   tobacco companies.

        1. Legislative Status: Bipartisan legislation has been introduced in the Senate (Hutchison
        and 36 cosponsors) and the House (Bliley and 79 cosponsors) to prevent the federal
        government from recouping the federal share of the tobacco settlement. The President
        has made clear that we oppose this legislation because it gives up the federal share of the
        states' tobacco settlement without any commitment by the states to use the funds to
        prevent youth smoking, protect tobacco farmers, improve public health, or assist children.
        The Senate Finance Committee plans a hearing on March 10th, with Jack Lew and Nancy
        Ann Min DeParie as witnesses. We hope to foster an alternative to the Hutchison/Bliley
        legislation that could serve as a vehicle for language to reaffirm FDA's authority over
        tobacco products as well as ensure states spend some of the funds to prevent youth
        smoking, protect tobacco farmers, improve public health, and assist children. Outlook for
        our proposed 55 cents-per-pack cigarette tax is less certain, but it could be used to finance
        a set of targeted tax credits, such as child care and long-term care.

        II. Presidential Actions:
        - As negotiations with Congress and the states intensify, the President and other members
        of the Administration should make clear that our overriding priority is to protect children.
        In particular: The President should reinforce his commitment that a share of tobacco
        settlement funds should be used to prevent youth smoking, protect tobacco farmers,
        improve public health, and assist children, through speeches and a veto of the
        Hutchison/Bliley legislation if necessary.
        - Sec. Shalala and Surgeon General Satcher should bring the message outside of the
        beltway by testifying before state legislatures and other groups about the importance of
        devoting tobacco funds to public health and children.


                                                17
                                                   . Hex-DiJmp Conversioi1 ·

        - On April 14, Kick Butts Day, we should remind the nation that 1 in 3 teenagers smoke,
        perhaps by releasing new data.
        - To reinforce the importance of FDA's authority over tobacco products, we could release
        new data on the results of retailer "stings" targeted at reducing youth tobacco access/
        - When the Justice Department is ready, the President could unveil federal litigation to
        recover federal health announcement on DOJ recoupment litigation.

        III. Relationship to Republican Agenda and Priorities: Congressional Republicans are
        trying to be responsive to the governors by supporting their efforts to forgo the federal
        share of the state settlement (HutchisonIBliley bills) but some are concerned that such
        legislation could become a vehicle for other tobacco measures .. Republicans may try to
        use our proposals to label us as "tax and spend" liberals.


9. Welfare Reform

   A. Reauthorize Welfare-to-Work Program and Related Budget Initiatives. To help those
   remaining on the welfare rolls make a successful transition to work, help those who have gone
   to work succeed in the workforce, and help low income fathers better support their children, the
   budget proposes $1 billion to reauthorize the Welfare-to-Work program in FY 2000. The
   budget also proposes an additional $75 million to double funding for Access to Jobs
   transportation grants, $144 million for a 50% increase in welfare-to-work housing vouchers, and
   an extension of employer tax credits for hiring welfare recipients and other disadvantaged
   individuals.

        I. Legislative Status:
        - Welfare-to-Work reauthorization -- Rep. Cardin has expressed interest in introducing
        legislation. Senate sponsors are still being determined, as is possibility of bipartisan
        support. The House Ways and Means Committee plans to hold hearings on welfare
        reform in March and April. The major challenge on the Hill is justifying additional
        Welfare to Work funding when states have significant unobligated TANF reserves.
        - Access to Jobs -- Secretary Slater will testify on DOT budget March 4th and 17th.
        - Housing Vouchers -- Secretary Cuomo will testify on HUD budget March 1Othlll th and
        again in April. Senator Mikulski is key though needs convincing on this issue; House
        support needs to be developed.

        II. Presidential Actions:
        - The President unveiled these initiatives at a White House event on January 25th. The
        new focus on fathers was well-received by a wide range of groups who appreciate the
        attention both the Vice President and President have paid to fatherhood issues and see this
        as a significant new step.
        - It is critical that the Administration demonstrate support for the W elfare-to-Work
        initiatives while also fighting to maintain funding for the TANF block grants. As the
        President continues to tout our successes with welfare reform in his speeches, we should
        also continue to remind people how our initiatives will help address the remaining

                                               18
                                                 Hex-DiJmp COil version

     challenges. In particular, we should highlight how the WtW funds are targeted to those
     communities and individuals facing the greatest challenges and how these funds help
     fonner welfare recipients move up the employment ladder.
     - DOT expects $75 million in FY 99 Access to Jobs grants to be ready for release after
     mid-March. The President could announce these grants, praise innovative local projects,
     and highlight our initiative to double funding in FY 2000.
     - The President could do a Fathers Day event focusing on responsible fathers, highlighting
     a local program that is using current WtW funds to help low income non-custodial fathers
     and building support for our FY 2000 initiative. We could probably identify some new
     research findings to announce.
     - The Welfare to Work Partnership has a major c0nvention scheduled for August 2-4 in
     Chicago which will bring together several thousand businesses and service providers.
     This falls close to the third anniversary of signing welfare refonn and would be an
     opportunity for the President to highlight both our tremendous success to date and the
     remaining challenges.
     - In mid-late summer, the Administration will award $200 million in bonus funds to states
     who do the best job placing welfare recipients in jobs and ensuring they succeed in those
     jobs. This would make an excellent Presidential announcement.
     - Given his long-standing leadership on the Fatherhood issue and his commitment to
     Welfare to Work, Vice President Gore should do an event highlighting how the Welfare to
     Work reauthorization proposal ties these two issues together. We will work with the
     VP's staff to identify event opportunities.

     III. Republican Agenda:
     - With the exception of the Fathers initiative within Welfare-to-Work, Republicans have
     not expressed support for Welfare-to-Work reauthorization to date. In the January 30th
     Republican radio address, Governor Keating charged the Administration with shifting
     welfare funds into programs with more strings attached; Representative Goodling has
     focused on the T ANF surpluses; and Senator Voinovich sent around a letter reminding his
     Senate colleagues why he turned this money down as Governor.
     - Some Republicans continue to look at the T ANF reserves as a potential funding source
     for other priorities. This would be seen as breaking a deal with states and would
     encounter major opposition from Governors of both parties.
     - Last session, Rep. Shaw introduced 'Fathers Count' block grant legislation. While there
     continues to be interest among Republicans on this issue, it is not yet clear whether Rep.
     Johnson will introduce similar legislation now that she has assumed leadership of the
     Human Resources Subcommittee. There is some danger that Republicans will take the
     Fathers piece of Welfare-to-Work without the rest of the program.

B. Restoring Benefits to Legal Immigrants. Build on the progress already made in 1997 and
1998 by restoring additional SSI, Medicaid and Food Stamp benefits to vulnerable categories of
legal immigrants, at a cost of $1.3 billion over five years.

     I. Legislative Status: Legislation similar to the Administration may be introduced by Sen.
     Moynihan and Rep. Levin. No hearings pertaining to this issue are scheduled. In the

                                            19
                                        Hcx-DiJmp COilvelSion .

House, the Agriculture, Commerce and Ways and Means Committees will have
jurisdiction. In the Senate both the Finance and Agriculture Committees have
jurisdiction.

II. Presidential Actions:
- The importance of this initiative can be mentioned in speeches concerning: welfare, legal
immigration, nutritional assistance programs, kids' health care, and disability assistance,
particularly in states with large immigrant populations (the proposal was announced by the
Vice President in California). It is important that both the immigrant groups, the
public-health community, and local elected officials are periodically reminded of the
Administration's commitment to this issue.

III. Republican Agenda: The tide has turned on anti-immigrant sentiment and the usual
strong opposition from Republicans on this issue seems to have been replaced by muted
restraint. They are unlikely to openly oppose the package in feat: of offending Latinos and
other minorities -- groups they believe they must reach out to.




                                       20


