RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1999 12:04:00.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly Report 3/5/99

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
  Tanya does not think that they have any ed updates b/c she thinks
Counsel's office will do the IDEA decision and that the President will
already have done the class size radio address by the time he reads the
weekly report.==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D2]MAIL42152386A.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043C8100000010A02010000000205000000B358000000020000EA6264BF9236A1C71357E4
FOBE80A02780F788E7E1704C93A99FCFFD8D880E5CA52F94538FB5AA3B616D974FCCC482A7B236
70A88AC597C424830E08E4F9DE564ED9DF6224763273683DEE9FAFOA28D51D8E36E35891E665E6
3D61248DA6A9E5D95EBB7B624DA654F63112660910AAEOC1331020E156947A9668FC836837413F
lE9A74A910E36494411B52E718420C80F9FCFB1857820842D5091AE65FCB4A8907052781AE6A2C
                                       Hax.[)ilmp Conversion



                                        . March 6, 1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                     Bruce Reed
                          Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:                  DPC Weekly Report

        Tobacco: Medicaid Recoupment: Despite efforts by Senators Harkin, Durbin, and
Specter, on Thursday the Senate Appropriations Committee added to the supplemental
appropriations bill the Hutchison bill which lets states keep all tobacco settlement funds
without any commitment to use the federal share to prevent youth smoking, protect tobacco
farmers, promote public health, or assist children. Before the markup, the Chairman of the
Finance Committee, Senator Roth, sent a letter to Senator Stevens saying Appropriations
Committee action on the Hutchison bill would "bypass the jurisdiction of the Finance
Committee" and that the bill "has enormous ramifications for the Medicaid program and
should be thoughtfully considered through the committee process." He noted the amendment
was not paid for and urged the committee, if it was compelled to act, to prevent recoupment
only in 1999 or 2000 to give the Finance Committee time to act. The Hutchison bill now has
40 co-sponsors, including 9 Democrats (many of whom say they would be willing to accept an
alternative along the lines we've proposed). While we continue to urge the Congress to adopt
a measure which ensures the federal share is used to promote public health, assist children and
protect farmers, we recommend we issue a veto threat to underscore our opposition to the
Hutchison measure.

        Tobacco -- New Evidence Confirms Higher Taxes Reduce Smoking: Two new
studies show cigarette sales declined sharply in Alaska and Oregon after the states instituted
higher tobacco taxes. In October 1997, Alaska tripled its tax from $.29 to $1.00 a pack,
raising the retail price of cigarettes by 39 percent to $3.14 a pack. The next year, tobacco
sales declined 17 percent from 1995 and 1996 levels and average monthly tobacco tax
collections increased from $1.5 to $4.3 million per month. Moreover, the state found no
evidence of increased smuggling or crime.
        Oregon raised its tax by $.30 per pack in February 1997, increasing cigarette prices by
16 percent, and devoted 10 percent of the proceeds for tobacco-use prevention programs.
Tobacco sales in 1997 and 1998 fell 11.3 percent compared to 1993-1996 levels. The
analysis, by the Centers for Disease Control and the Oregon Health Division, found that this
comprehensive approach of a price increase plus prevention programs had a much bigger
effect than a price increase alone. Most studies of price increases have found that every 10
percent increase in price will reduce overall smoking by about 4 percent (the effect is higher
for youth -- about 7 percent) -- essentially the effects found in Alaska. According to this
                                           HeX-DiJmp Conversion
                                                                                                 2

model, a 16 percent price increase in Oregon should have resulted in a 6.3 percent decrease in
consumption, not the 11.3 actually achieved. The CDC attributes the higher smoking
reduction rates to the state's $8.5 million a year tobacco use prevention program which funded
community-based tobacco-use prevention coalitions in every county, a statewide public
awareness and education campaign, comprehensive school-based programs, tribal tobacco-use
prevention programs, multicultural outreach and education, a quitters' help line providing
smoking cessation support, and projects evaluating new approaches to prevent or reduce
tobacco use. Nearly all (93 percent) of the program's funds were awarded in grants or
contracts outside state government ~, county health departments, community-based
agencies, tribal governments, private sector agencies implementing public awareness
campaign). These findings bolster the rationale for ensuring that states use at least part of
their settlement on tobacco use prevention.

       Health Care -- Release of new regulation to promote the safe and effective use of
over-the-counter drug products: Next Wednesday, the White House will unveil a new
FDA regulation requiring over the counter drug products to use a standardized format
with larger print that makes it easier for consumers to understand product warnings
and comply with dosage guidance. The Vice President will join Secretary Shalala and
FDA Commissioner Henney in announcing that the regulation has been put on display.
This action will be widely heralded by consumer representatives, physician and other
provider groups, and even by product manufacturers. Studies indicate that parents
often have difficulty determining the correct dosage of over-the-counter medications,
and that many of the elderly, who take significantly more over-the counter drugs than
the rest of the population, have difficulty reading the small type on the product labels.
This new regulation represents a critical first step towards preventing the thousands of
unnecessary hospitalizations caused by misuse of over the counter medications each
year.

       Health Care -- Signing of Executive Order on Genetic Discrimination: Next
week, you are tentatively scheduled to sign a new executive order directing Federal
agencies to take all necessary action to guard against employment discrimination in
Federal hiring practices through the inappropriate use of genetic information. The
prohibition against using genetic information to inappropriately deny individuals access
to health insurance coverage for Federal employees and many (but not all) of the insured
population was effectively applied when you signed Kennedy-Kassenbaum into law in
1996. We currently plan to unveil your EO in an event with the Vice President and a
bipartisan group of Members of Congress who are supporting Federal legislation to
apply these protections to all employers and insurers.

       Crime -- Directive on Firearms Enforcement: We are preparing a directive for you
to sign that will ask Secretary Rubin and Attorney General Reno to work with the U.S.
Attorneys and ATF Special Agents in Charge to develop a national strategy to strengthen the
enforcement and prosecution of federal firearms laws. As you know, the NRA has repeatedly
                                                   Hex-DiJmp Conversion
                                                                                                        3

    called for the widespread replication of Project Exile in Richmond, VA, where the u.s.
    Attorney generally prosecutes all firearms offenses in federal court. Your proposed directive
    will be broader in scope. It will call for: the timely prosecution of gun criminals at the
    federal and state level; increased efforts to trace crime guns, identify illegal gun markets, and
    determine gun "hot spots"; coordinated law enforcement efforts to ensure that gun dealers
    comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws; and more. This directive could be
    released in conjunction with a new Justice Department report, Promising Strategies to Reduce
    Gun Violence, which details more than 50 examples of local strategies and partnerships that
    are reducing gun violence across the country. These include: comprehensive violence
    reduction programs that focus on guns; gun deterring illegal gun possession through consent
    searches and the aggressive seizure of firearms; targeted enforcement in gun "hot spots";
    increased surveillance of probationers; school-based prevention programs; focused and
    vertical prosecution strategies; and special youth gun courts.

            Crime -- Upcoming Announcements/Hearings: Next Thursday, Deputy Attorney
    General Holder plans to use his morning press availability to highlight the community
    prosecutors portion of your proposed 21 st Century crime bill. As you know, your FY 2000
    budget and proposed crime bill will include $1 billion over the next 5 years to hire and train
    community prosecutors. As the former U.S. Attorney for DC, Holder helped to launch one of
    the first successful community prosecution programs, and he is personally committed to
    building public and congressional support for this initiative. On a related note, in testimony
    before the House Committee on Government Reform this past Wednesday, Mayor Guiliani of
    New York expressed support for community prosecution programs.

            Welfare Reform -- Supplemental Proposes Cutting TANF Block Grant: The
    Senate Appropriations committee has proposed paying for emergency supplemental spending
    in part by cutting $350 million in TANF block grant funding in FY 1999. While the bill
    would restore the cut in later years, we believe this provision establishes a dangerous
    precedent of raiding T ANF to pay for other measures and we should vigorously oppose it.
o   Cuts in TANF will undermine states' ability to reserve funds for a rainy day and assist families
    during an economic downturn. Moreover, cuts in T ANF may prevent states from investing in
    helping more families move from welfare to work, just as work requirements increase and
    those remaining on the rolls face greater challenges to employment. Finally cuts in T ANF
    may interfere with innovative efforts to help those former recipients who have joined the
    workforce succeed in the workplace and advance in their careers. The governors are strongly
    opposing these cuts, saying they break the commitment made by the Congressional leadership
    in 1996 to a guaranteed five years of full block grant funding.

           State data compiled by HHS (but not yet released) show that in FY 1998 states spent
    or obligated 84% of the $16.5 billion TANF block grant, leaving $2.7 billion or 16%
    unobligated. There is considerable state variation -- 19 states have obligated all of their FY
    98 funds, but 12 states account for three-quarters of the unobligated balances: We will
    provide you with more complete report on these trends in a separate memo.
                                               Hex-Dilmp Con~:siol\

        Immigrant Benefits -- Declining Participation: The Urban Institute will issue a
report on Monday showing evidence of a "chilling effect" that has resulted in fewer immigrant
families, compared to citizen families, accessing an array of public benefits. The study found
receipt of cash benefits (AFDC/TANF, SSI, and state-funded general assistance) by
noncitizens declined by 35 percent from 1994 to 1997 while use by citizens declined 15
percent. Use of Medicaid and Food Stamps declined 22 and 30 percent respectively among
noncitizens, but only 7 and 21 percent among citizens.

        The report concludes that these effects are due primarily to the "chilling effect" of the
welfare reform debate, since most legal immigrants were actually still eligible for benefits in
1997. (While new immigrants arriving after August 1996 were ineligible, the vast majority
of legal immigrants in the U.S. in 1997 had arrived prior to that date and due to a one year
delay in implementation were eligible for Food Stamps for most of the year and for SSI all
year (since SSI benefits were restored in August 1997). Moreover, all but one or two states
opted to provide TANF and Medicaid to legal immigrants who arrived before August 1996.)
Despite the fact that most legal immigrants were eligible for most benefits in 1997, the
publicity surrounding the debate over welfare and immigration reform may have led many
immigrants to think they were ineligible or that accepting benefits would affect their
immigration status. As you know we have been working closely with the Department of
Justice and HHS on these issues, and we expect the INS will issue guidance in the near future
to provide clarity on what type of benefits an immigrant can accept without being labeled a
"public charge." Clearer guidance on public charge policies, along with our proposals to
restore additional health, nutrition, and disability benefits to vulnerable legal immigrants, will
allow us to begin sending clearer messages to immigrant families regarding their eligibility for
benefits.

Note to Bruce and Elena: You asked how it was true that most legal immigrants were still
eligible for benefits in 1997. Here's how:

Immigrants who arrived before 8/22/96 -- the vast majority of immigrants in U.S. in
1997

SSI and Food Stamps: The welfare law gave the agencies a year to conduct redeterminations
for SSI and Food Stamps for immigrants in the U.S. as of August 22, 1996. SSA and USDA
conducted the redeterminations, but delayed notifying immigrants of their ineligibility for as
long as possible. SSI benefits were restored August 5, 1997. Food Stamps were not, but
immigrants were eligible for most of 1997.

Medicaid and T ANF: the law gave states the option of providing T ANF and Medicaid to
immigrants who arrived pre 8/22/96. (Those receiving SSI as noted above automatically got
Medicaid.) Every state but Alabama provided TANF; every state but Louisiana and
Wyoming provided Medicaid.




                                        Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                Hex..[)iJmp Conversion .
                                                                                                           5


           Immigrants who arrived after 8/22/96 -- a small percentage of immigrants

           In 1997, immigrants who arrived after 8/22/96 were ineligible for SSI, Medicaid (except
           emergency), TANF, and Food Stamps.

                   Discrimination -- Urban Institute Report: On March 2, 1999, the Urban
           Institute issued a report, A National Report Card on Discrimination in America: The Role
           of Testing that calls for a national report card on discrimination in America. They
           contend that such a report card would promote greater understanding of the prevalence
           of discrimination, provide strategic guidance to civil rights enforcement agencies, and
           develop insight on the changing pattern and impact of discrimination. The report also
           shows that a research method called paired testing -- the practice of sending individuals
           similar in all relevant characteristics except racial or ethnic backgrounds -- can be used
           to audit critical areas of discrimination. Currently, paired testing is used primarily by
           the Department of Housing and Urba~ Development (HUD) and other agencies such as
           Departments of Justice and Labor. The EEOC conducted a pilot project on the use of
           paired testing in the context of employment discrimination. However, Congress
           objected to the EEOC pilot project and EEOC agreed not to do any further testing in
           return for an increased funding. In the FY 2000 budget, the President's budget
           includes $10 million for measuring discrimination including $7.5 million to expand the
           HUD program. If the results of the EEOC pilot program show promise, we may
           consider expanding the paired testing method to employment discrimination but it may
           raise the ire of Congress.

                    Children and Families -- Child Care. The House Ways and Means Subcommittee on
           Human Resources will hold a hearing on child care on March 16, which is significant because
           the last Congress refused to hold even a single hearing on the issue. The Administration will
           lead off the hearing testimony. Prior to the hearing, the Subcommittee's ranking Democrat,
           Rep .. Ben Cardin (D-MD), will introduce a child care bill largely based on the
           Administration's proposals. In addition, Rep. Ellen Tauscher (D-CA) will re-introduce last
           year's House Democratic consensus child care bill and will reach out to the Democratic
           caucus for extensive Democratic co-sponsorship. Finally, we understand that Rep. Nancy
           Johnson (R-CT), Chair of the Subcommittee, may re-introduce the tax provisions of her child
           care bill from last year, which included the expansion of the Child and Dependent Care Tax
           Credit and a new credit for stay-at-home parents.

                    Livability -- Better America Bonds: DPC and Treasury staff met last week with
           staff from Ways and Means and Representatives Doggett and Matsui. Both Congressman are
           interested in introducing on behalf of the Administration, the Better America Bonds proposal.
            We will be working with their offices and Treasury over the next three weeks to draft the
           legislation.


