RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1999 18:14:14.00

SUBJECT:   1999-3-5 Sperling briefing

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Richard L. Siewert ( CN=Richard L. Siewert/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
is this different from the thing you were suggesting we take our time to
think about?
---------------------- Forwarded by Michael Waldman/WHO/EOP on 03/05/99
06:14 PM ---------------------------



        SUNTUM_M @ A1
        03/05/99 01:16:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject: 1999-3-5 Sperling briefing




                            THE WHITE HOUSE

                    Office of the Press Secretary

For Immediate Release                         March 5,   1999


                         PRESS BRIEFING BY
         DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL GENE SPERLING
       AND CHAIR, COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISORS, JANET YELLEN

                         The Briefing Room


11: 50 A.M. EST


             MR. SIEWERT: As you know, the Labor Department had some
new figures on the unemployment rate and job numbers today.  Briefing
for you on that today will be Janet Yellen, Chair of the President's
Council on Economic Advisors; and Mr. Gene Sperling, my former boss,
Director of the National Economic Council.

             MS. YELLEN: Thank you.   Today's employment report
indicates that the economy remains on a path of strong,
non-inflationary growth.  Non-farm payroll employment rose a robust
275,000 in February; and, now, since January 1993, the economy has


created 18.1 million jobs and 16.8 million of those jobs are in the
private sector.

             The unemployment rate in February remained essentially
unchanged, edging up slightly to 4.4 percent, from 4.3 percent in
January.  The unemployment rate has now been below 5 percent for 20
months without any sign of inflationary pressure. And our nation's
continued and long-lasting strong labor market is benefitting all
Americans, and that includes historically disadvantaged groups.

             Even with this strong labor market, inflation remains in
check. Average hourly earnings rose a tenth of a percent in
February, and over the past 12 months average hourly earnings have
increased 3.6 percent 'over a period when consumer prices rose about
1.75 percent. What that means is that American workers are
experiencing strong, real wage gains while inflation remains tame.

             In February, employment was up sharply in construction
and retail trade, while manufacturing employment fell.  Most other
major sectors posted moderate gains. Reflecting the weakness in the
world economy, manufacturing employment fell 1.8 percent during the
past year, but job losses in this sector have been offset by strong
gains elsewhere.  Over the past 12 months, for example, employment in
computer services rose 13 percent, and employment in engineering and
managements services are up 7 percent.

             Recent indicators suggest that the United States economy
remains on a healthy course. Despite the challenges that face the
U.S. economy, with the recent international financial turmoil, the
United States economy is likely to continue, during the first part of
1999, on a path of solid growth with low
unemployment, low inflation, solid job gains and improved living
standards for American workers.  Thanks.

          MR. SPERLING:  I'd just like to make a couple of
comments concerning some of the initial information that was
given out yesterday by Chairman Domenici and Chairman Kasich on
C,

the Republican budget framework.  I'd like to note what appears
to be favorable about their budget outline, and what appears to
provoke very serious questions.

          What appears to be favorable is that over 'the last two
years, this president, in both State of the Unions, has made a
major call to the united States people that in this era of
surpluses we focus on saving surpluses to meet our Social
Security and Medicare challenges, and in particular, in this last
State of the Union, focusing on paying down our national debt in
a way that would help us strengthen the solvency of Medicare and,
Social Security.

          To the extent that the Republicans are joining the
President's call for setting aside a significant amount of the
surplus for debt reduction, we welcome their joining the
President on this focus on debt reduction. We find that to be
welcome news.  However, there are serious questions that remain.

          First, as of this moment, there has been no commitment
that we have seen that any of the benefits of this debt reduction


would actually flow to strengthening the solvency of Social
Security. The President's plan has been scored by the
independent actuary of Social Security as extending solvency to
2055, even if it relied solely on debt reduction until 2049. As
of this moment, we have not heard really any word from the
Republicans that any of the benefits of debt reduction would go
to strengthening the solvency of Social Security. And that is a
serious question that needs to be examined and discussed.

          Certainly, debt reduction is very good for our economy,
increasing savings, increasing growth, giving us greater cushion
to handle what may come down the road.  But to the degree that it
makes room -- greater room for us to handle challenges in the
future, we want to lock in that some of those benefits from debt
reduction would go to Social Security and Medicare.  So far, the
Republicans remain silent on giving any assurances in this area.

           Secondly is the issue of Medicare. The framework that
is being outlined says that all of the so-called off-budget
surpluses, the surplus is coming from Social Security, should be
set aside.   They suggest that for over 10 years. We for over 15
years lock in an amount that is actually equal to more than that
off-budget surplus for Social Security.   So ours is a guarantee
over 15 years for an amount that is more than is -- about $60
billion more than the off-budget surplus.

           In addition to that, however, the President allocates
$6B6 billion for strengthening the solvency of Medicare until the
year 2020. As we said, our preference is to use those surplus
funds in combination with real Medicare reforms that would make
the program more modern and competitive and allow for
prescription drug benefit.   But we are adamant that we need to
have 15 percent of the surplus set aside for Medicare.

          Right now, with the Republican framework of having the
so-called on-budget surpluses, the surpluses that do not involve
any of the Social Security payroll taxes -- with all of that
going to tax cuts, that leaves nothing so far for Medicare, even
though we know that the Medicare trust fund will go -- become
insolvent in 200B, just nine years from now.

           Now, clearly, we need to have reforms in Medicare, but
no one should be allowed to believe that we could extend the
solvency of Medicare until 2020 without any of the surplus being
set aside.   It would require virtually 20 years in a row of
Medicare growth per person at 2.B percent, less than half of the
growth in the private sector, almost below the inflation growth.
It would require almost 40 percent less than projections.
Clearly, this is not plausible, and it's hard to think of
something that would be more irresponsible, fiscal policy, than
for us to look at an over $4.5 trillion surplus over the next 15
years and allow all of that to be committed to other things when
we know Medicare is running out of money by the year 200B.

          So, again, the cupboard remains bare for Medicare in
the Republican budget and the silence on setting aside the
surplus for Medicare needs to end.

          Related to that is the question about their tax cuts.
If you look at the Congressional Budget Office numbers, there is


not any significant on-budget funds until 2002. That provides
concerns that if the Republicans are calling for significant tax
cuts in the year 2000, we would be very concerned if they would
be resorting to gimmicky tax cuts that would be designed simply
to bring in funds simply to meet a gap.  We don't need that kind
of gimmick.  And so this is one of the things that I think
everyone should be looking out for.  It is clear under their
framework that they cannot afford any significant real tax cut
until 2002. And so anything that comes before that should get
the closest scrutiny from all policymakers.

          But perhaps more concern is that if the commitment to
having all of the on-budget surpluses, if that is their
commitment, as has been expressed at times, goes to tax cuts of
some form, that would lead to draining away funds of as much as
$250 billion to $300 billion a year in the 10th through 15th year
of the budget. That is money of which significant amounts need
to be allocated toward Medicare. We, right now, allocate $686
billion towards Medicare. That comes out to about $350 billion
in the first 10 years and $335 billion in the last five years.
Again, if all of the additional funds are going to the tax cuts,
where is there any resources to insure that the solvency of
Medicare can remain strong, and that there's a possibility of
having real reforms that include prescription drugs?

          Finally, the fourth serious concern goes to the
discretionary budget.  If again, the commitment is that all the
on-budget surpluses go simply to tax cuts, one has to struggle to
imagine how they can put together a discretionary budget over the
next five years.  It seems that already there's commitments to
having an additional $15 to $20 to $25 billion for defense.  That
would have to be made up, then, in the out-years with that
equivalent amount of cuts, and -- on the discretionary side.

          And Senator Domenici has talked about even having
special education increases.  If this is the case, it's going to
be very hard to imagine how they are going to put together a
budget over the next five years that deals with health care,
research, crime, environment, other areas of education, without
significant reductions.

          So, summing up, we applaud the degree that they have
joined the President's call for saving a significant amount of
the surplus.  I think this shows how much the President has
defined the fiscal agenda over the next two years, for the need
for saving, for debt reduction, for putting our country in a
position to meet the retirement challenge of Social Security and
Medicare in the future.   But we have serious questions as to
whether any of the debt reduction benefits will be allocated to
Social Security, whether there's any funds for Medicare or not,
whether the tax cuts in the out-year will compete and drain away
the funds needed for Medicare, and how they can put together
discretionary budget under their outline that does not lead to
serious reductions in key areas -- in health care, education,
environment and fighting crime.

          Q    So where do you go from here?   Is there room for
compromise or is this a no-win situation?

         MR. SPERLING:   Oh, there's nO question that we should


be able to work in a bipartisan way to meet these challenges.
Again, many of the Republican leaders have joined the President
calling for 62 percent of the surplus to be reserved in some form
for Social Security -- we just haven't actually seen a commitment
on how that would be done.

          We've seen now some suggesting that it would go to debt
reduction, as the President suggests, but, again, their silence
as to how any of the benefits of debt reduction would actually go
to strengthening Social Security.

          Q    More specifically, if the Republicans meet the
administration's proposal on Social Security, and are dedicating
enough to paying down the debt, are you saying that there's no
room -- are you ruling out negotiation over Medicare so that they
can try to make good on their pledged proposals of tax cuts?

          MR. SPERLING: No, what we've been calling for is to
reserve 77 percent of the surplus for Social Security and
Medicare. That clearly allows for substantial funds to be
available and to be discussed as to how they should be allocated
among tax cuts -- whether it's our USA account or other tax cuts
they're proposing -- military readiness, and key issues like
education, discretionary spending.

          It just seems to us, as a basic test of fiscal
responsibility, that you first need to set aside enough to meet
your existing gap in Medicare and Social Security, which we
believe is 77 percent of the surplus, before one goes on to doing
whatever spending or tax initiatives anyone might prefer. First
you do what you have to do before what you want to do.   First
things first.  And when you have a foreseeable, clear Social
Security and Medicare challenge coming down the road, we're
saying you should be allocating 77 percent of the surplus over
the next 15 years for Medicare and Social Security.

          It's amazing that we have not heard a single word of
agreement from the Republicans that they want to set aside any of
the surplus for Medicare.  I would remind you that Chairman
Domenici last year spoke of Medicare first, and suggested that
tobacco revenues should go first to Medicare.  Chairman Domenici
is one of the great fiscal leaders over the last 15 years, and I
think that, to be consistent with that commitment, he and others
should join us in calling for both setting aside 15 percent of
the surplus for Medicare, and doing that in the context of
important reforms that would modernize Medicare and allow room
for prescription drugs.

          Q    Gene, Republicans and even some Democrats have
said that they don't trust the President on the issue of Social
Security, and they've demanded that he come forth with a plan for
the reforms that will include the tough choices that will need to
be made.  I'm wondering what is the rationale for the President
not coming forward with a plan?
rJ,


          MR. SPERLING: Well, as you recall, many people
suggested that the President come forward, we just would like you
to come forward.  So the President came forward at the State of


the Union -- to the surprise of some, not to us -- with a bold
framework for allocating the surplus for Medicare and Social
Security. And so far we have not seen anyone come forward with
the type of commitment he has.

          The President has a plan that has been scored at
getting to 2055, to extending Social Security solvency to 2055.
The President was very clear in the State of the union that to
get to the 75-year solvency there would need to be a bipartisan
process that would require both sides get together and make some
tough-minded choices.

          Now, let me be clear.  I am not necessarily
recommending that either side should go out alone on some of the
more tougher controversial choices that could end up politicizing
the debate.  I think in the past things have worked better when
there's been a process where people could agree together in a
bipartisan way on some of the tougher choices.

          However, a threshold matter should be that we should be
at least setting aside enough of our surpluses to make reform
viable in both Social Security and Medicare.   And I do think that
we are still waiting to hear from the Republicans that some of
the $4.5 trillion in surpluses over the next 15 years should be
set aside for one of the nation's most important programs that we
know is running out of funds by the year 2008.

          Q    Aren't you at some point, if you've set aside 77
percent, shifting some money from general revenues to trust funds
that are supposed to be paid for by the payroll tax? And are you
allowed to do that?

          MR. SPERLING: First of all, by paying down our
national debt to the degree the President is, the President will
be dramatically reducing the net interest cost that our
government pays out. That will be freeing up additional general
revenues for decades that can be used.

          What we're arguing is that we are one nation, we have a
large expected surplus over the next 15 years, and yet, we have a
large Medicare and Social Security gap over the next 50 or 75
years.  It just is basic common fiscal sense that we should seek
to set aside
~.

     ·
