    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Richard L. Siewert ( CN=Richard L. Siewert/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1999 17:26:30.00

    SUBJECT:   Airline Story -- Lead Story last Sunday in Dallas Morning News

    TO: Jennifer M. Palmieri ( CN=Jennifer M. Palmieri/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Dorothy Robyn ( CN=Dorothy Robyn/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ:UNKNOwN

    TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Jonathan A. Kaplan ( CN=Jonathan A. Kaplan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Melissa G. Green   ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Airlines facing outcry Congress looks for ways to boost passenger rights
    Byline:Robert Dodge
    Credit:Staff Writer of The Dallas Morning News
    Dateline:WASHINGTON
    Art:PHOTO(S): 1. John Dingell . . . Michigan Democrat plans to introduce a
    proposal this week. 2. John McCain..     Arizona Republican chairs a Senate
    transportation committee. 3. Ron Wyden . . . Oregon Democrat is helping
    push
    for bipartisan legislation.
    Text:

    WASHINGTON - It seems everyone has an airline horror story to tell these
    days.

    Take Sue Curtis and her husband. The Dallas couple thought Vanguard
    Airlines
    Inc. had made an appropriate conciliatory gesture when it gave them two
    free
    tickets after they were delayed for more than six hours last summer just
    outside Kansas City, MO.

    But there was a hitch. After spending hours on the phone with vanguard, and
    after giving the tickets to her daughter and then to friends in Chicago,
    Ms.
    Curtis said, the airline could not produce seats.

    "No one was able to use them," said Ms. Curtis, disgruntled. And then the
    six-
    month deadline to redeem the tickets expired.

    Vanguard said it allots a limited number of free seats on its flights, just
    the sort of explanation that has angered passengers already fuming about
    what


    they view as deteriorating airline service.

    And though airline officials contend they provide a high level of service
    at
    low fares, recent extraordinary events - passengers detained on Northwest
    Airlines' planes during a Midwest snowstorm in 'January and the American
    Airlines pilots' sickout - have touched a raw nerve on Capitol Hill.

    Lawmakers, who fly frequently, have introduced several bills that would
    mandate more passenger rights. The proposals appear to be generating
    bipartisan support.

    The outcry also has been heard at the White House, where officials looked
    into
    the issue after sharing personal experiences about Northwest's snowstorm
    episode.

    "We are taking a close look at this because we think there are some
    legitimate
    concerns," said White House spokesman Jake Siewert.

    Officials at the Department of Transportation, who requested anonymity,
    said
    they are encouraged by the legislative proposals, seeing an opportunity to
    force airlines to improve customer service without having to go through the
    process of writing regulations.

    Helping passengers

    No one is expecting Congress to mandate bigger seats and better meals. But
    the
    proposals would require airlines to keep passengers better informed about
    delays, cancellations and air fares, and in some cases, would force
    financial
    compensation for inconvenienced passengers.

    "I cannot walk on the floor of the House or to the House gym without
    members
    coming up and telling me about the horrible experiences that they or their
    constituents have had on the airlines," said Rep. Bud Shuster, R-Pa.,
    chairman
    of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee.

    Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., introduced a competing proposal this week. And
    in
    the Senate, bipartisan legislation is being sponsored by Sen. John McCain,
    R-
    Ariz., chairman of the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation
    Committee,
    and one of the panel's Democrats, Sen. Ron Wyden of Oregon. Both House and
    Senate committees plan hearings in early March.

    "There's a feeling that the airlines have been very profitable and that
    passenger service is getting short shrift," Mr. Wyden said.

    Airline spokesmen deny that service has suddenly deteriorated. And industry
    executives warn that legislative initiatives could begin to resurrect the
    inflexible scheme that governed schedules and fares before deregulation in
    1978.


"Our market research shows the airline industry continues to enjoy high
favorable ratings with the general public," said Dave Fuscus, a spokesman
for
the Air Transport Association, the industry's Washington lobbying
organization.

Industry changes

But some passengers complain that service has changed dramatically during
the
two decades since deregulation. Seating is more crowded, bags of snacks
have
replaced hot meals and flight attendants and other airline employees
sometimes
appear overwhelmed with the crush of passengers. And each travel season
seems
to bring new announcements of discontinued services or new fees.

For instance, Delta Air Lines Inc. of Atlanta announced in January it would
levy a $2 surcharge for round-trip tickets not booked through the company's
Web site. After a sharp customer rebuke, the airline rescinded the policy
but
said it would only refund the $2 fees collected during the interim period
if
customers paid a $75 service charge.

Delta officials declined to be interviewed and referred questions to the
Air
Tr~nsport Association, which contends service has not deteriorated.


But Department of Transportation statistics show that passenger complaints
are
rising. Last year, the department recorded 9,606 complaints, a 25 percent
increase over 1997. At the same time, airline profits have been going up.
According to the department, airlines reported net income of $5.3 billion
in
1998, up more than 23 percent from $4.3 billion reported in 1997.

And with fewer options for travel and a robust economy, more people are
flying. The number of passengers has more than doubled to 608 million a
year
over the last two decades. Industry forecasts said there will be 1 billion
by
2008.

Although passenger discontent has been festering for some time, some
industry
officials fault Northwest for attracting the scrutiny of Congress and the
Clinton administration.

"Runway Sunday'

As many as 4,500 passengers were stuck inside   Northwest's airplanes up to
eight hours during a fierce January snowstorm   at the carrier's major hub,
Detroit Metropolitan Airport. Passengers were   forced to remain aboard
grounded
aircraft as lavatories backed up and food and   water ran out, only to see
many
flights eventually canceled.


"Northwest had done such a terrible job within that blizzard that it drew
attention to itself and the industry," said an executive at a rival
airline,
who asked not to be identified.

Northwest spokesman Jon Austin acknowledged the "Runway Sunday" incident
drew
passengers' ire. But he said it was a bad idea for the government "to
insert
itself between a business and its customers."

"I will say as an industry we have done some of this to ourselves," he
added,
noting that Northwest has sent out 8,000 free tickets and an apology to
detained passengers.

The American pilots' sickout also is drawing fire. San Francisco lawyer
Patrick Catalano said a general frustration about airline servi~e may have
played a role when six Illinois residents filed a lawsuit against the
pilots'
union over a flight cancellation.

Airline response

American officials declined to comment about proposed legislation and
referred
to a prepared statement that suggested Congress could make better use of
its
time by improving the air traffic control system.

"We are nearing the point of gridlock at many airports and in the skies,
and
Congress' failure to address these issues will only result in more delays
and
higher air fares," the American statement read.

Lawmakers said they will not tolerate an unresponsive attitude by the
airlines. "They better not put their heads in the sand, as this is a
serious
issue," Mr. Shuster said.

The various legislative proposals would require airlines to tell passengers
when flights are overbooked, as well as the reasons for delays,
cancellations
and diverted flights. Airlines also would have to disclose the number of
seats
available on each flight to frequent fliers and provide information about
all
fares available.

In some cases, passengers would be entitled to compensation for delays,
full
refunds on canceled flights and the opportunity to cancel reservations
without
penalty within 48 hours after they were made.

Hal Salfen, director of consumer affairs at the International Airline
Passengers Association, applauded the proposals. But he said that they
would
be difficult to enforce and that passengers also bear responsibility


because
they put heavy demands on the airlines, such as bringing too many bags
aboard.

Setting standards

Sponsors of the legislation said they expect objections from lawmakers who
do
not want Congress intervening in the marketplace. That concern was echoed
Friday by retired American Airlines chairman Robert L. Crandall, who said
every airline executive wants to treat every customer well, but "the
question
of whether you can pass a law that will in some way affect customer service
standards is a very open question."

Some airline customers expressed similar misgivings about the government
stepping in. Mark Hunt of Coppell, a sales manager with Pepsico Food
Imports
Inc., said that doesn't always improve things.

"I think the government sometimes gets involved in areas where they become
more of a problem than a benefit," he said.

But Mr. McCain said it was unlikely free-market competition would solve the
problem.

"If we had sufficient competition, I would be much more open to that
argument," he said. "There is less and less competition and more and more
consolidation. "

And even Mr. Hunt, who travels about 60,000 miles a year on business, said
he
would like more accurate information from airlines about why he's sitting
in
the terminal waiting and waiting for a flight.

"That would be absolutely fantastic if they forced airlines to let us know
the
reason for a delay . . . and be held more accountable for the times they
give
the passengers," he said. He said he is irritated about instances when a
brief
delay follows a brief delay, and "next thing you know, you've been sitting
there for two hours."

Staff writer Terry Maxon in Dallas contributed to this report.


