RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-MAR-1999 17:58:49.00

SUBJECT:   Memo on Pros and Cons of Comparable Worth

TO: Elena Kagan    CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
You asked for a brief handout on the pros and cons of comparable worth.
Attached is a memo on this subject.   OPM will send a memo tomorrow that
outlines whether the federal government should implement comparable worth
and if so, how we could do it.  In addition, we will be sending you later
tonight a memo that discusses options on data collection.     ==================== A
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D51]MAIL40126637Z.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504354150000010A02010000000205000000203D0000000200009B95B3A7CBA518E06BD4C7
CBA56B70C28E31C6FECE90928154355830BBB2D23A500CD2F567DOE5B6DECDDA4D487274B9BF60
947B52CB9048B5AOFD933FE411E9B406B1BB29CCF88E060D80E86385610879FC21BBB08B7F2956
                                           Hex-Dump Convemion
ииииииииииииииии

                                 COMPARABLE WORTH

Senator Tom Harkin and Rep. Eleanor Holmes Norton introduced bills to implement
comparable worth in the last Congress (and these bills are expected to be reintroduced this
year).

и       The Congressional comparable worth proposals would prohibit employers from paying
        lower wages for jobs dominated by employees of a particular sex, race, or national origin
        than for jobs dominated by employees of the opposite sex or different race or national
        origin for work on "equivalent" jobs. Equivalent jobs would be defined ~s jobs that may
        be dissimilar, but whose requirements are equivalent when viewed as a composite of
        skills, effort, responsibility, and working conditions. The EEOC would establish criteria
        for determining whether jobs are dominated by employees of a particular sex, race or
        national origin. The bills also provide that no wage rates may be reduced in order to
        comply with comparable worth requirements.

ARGUMENTS FOR COMPARABLE WORTH LAW

и       There is a significant wage gap. According to the Council of Economic Advisors, in
        1997, the gap between men's and women's wages was approximately 75 percent. The
        most recent detailed longitudinal study found that in the late 1980s about one-third of the
        gender pay gap was explained by differences in the skills and experience that women
        bring to the labor market and about 28 percent was due to differences in industry,
        occupation, and union status among men and women. Accounting for these difference
        raised the female/male pay ratio in the late 1980s from about 72 percent to about 88
        percent, leaving around 12 percent as an "unexplained" difference. While some of this
        gap is due to unequal wages paid for the same job, some of the difference is due to
        women in occupations predominated by women not being paid the same by men in
        equivalent jobs.

и       Comparable worth could increase wages. The AFL-CIO recently issued a study that
        shows that America's working families lose approximately $200 billion of income
        annually to the wage gap -- an average loss of more than $4,000 every year for each
        family, even after accounting for difference in education, age, location, and the number of
        hours worked. The study also showed that ifmarried women were paid the same as
        comparable men, their family incomes would rise by nearly 6 percent, and their families'
        poverty rates would fall from 2.1 percent to 0.8 percent.

и       Eight states have implemented comparable worth laws for state employees. Eight
        states -- Connecticut, Iowa, Minnesota, Montana, New York, Oregon, Washington, and
        Wisconsin -- have enacted comparable worth laws covering state government employees.
         With the exception of Montana whose pay equity study found that there was "no
        significant gender bias," the seven states that have implemented comparable worth
        expended only between 1 percent and 4 percent of their payroll budgets.

и       Comparable worth adjustments for state and local governments have resulted in
        payments.   Public employees in twenty states received collective bargaining related
                                         Hex.()ump Conversion
    equity adjustments during the 1980s. State employees in Michigan received $21 million
    in comparable worth adjustments; in Pennsylvania, $16 million; and in Washington, $442
    million. In the 1990's, state workers in Connecticut reached a $22 million pay equity
    settlement that will give nearly half of that state's workforce and average of $1,000 per
    year. In 1994, social workers in Los Angeles County won a 20 percent pay equity wage
    increase. Previously, there had been a 34 percent wage differential between the
    female-dominated social worker class and the male-dominated probation officer class,
    despite similarity of skills, responsibilities, and working conditions.


ARGUMENTS AGAINST COMPARABLE WORTH

и   Comparable worth policies could cause significant job losses. Comparable worth job
    assessments are based on skills, effort, responsibility and working conditions required by
    the job without taking into account any of the traditional supply and demand factors. If
    the wages of child-care workers (which is dominated by women) were to be raised to be
    equivalent to a comparable job (e.g., mechanics, which is dominated by men), this would
    mean that wages would be increased above the market-clearing level and unemployment
    would result.

и   Comparable worth evaluations could cause substantial administrative costs -- and
    possibly extensive litigation. The HarkinINorton bills call for the EEOC to establish
    criteria for determining whether particular jobs meet the gender, race or ethnicity
    thresholds, but do not call for governmental classification of jobs. Assessments would
    be done by individual employers and comparisons would be made between jobs at a
    particular establishment. while this decentralized approach avoids direct government
    job ratings, it could lead to significant variation among establishments and to costly
    litigation challenging the criteria and scoring of jobs at particular establishments. While
    it could provide a job bonanza for human resource consultants, the resulting
    administrative costs could be a severe burden to many firms.

и   The accuracy of comparable worth job classifications is questionable. A 1989
    experimental study of comparable worth prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of
    Kansas City had three commercial job evaluation firms rate the same 27 jobs in an actual
    company. The report concludes that scores provided by different job evaluators do not
    provide mutually consistent adjustments to existing pay scales.

и   Comparable worth is more invasive of private business decision-making than other
    Federal mandates. For example, compared with the minimum wage which is uniform
    in its application and is relatively easy to administer, comparable worth would require
    more extensive record-keeping, incur greater administrative expenses, and affect wage
    levels and resource allocations without regard to productivity and other market
    conditions. As the American economy becomes more and more flexible, the rigid job
    classification framework of the HarkinINorton bills would move us backwards -- against
    the tide toward more flexible job definitions, individual merit-based pay, and work teams.



                                             2
                                       Hex.()ump Conversion .
и   Mandatory comparable worth experience in the United States -- which has been
    limited to public sector employment in a few states -- fails to establish a good model
    for a man~atory private sector program. Governments generally use a traditional
    job-description based, administratively run system for determining wages. This makes it
    more feasible to implement a comparable worth system in government; however, both the
    private sector and reform-oriented government personnel systems are moving toward
    compensation-based regimes linked to individual worker performance. At least one
    study of public-sector comparable worth programs (Minnesota and San Jose, CA) found
    that women's wages increased slightly, but there was also a slight loss of employment in
    the form of reduced future jobs.




                                            3


