RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan H. Schnur ( CN=Jonathan H. Schnur/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-MAR-1999 23:08:03.00

SUBJECT:   updated draft of long-term education plan from Jon and Tanya

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D45]MAIL41349737B.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750439E050000010A020100000002050000002E610000000200001EA9DIE28DEB930831EFCD
2A8602A8CBODD91514647F55468C53032D1818EDOEBA8AB9386F30DCD45E6B4C2901AD02BC8402
50D357704C3ED2D91C4EF7BA8F2FOC390BB556084BC5CBF7D012B5D6678253FC0380EF80499BE6
B6043BF9B96B20AB12916DF6F697627A2C89FBCC944BC2FCC86CA66E22CD3BB3A97A29F6FE38BD
                                              Hex-Oump Conversion
1.     EDUCATION

Our major objectives on education over the next few months will be to: 1) frame the
education debate through the President's arguments that accountability, and targeted
investments in class size, school construction, and after-school, must be national priorities; 2)
keep Democrats united behind our accountability agenda; and 3) attack Republican efforts to
regain credibility and broaden their appeal on education, such as Domenici's jumbo block
grant and Coverdell's education savings accounts.

A. Education Accountability Act. Legislation to reauthorize the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act which will require states and districts receiving federal funds to end
social promotion, fix failing schools, end use of unqualified teachers, issue report cards, and
institute discipline codes. Programs that are part of ESEA include Title I, After-School,
Class Size (see below), Bilingual, Safe and Drug-Free, Technology, Charters, and Teacher
Quality

I. Presidential Actions:
-- Announcement in late March or early April of bill transmittal, perhaps preceded by leaks on
key unannounced components such as a new teacher quality initiative.

-- Release of Dept. of Education social promotions guide. The President would like to visit a
school district that has ended social promotion. He could accompany Tony Blair who is
visiting Chicago's schools before the NATO Summit in late April.

     Release of Dept. of Education study on public school choice initiatives and the third year
of a 4-year Education Department study on charter schools. The President would like to do
an event at a charter school, and there are several charter schools in the District of Columbia
he could visit.

       Visit to a poor, rural school in Appalachia or the Delta.

-- Address to a state legislature.

       Commencement at a teacher college.


II.  Republican Agenda: ESEA is the centerpiece of the federal government's K-12
education policy. This is a top priority item for Republicans, who will seek to have ESEA
reflect their key education initiatives --flexibility, block grants, and possibly vouchers.

Ill.  Timing and Strategy. The administration plans to transmit its bill to Congress around
the Easter recess. The reauthorization process is expected to run through much of 1999 and
possibly into next year. The House has already started hearings on the bill. The Senate and
House are expected to start mark-up this summer. Overall, we need to shape the debate
around the need to hold states and districts accountable for the use of federal funds rather than
around the Republican approach of providing large block grants with no accountability. We
                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

need to enlist the support of key constituency groups, members of Congress and the public
around our accountability platform by working to identify and diffuse concerns that could
lead to opposition -- particularly around issues such as social promotion (of concern to civil
rights groups and others), flexibility (Governors of both parties are concerned that our
proposal will not provide them with adequate flexibility to carry out these initiative), bilingual
education and the conversion of formula grants programs to competitive programs. Because
timing will be driven by an unpredictable legislative process, our goal will be to sustain efforts
to ensure that our accountability message is breaking through and to communicate with
concerned groups around key issues.


B. Ed-Flex Demonstration Program. Legislation to expand Ed-Flex to give all 50 states
authority to waive certain federal rules in exchange for showing results.

I. Presidential Actions:
-- See timing and strategy below

II. Republican Agenda: Republicans have made Ed-Flex expansion their number one
priority. It will be the first education vote this session. Flexibility is a key theme of their
education agenda, and they will claim passage as a victory unless Democrats succeed in
passing a class size amendment (see below).

III. Timing and Strategy: This week the Ed-Flex bill is on the floor in the Senate and under
consideration in the House Education and Workforce Committee. The President has
indicated that he will sign an Ed-Flex bill that has strengthened accountability to better link the
waivers to student performance. If not approved this week, we will continue to work across
party lines to enact this measure, along with other key initiatives like class size.

C. Class Size. Legislation to authorize $11.4 billion more over six years to complete the
hiring 100,000 teachers and reduce class size in the early grades to the national average of 18.
 (We will still also need to appropriate $1.4 billion in FY 2000).

I.   Presidential Actions:

-- Completed: March 6th radio address to release Dept of Education Class Size program
guidance, and challenge Senate to adopt Murray-Kennedy amendment.

-- Completed: Release of local allocations for Class Size program.

II. Republican Agenda:      This is not a program Republicans love, but they funded it in the last
appropriations bill and are thus on record in support. Republicans would prefer to make
class size an allowable use of a block grant proposal. Republicans are also attempting to recast
this debate from the need for class size funding to one of whether to permit local school
districts to use this funding for special education (see IDEA/Special education section
below).
                                               Hex-Dump Conversion ·

III. Timing and Strategy: Senators Murray and Kennedy have offered a class size amendment
to the Ed-Flex bill to authorize the program for the remaining six years in the President's
proposal. The President strongly supports this amendment. Republicans are attempting to
shut-down debate and force a vote on Ed-Flex without having a vote on the class size
amendment. If Republicans succeed in blocking a vote, we should call attention to their
failure to support class size. Because of the need for school districts to have certainty
regarding continued funding for this program as they began to hire additional teachers, we will
need to consider whether to attach this to other measures. We will find ways to sustain the
message on the importance of smaller class sizes.      Also, we will work to ensure that
first-year funding is carefully implemented so that school districts are not encountering
administrative problems just as this debate is underway.


D. School Modernization. Legislation to create tax credits to support $25 billion in bonds
to help build, repair, or modernize up to 6,000 schools.


I. Presidential Actions:
-- Events or statements coordinated with legislative action.

II. Republican Agenda: Republicans will try to push an alternative school construction
proposal, which would change arbitrage provisions for school bonds. The school
superintendents organization supports this proposal; we will have to work hard to make the
case that this proposal is fundamentally flawed (because the proceeds do not have to be used
for school construction and go to districts that do not need assistance).

III. Timing and Strategy: Rep. Rangel will introduce the administration's school
modernization proposal in the House. A Sense of the Senate resolution on this issue may be
offered during the Ed-Flex debate. Ultimate success will come, if at all, on a larger tax
vehicle. We will continue efforts to promote message on the importance of dealing with the
growing need for school construction and renovation. We will need to address potential
flashpoints, including Davis-Bacon and Sen. Bob Graham's school construction alternative.


E. Education FY 2000 Appropriations Bill. Legislation to fund federal education
programs, including after-school; turning-around failing schools; class size; Troops to
Teachers; master teachers; GEAR-UP; Title I; technology grants; choice initiatives (charters,
work-site and magnets); and Safe and Drug-Free Schools.

I. Presidential Actions:
-- National Teacher of the Year event in April.
-- FY 99 grants announcements --e.g., after-school, charter school, teacher recruitment and
quality, Gear-Up, technology.
-Reports on various issues --e.g., charter schools, teacher quality, after-sc~ool.
                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

II. Republican Agenda: Republicans probably will support increases in funding, but will try
to push block grants and target increases towards IDEA (essentially a politically viable form of
block grants). Recent court rulings and new federal regulation may strengthen the
Republican case for increases in IDEA funding. We will have to counter with sustained
campaigns for increases in our priority programs.

Ill. Timing and Strategy: Appropriations Committee hearings begin in March; final bills will
get to the President in the late fall/early winter. Our overall message will stress the purpose
and importance of our education initiatives. Many of these initiatives were first funded - or
received expanded funding - in the 1999 fiscal year.FY 1999 grant announcements provide
is with an opportunity to take credit for Clinton-Gore victories and to call on Congress to
expand on this good work. We will also continue to identify members of Congress to
champion key initiatives and work with groups to ensure that they are communicating their
support for these initiatives to members. We will develop strategies to place op-eds and
communicate with opinion leaders on our approach of identifying promising practices, using
targeted funding to spread their use, and combining flexibility in use of federal funds with
accountability for results -- as opposed to the Republican approach of broad - and ultimately
unaccountable
  block grants.

F. Should we add something on national testing/national standards?

CHALLENGES

A. Bilingual Education/LEP. The Administration's ESEA reauthorization will include
the President's goal of helping children learn English within three years. There is
considerable division around the best approach to teach English to children with limited
English proficiency. Bilingual education - where students first receive instruction in their
native language in order to then learn English - has been the target of a ballot initiative (Unz
initiative) in California that the administration opposed.

Republicans may offer measures to effectively end bilingual education and/or require students
to leave bilingual education programs within one or two years. They may criticize the
Administration's position as for being too protective of the status quo in bilingual education.
Some groups who support bilingual education will criticize the Administration's effort for
being too draconian. Our legislative proposal in ESEA will accommodate some of these
concerns.

1. Timing. This issues will likely come to the forefront during hearing on the ESEA
reauthorization, since that bill will reauthorize the federal bilingual education program.

2. Responses. Introduction of the ESEA legislation will give us the advantage of defining the
debate early. Establishing a 3-year goal for learning English will counter criticisms that
children stay in bilingual education far too long - while at the same time allowing districts to
                                           Hex-Dump ConvelSion .

choose the education method that best suits their need (i.e. unlike the California initiative, we
don't specify whether to teach students English in bilingual or immersion classes).
We will need to address concerns in the Hispanic community through targeted outreach and
communications strategy explaining our position and legislation. This will include briefings on
our legislation to Hispanic groups and members of the Hispanic caucus, as well as a
communications strategy targeted at the Hispanic media. We also will need to identify
members of Congress in both parties who can champion our approach. Moreover, we will to
work closely with many of these groups to seek expansion of the Hispanic Education Action
Plan announced by Vice President Gore last year (an array of federal education initiatives that
serve high concentrations of Latino students) and find appropriate ways to ensure that existing
federal programs help students with limited English proficiency.

3. Presidential Action. It is not clear whether a Presidential statement will be needed. The
ESEA reauthorization will be transmitted around the Easter recess.

B. Race-Based Admissions. Admissions decisions that consider the race of the applicant
either for the purpose of remedying past discrimination or to enhance the diversity of the
student body.

1. Timing. Affirmative action opponents have filed cases against school districts and
universities across the country to challenge admissions that factored race into the admissions
decision process. In several instances (Boston, San Francisco), schools have changed their
admissions process to avoid legal challenges. Congressional Republicans may try and offer
amendments to any moving piece of education legislation to prohibit race from being
considered in school and university admissions.

2. Responses. The administration supports the consideration of race in school admissions
decisions to remedy past discrimination and to promote diversity. The counsel's office is
working the Departments of Justice and Education to monitor several of these cases and to
determine where federal intervention would be appropriate.         The Administration also fought
efforts in the last Congressional session to prohibit the use of race as a factor in admission
decision and should be prepared to engage in a similar battle.

3. Presidential Action. The higher education groups are working on an effort to unite
university presidents behind an enhanced strategy to increase campus diversity because of the
identifiable benefits diversity brings to classroom environment (e.g., diverse opinions). If
this group is effectively pulled together, the President should announce its formation. The
timing is unclear, but this could be part of the roll-out for the President's report on the race
initiative.

C. Vouchers. Vouchers would provide tax dollars - usually those that would otherwise be
allocated to the public schools -- to students to use at a private school.

1. Timing. Republicans may propose vouchers as part of their own approach to reauthorizing
ESEA (spring/summer) or as part of the education appropriations or D.C. appropriations (fall)
bills.                                        Hex-Dilmp Conversioi1

2. Response. The administration should continue to oppose the use of federal funds to
support private school vouchers. The major education groups have also long-opposed
vouchers and we should continue regular discussions with them to coordinate our efforts as
individual legislative measures on vouchers arise.

The Administration's efforts to support interventions in failing schools -- and strengthening
school accountability more generally -- provide one effective counter to vouchers, principally
because voucher advocates typically use the image of students trapped in failing schools as a
major reason for advocating vouchers. Moreover, the Administration's efforts to expand
choice within public education can preempt calls for vouchers by demonstrating that we are
making progress expanding parental choice without hurting public education. Finally, our
efforts to invest in common-sense steps like smaller classes and moaern school buildings help
round out an agenda that may make more sense to the public than markets and vouchers.
Partly because of these steps, Republicans are trying to scale back the focus on vouchers in
their education agenda, but they clearly will continue to press on this issue.


3. Presidential Action. A Presidential statement may be needed in late summer or fall if
Republicans propose attaching vouchers to appropriations bills or to ESEA. Moreover,
Presidential events on fixing failing schools, expanding public school choice, and reducing
class size and modernizing school buildings will help undermine the effectiveness of the
voucher message. Finally, the livability agenda -- its focus on schools as centers of
community -- may help undermine the voucher message by reminding people of the
importance of building up our public schools as centers of community rather than tearing them
down through vouchers.
                                                Hex-Dump Conve:sion ·

D. Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and Special Education. Many
Republicans are trying to broaden the appeal of their education agenda -- and attack the
President's agenda -- by criticizing the Administration's alleged failure to provide adequate
funding to help local school districts serve students with disabilities. Republicans argue that the
federal government should be providing 40% -- rather than the current 11 % -- of the costs of
special education These Republicans are beginning to make the case to the public that the
federal government should fully fund requirements to serve students with disabilities before
funding new initiatives like class size. Moreover, they argue that providing extra support to
school districts for special education would free up otherresources that local school districts
could choose to use on reducing class size, after-school programs, etc. They argue that this
approach -- supposedly providing investments and flexibility to local school districts -- is
preferable to the Administration's approach ofleaving school districts hold the bag on special
education and then direct them to spend other federal resources on specific strategies like class
size, after-school, etc. The Governors raised this issue to the President in NGA, and complaints
have been increasing from communities across the country about this problem.

1. Timing. This issue will likely be raised throughout the year during deliberations in the House
and Senate on Presidential education initiatives, consideration of the budget resolution and
appropriation bills. Moreover, it appears there may be a coordinated strategy for Governors,
school districts, and others to raise this with the president and vice president in meetings on
education.

Moreover, IDEA regulations will be released later this month. Major issues involve how the
regulations address discipline for children with disabilities.


2. Response. We have been arguing that special education funding has increased over the past
few years and that many of our investments in strategies like smaller classes also help special
education students -- indeed some of these strategies help children learn to read well and may
keep them from being placed in special education in the first place.

Weare examining other strategies to address this issue.


3. Presidential Actions.
Weare examining other strategies to address this issue.


E. Block Grants. Republicans will also continue to promote the theme of investments in
education coupled with flexibility though their block grant proposals.

1. Timing. The Senate could try to bring block grant proposals to the Senate floor this spring.

2. Response.    We will continue to emphasize the message that states and school districts
should be held accountable for federal funds -- rather than giving out funding without
                                                    H~x·DiJmp COilve:sioil .


accountability through block grants. Moreover, we will also continue to emphasize the
importance of targeted funding for important national purposes like smaller classes and modem
school buildings.

3. Presidential Actions. Presidential events around his education agenda.

F. Teacher quality. Republicans will also likely advocate proposals to improve teacher quality
through initiatives that could be difficult for the Administration to support -- such as testing for
current teachers and merit pay for high-performing teachers.

J. Timing. The timing of Republican proposals along these lines is uncertain but could come
this spring or summer.

2. Response. The Administration's ESEA proposal will contain several initiatives to improve
teacher quality that will help define the debate early -- including ending the use of unqualified
teachers and supporting national certification for highly accomplished teachers. Moreover, the
Administration is advocating other teacher quality initiatives such as attracting retiring military
troops and talented young people into teaching. Special emphasis on the President's initiatives to
hold teachers accountable and support good teachers will be helpful in defusing possible support
for these likely Republican efforts.

3. Presidential Actions. Presidential events around his teacher quality initiatives.

POSSIBLE EXECUTIVE ACTIONS

-- Release two Education Department studies on public school choice and charter schools.

-- Release Administration report on ending social promotion.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 091 - FOLDER -005


[03/10/1999 - 0311111999]
