RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-MAR-1999 21:20:00.00

SUBJECT:   Long-Term Strategy Memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is our revised long-term strategy memo. We have not included any
"challenges" that will require an Administration response because there
are no (predictable) challenges in the areas of food safety, hate crimes
or equal pay that we see as upcoming.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D52]MAIL449447376.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504336050000010A02010000000205000000C9300000000200000A8674A685400F683B5208
118210ACDBE714576AB5FD9C6C01895F7B463A08B87EA4C6BE68579822D320294A2C7524E373AD
C8642978AC8DF84F09434439D5C993B708B9AD08CCE20F5B9D6C8932CD761613F34DD9E974BD99
B609A9195DAA427F358E50CE6C6FC9C979F4030D8B27EEC98AD97F19632FF64BE9434CE78AF7B9
                                    Hex-Dump Conve:sion ·


4. CIVIL RIGHTS
 Our goal is to maintain our leadership role in promoting civil rights and use
advocacy opportunities to highlight crucial issues including attacking hate crimes
and promoting equal pay for women. Hate crimes legislation and equal pay are
each powerful examples of further steps the nation needs to take to make sure
everyone enjoys the American dream, and both issues have strong public support.
The Administration has had a high profile on civil rights issues including creating
the President's Initiative on Race, proposing an Administration-wide budget for
civil rights agencies, endorsing new hate crimes legislation, promot:ing equal pay
for women, and winning important increases and reforms for the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission.


   A. Hate Crime Legislation. Legislation to strengthen the ability of the Justice
  Department to prosecute hate crimes based on race and religion by removing needless
  jurisdictional requirements and giving the Department the power to prosecute hate
  crimes committed because of the victim's sexual orientation, gender, or disability.

       I. Legislative Status: Senators Kennedy and Specter will reintroduce the
       bill this month. Senator Hatch has stated that he intends to hold hearings
       on the subject in April.

       II. Presidential Actions:
       A scheduling request has been submitted for the President to host a White
       House event with the bipartisan Senate and House co-sponsors of the bill,
       on the occasion of its re-introduction in Congress. MTV is prepared to
       release a poll on the day of the event relating to youth and hate crimes.


       III. Republican Agenda: There has been Republican criticism that
       including women as a category in the bill would lead to federal intervention
       in all assaults against women. Recently, Senator Hatch has indicated that
       he will hold hearings on hate crimes legislation and is interested in working
       with us on legislation. Rep. Hyde has also expressed interest in working
       on legislation. Senators Specter and Gordon Smith have already signed
       on, and Senators Chafee and Jeffords may decide to do so.

    IV. Timing and Strategy: Because of recent high profile crimes, hate crime
    issues are currently receiving a good deal of attention. March/April is likely to
    be an important period for debate over the issue due to on-going criminal
    proceedings in Alabama and Wyoming, as well as Senator Hatch's decision to
    hold hearings on the topic. In addition, Matt Shepard's mother plans to start
    a foundation, and she may well receive publicity over the next several months.
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion ·

 We are working closely with sponsoring members of Congress and interested
 groups to make sure that our legislation is consistently part of coverage of the
 hate crimes story. This month the legislation will be re-introduced with
 bi-partisan support. In early April, we are hopeful that the President will be
 able to hold an event or radio address on the topic which sets the focus for
 senate hearings. MTV has plans to pUblicize the story as well, and is planning a
 poll of youth attitudes towards hate crimes to be released in conjunction with
 our event. Following hearings, if we are able to gain bi-partisan support
 from Hyde and/or Hatch, the legislation would have some chance of passage.
 If not, presidential event(s) in April would still serve to highlight the
 Administration's strong position on this high profile issue.



B. Equal Pay. We have supported Senator Daschle's Paycheck Fairness Act,
which would increase remedies available for women under the Equal Pay Act.
We are also in the process of analyzing whether we could support (1) a
strengthened version of the Daschle bill requiring greater disclosure of wage
information by employers and (2) legislation sponsored by Senator Harkin on
comparable worth.

     I. Legislative Status: Senator Daschle's bill has 20 Democratic cosponsors,
     and Congresswoman DeLaura's equivalent bill, H. R. 541, has 34. Senator
     Harkin's comparable worth bill had eight cosponsors in the last Congress, while
     the House version garnered 64 cosponsors.

     II. Presidential Actions:
     A scheduling request is pending for the President to hold a roundtable
     event on fair pay on April 7.

     III. Republican Agenda: Republicans probably .will continue to oppose
     Senator Daschle's bill. If we support Senator Harkin's comparable worth
     bill, it might become a high-profile target for Republican attacks.

  IV. Timing and Strategy: April 8th is designated "Equal Pay Day" and the
 President is tentatively scheduled to hold a roundtable event on the topic on
 April 7th. Following that event, our equal pay budget initiative for EEOC
 and Labor may receive some attention in congressional hearings, but it is
 unlikely to gain significant Republican support. When the agencies' budgets
 reach the House and Senate floor, the President will again be in a good
 position to publicly advocate for the initiative. The legislation we have
 endorsed (currently the Daschle bill) is unlikely to achieve passage. If we are
 able to identify a new formulation for equal pay legislation that can win broad
 support, fighting for a fair pay bill is an excellent issue that should be part of
 Administration packages on both economic issues and civil rights that we can
                                                   Hex-Dump Conve:sion ·
    highlight in coming months.



6. FOOD SAFETY

A. Congressional Action on Food Safety:
Our major objective over the next several months will be to re-affirm the
Administration's position as the leader in the fight for better regulation of food and place
opponents in the spotlight for being against needed measures. We intend to highlight
our pro-consumer position by supporting our food safety budget initiative, and pushing
two legislative measures which will increase USDA's authority to regulate unsafe food
production and provide better oversight of imported food.

       1.    Legislative Status:      The food safety budget will be the subject of
       congressional hearings beginning in mid-March. The SAFER Meat and Poultry
       Act, which gives USDA the ability to recall products and impose civil fines, is
       included in the Senate Democratic Leadership package. Senator Harkin has the
       lead. Our bill to give FDA greater authority to halt food imports from countries
       that do not have adequate food safety inspection systems has been the subject of
       interest to Senator Collins, a key Committee chair. She has told the FDA that
       she would push for a compromise bill if the Administration agreed to support it.
          We have not responded to her. If we agree, the bill could well pass. If we
       do not, the bill is unlikely to leave committee.

         II. Presidential Actions:
       -We are exploring events with new technologies in the food safety area that
       highlight the need for investments in prevention and surveillance. In addition,
       the July 4th radio address is an excellent opportunity to urge passage of our
       budget request and food safety legislation.


     III. Republican Agenda: Republicans in the past have opposed new spending in
     this area and our legislation to give agencies greater authority. Last year we were
     able to obtain most of our requested initiative funding following a Senate floor
     battle. We will likely have a similar dispute this year. On the imported food
     legislation, Senator Collins has held hearings on the problem and will likely
     continue to work on the issue seeking a bipartisan compromise. Republicans have
     indicated that under the Administration bill they are worried that farmers in the
     U.S. will be faced with new regulations.


    IV. Timing and Strategy:
                                    Hex-Dump Conversion    .

For our budget measures, the most valuable time for a statement of Presidential
support would be sometime close to the date of mark-up, perhaps in Mayor later.
Our two legislative measures can be supported in tandem, perhaps along with our
budget measure, as part of an Administration package of efforts on food safety. In
the past, we have found holiday weekends, such as July 4th (see above), are good
opportunities to speak for food safety.          Senator Harkin is looking for an
appropriate legislative vehicle to attach his SAFER bill. As he is uncertain what
when such a vehicle is likely to appear on the floor, we should be prepared to
quickly issue a statement of support and rally advocates in support of the bill.


