RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 12-MAR-1999 18:57:04.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly Report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D89]MAIL41816187R.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504380100000010A020100000002050000005467000000020000876232829DC90DAF9FECCA
FDFCB3246D14037371279EEB228F06A121BC7B895FOEFOA74A78DOAE3F52C113504E4ACB17CFCO
999DEB340D52ACFFA9020C0401A68F327F877C4FED154B8FD59AF1COB657CA1D1AOC2010E6AC24
AD3D492FAE622AB05F86688C99BC7D6A5412C2A56D7D57DEF93DCD73CEC711997F9392F980738C
5634AB960FE87927120E4DF3303802DE7683BOF8642894C26FF4F975572E2E9229183AA847F665
AAA68218C3A6D904A9B8C769ED2DD2D4189A2BE863A17E2CDD6CECD6F7A02E02177A4849AD6D46
DOOF7D2D741BE9AE0424953AE476ADD57494004F33F25ABB80405DC3CE299D337AF028FE11FB8A
524EFF3AFCCFD6098E36E5591A7A2A647542B425CDF9937537FAB49BA4F1A19E813FFBDA4725A4
                                           Hex-Dump Conversioil ·



                                        March 13,1999

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:                     Bruce Reed
                          Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:                  DPC Weekly Report

        Education -- Class size/ed flex votes: Thursday, the Senate approved an ed-flex bill
that did not include a class size amendment, but did include Jeffords-Lott amendments
permitting school districts to use FY99 class size funding for special education. Five
Democrats votes for the Jeffords-Lott amendments. The House approved an ed-flex bill that
neither contained a class size amendment nor amendments comparable to the Jeffords-Lott
amendments in the Senate.

        Education -- Charter school conference: The Education Department's second
national charter school conference will take place next week. Secretary Riley will address the
conference, and a videotape of your remarks will be played as well. The Education
Department will release non-binding guidance for charter schools receiving federal start-up
funds; the guidance includes issues such as admissions requirements, conversions of private
schools to charter schools, and for-profit charter schools.

        Health Care -- Privacy Concerns Around New HCFA Survey System for
Medicare Home Health Agencies: On Thursday, it was widely reported that HCFA is
planning to implement a new home health survey policy which requires providers to
collect data from patients about their physical and mental health, as well as other
characteristics, such as their living arrangements. These data will then be aggregated
and used to develop performance reports for each agency. HHS takes the position that
the data they are collecting is necessary to implement the new prospective payment
system required by the 1997 Balanced Budget Act. The beneficiary data used by HCFA
is subject to numerous physical, technical and procedural safeguards. Access to
individually identifiable data is limited physically (locked doors, employee access lists,
etc.) electronically, (gradated passwords, etc.), and only to those with a need to access
the data (generally programmers who process and aggregate the data). We are
reviewing the new survey instrument to determine if it is consistent with our overall
policy on medical records privacy and are doing this review in the context of a broader
analysis of our overall administration policy on privacy. This will include how we are
positioning ourselves on medical records protections in the private sector and the
practice of use of genetic information for both health insurance and employment. If we
                                           Hex-Dump Conversioil


find it to be inconsistent or raise other policy concerns, we will work with HCFA to
modify or, if necessary, work to reverse this policy decision.

         Health Care -- Speech to the International Association of Firefighters: On Monday,
you are scheduled to speak to the International Association of Firefighters' 17th annual
legislative conference. At this event, you will unveil a number of new efforts to involve
firefighters and other emergency response personnel in the Administration's multi-agency
national effort to combat bioterrorism and chemical weapons attacks. These include
investing an additional $11 million in new, rapid medical response teams trained to respond to
a biological or chemical weapons emergency; awarding $5 million new funds to communities
training emergency personnel, including firefighters, to respond to bioterrorist attacks; and
providing $73.5 million to communities purchasing protective gear and specialized
communications equipment for "first responders", such as emergency medical personnel,
policemen, and firefighters.

         Health Care -- Filing an amicus brief in L.c. and E. W. vs. Olmstead: On
Monday, the Department of Justice will file an amicus brief with the Supreme Court in L.c.
and E. W. vs. Olmstead on behalf of the plaintiffs. . This case was brought by two mentally
retarded Medicaid enrollees who argued that their placement in an institutional setting rather
than in a community based setting violated the ADA requirement to provide services in the
"most integrated setting". Both the disability community and state officials have extremely
strong feelings about this issue. Advocates would like the Administration to argue that the
ADA establishes an unqualified right for individuals with disabilities to receive care in
community based settings. States believe that the ADA clearly establishes exceptions to the
requirement to provide care in the most integrated setting, and feel strongly that they should
be able to take advantage of the exception at their discretion. The amicus brief filed by DOJ
states explicitly that the ADA does establish a beneficiary's right to care in a community
based setting. However, the brief acknowledges and supports provisions of the law that
provides for exceptions to the requirement for the most integrated setting (such as situations in
which coverage would fundamentally alter the state program or be excessively expensive).
Our brief points out, though, that this case does not meet the exemption because the
community based alternatives currently exist and that the cost of serving these individuals in a
community based setting is so minimal that it does not rise to the level of a fundamental
alteration of the program. We feel this filing this amicus brief positions us as well as
possible between the desires of the disability community and those of the states. It is worth
noting that the number of states signing on to the brief on behalf of the State of Georgia has
dropped from over 20 to 12 over the last couple of weeks, indicating the Governor's growing
political sensitivity to the disability community.

       Health Care -- Update on Patients Bill of Rights: Nex.t week, the Senate Labor
Committee has scheduled a markup of the Republican Leadership version of the Patients Bill
of Rights. We fully anticipate that it will be flawed in several respects, including the
omission of virtually any remedies or right of action to' enforce the patient protections, the
absence of a medical necessity provision (which provides standards for reviewers in the
independent appeals process to judge the appropriateness of the medical decision made by the
                                         Hex-Dump Conversioil
                                                                                                   3

HMO) and a significant limitation on the number of health plans that would be covered (as it
would only cover self insured plans, leading states to regulate the over 80 million Americans
who are enrolled in insured plans). We will be meeting with Senator Kennedy's staff on
Monday to determine an amendment strategy and will be coordinating with consumer
advocates and providers who strongly oppose the Labor Committee mark.

         Health Care -- Nursing Homes Event and Announcement: Next Tuesday, the
Vice President is tentatively scheduled to meet with advocates for the elderly and
representatives of the nursing home industry to discuss the challenges facing the industry as
they attempt to improve the quality of patient care. At this meeting, the Vice President will
unveil new efforts to improve nursing home quality, including: new civil money penalties of
up to $10,000 for serious statutory violations; a new, $2.5 million educational campaign to
prevent elder abuse and neglect in nursing homes; and providing new authority to the
Department of Justice to impose criminal penalties on nursing homes committing repeated
and egregious violations of Medicare or Medicaid regulations. This event also provides us
with the opportunity to highlight the aggressive efforts in your FY 2000 budget to implement
effective nursing home enforcement tools and improved nursing home quality and safety
standards, including a new investment of over $100 million dollars dedicated to nursing home
quality monitoring and improvement. This event is designed to preempt the release of
negative GAO reports and several critical reports by the HHS Inspector General to be
released by the Senate Aging Committee next week that criticize our nursing home quality
enforcement record.

        Crime -- Prison and Jail Population: On Sunday, the Justice Department will
release its midyear 1998 report on prison and jail inmates. The report shows that, from
mid-1997 to mid-1998, there were a total of 1.8 million persons incarcerated in the nation's
prisons and jails -- or one out of every 150 U.S. residents. more than double the incarceration
rate 12 years ago -- although there is a slowing of growth in the state prison population.

   (1) Prisoners: There were 1.27 million state and federal prisoners in mid-1998, an
   increase of 4.8 percent from the previous year. Overall, growth of the prison population
   slowed from the annual average increase of 6.9 percent since 1990. States with the
   largest increases in prison population from were: ND (19.5 percent), MT (18.3 percent)
   and HI (13.6 percent). States with the largest decreases: the District of Columbia (10.9
   percent), ID (3.6 percent), and WY (3.0 percent).

   (2) Jail Inmates: There were 592,000 inmates in local jails in mid-1998, an increase of
   4.5 percent from the previous year. Overall, growth of the jail inmate population was
   slightly less than the average annual rate of 4.9 percent since 1990. Local jails were filled
   to 97 percent of capacity, the same as the previous year and lower than in 1990, when they
   operated at 4 percent over capacity. The national jail inmate population was 41 percent
   white; 41 percent African American; 16 percent Hispanic; and 2 percent of other
   ethnicities, such as Asians, Pacific Islanders, American Indians, and Alaska Natives ..
                                          Hex-Dilmp COilve:sioil
                                                                                                  4


        Crime -- Hatch Crime Bill: Hill sources recently infonned us that Senator Hatch
may introduce a crime bill as soon as next week. Some of the provisions it may include are:
(1) an authorization for the Local Law Enforcement Block Grant; (2) a version of COPS, but
with stricter accountability provisions; (3) an expansion of the DeWine/Leahy law
enforcement technology grants program; (4) Hatch's juvenile crime bill; (5) an expansion of
Project Exile in Richmond, VA, to prosecute more gun criminals in federal courts; (6) a ban
on the sale of alcohol over the Internet; (7) a reauthorization of the Violence Against Women
Act; and (8) a sense of the Senate resolution on the rights of crime victims. We have
reserved March 31 st on the schedule for you to unveil your 21 st Century Crime Bill, which is
currently in the OMB clearance process.

        Drugs -- Medical Marijuana: Next Wednesday, the Institute of Medicine (10M)
will release a study on the medicinal use of marijuana. ONDCP called for the study in
January 1997, and asked 10M to conduct a review of the scientific evidence to assess the
potential health benefits and risks of marijuana. Key findings are:

       Effects of isolated cannabinoids (compounds related to THC). Cannabinoids appear
       to have a natural role in controlling pain, movement, and memory. The brain
       develops tolerance to cannabinoids -- although to a lesser degree than cocaine, nicotine
       and certain other drugs. While there is potential therapeutic value in cannabinoid
       drugs (primarily THC) for pain, nausea, and appetite stimulation, smoked marijuana is
       a crude THC delivery system that also delivers harmful substances. In addition, the
       psychological effects of cannabinoids such (e.g., anxiety reduction, sedation) can
       influence their therapeutic value. The report recommends continued research into the
       physiological effects of synthetic and plant-derived cannabinoids, and conducting
       clinical trials to look into reliable and safe delivery systems as well as the
       psychological effects of taking cannabinoids.

       Health risks associated with medicinal use of marijuana. Numerous studies suggest
       that marijuana smoke is an important risk factor in respiratory disease. Second, there
       is a distinctive marijuana withdrawal syndrome, though it is mild and short-lived.
       The report recommends additional studies to define individual health risks of smoking
       marijuana. Importantly, the study did not find conclusive evidence that marijuana
       acts as a gateway drug, nor did it find that medicinal use of marijuana would increase
       its use among the general population.

       Use of smoked marijuana. Due to health risks associated with smoking, the report
       concludes that smoked marijuana generally should not be recommended for long-tenn
       medicinal use. However, the report makes two important exceptions: (1) With the
       goal of developing a nonsmoked, rapid onset cannabinoid delivery system, limited
       clinical trials of smoked medical marijuana should be conducted; and (2) For patients
       with debilitating symptoms (chronic pain, vomiting) -- with documentation that all
                                          HCA-Dilmp COilversioil ·
                                                                                                  5

       other approved medications have failed to provide relief -- short-term use of smoked
       marijuana (less than 6 months) should be allowed under medical supervision.

        Crime -- Directive on Firearms Enforcement: We are preparing a directive for to
sign, possibly next Friday before your press conference, that will ask Secretary Rubin and
Attorney General Reno to work with the U.S. Attorneys and ATF Special Agents in Charge to
develop a national strategy to strengthen the enforcement and prosecution of federal firearms
laws. As you know, the NRA has repeatedly called for the widespread replication of Project
Exile in Richmond, VA, where the U.S. Attorney generally prosecutes all firearms offenses in
federal court. Senator Hatch may also propose an Project Exile-type initiative in his crime
bill. Your proposed directive will be broader in scope. It will call for: the timely
prosecution of gun criminals at the federal and state level; increased efforts to trace crime .
guns, identify illegal gun markets, and determine gun "hot spots"; coordinated law
enforcement efforts to ensure that gun dealers comply with all applicable city, state and
federal laws; and more. This directive could be released in conjunction with a new Justice
Department report, Promising Strategies to Reduce Gun Violence, which details more than 50
examples of local strategies and partnerships that are reducing gun violence across the
country. These include: comprehensive violence reduction programs that focus on guns;
gun deterring illegal gun possession through consent searches and the aggressive seizure of
firearms; targeted enforcement in gun "hot spots"; increased surveillance of probationers;
school-based prevention programs; focused and vertical prosecution strategies; and special
youth gun courts.

        Welfare -- Food Stamps: You asked what we could do to ensure families obtain
food assistance, in light of reports in The New York Times that more working families are
seeking help from private food banks. We are working to address these issues on two fronts:
first to ensure states follow the food stamp law and provide assistance to all eligible
individuals who seek assistance; and second, to develop and implement new initiatives to
make the food stamp program more accessible to working families.

        We have taken numerous steps in recent months ~o ensure states follow the food stamp
law. USDA has launched investigations of state and local practices, including an inquiry in
New York City which found local welfare offices were not allowing individuals to apply for
food stamps on their first visit to the office (USDA has issued a formal warning and will
impose penalties if these practices are not changed). At the same time, USDA issued formal
guidance to every state reminding them of their obligations to ensure that applicants are aware
of their right to file an application for food stamps, process applications in a timely manner,
and continue food stamp benefits when TANF benefits are denied or terminated.

        In addition to these enforcement actions, we are working with USDA and others to
develop and implement efforts to make food stamps more available to eligible families.
Historically, individuals with earned income who are eligible for food stamps have been about
half as likely to obtain them as individuals receiving cash assistance. There are several
                                           Hex-Dump COilversion
                                                                                                      6

possible reasons for this. First, individuals with earnings are eligible for far less in food
stamps and they may decide the amount is not worth it. For example, a family of three with
$210 per week income can obtain about $50 a month in food stamps, and loses eligibility all
together once its income reached $1,10 a month Second, families need to follow somewhat
cumbersome procedures to report their earnings to the food stamp office and it is often
difficult for working families to get to the food stamp office during open hours. We are
currently working with USDA and OMB to devise administrative proposals to help address
these and other potential barriers and we will provide you with an analysis of our options
soon. In addition, we will be working to enact the proposals in this year's budget to increase
funds for food stamp outreach (the budget contains $3.5 million to provide a 50 percent
federal match for activities including media campaigns and distributing informational
materials at various community locations such as shelters, senior centers, and churches) and to
provide $60 million for eligibility for an additional 15,000 legal immigrants in the U.S. by
August 1996 who subsequently became elderly (the Agriculture Research Act restored
benefits to those elderly as of 1996, as well as children, people with disabilities, and refugees).

        Children and Families -. Child Care: The House Ways and Means Subcommittee
on Human Resources will hold a hearing on child care next week, which is significant
because the last Congress refused to hold even a single hearing on the issue. The
Administration will lead off the hearing testimony. Prior to the hearing, the Subcommittee's
ranking Democrat, Rep. Ben Cardin (D-MD), will introduce a child care bill largely based on
the Administration's proposals. In addition, Rep. Ellen Tauscher (D-CA) also plans to
re-introduce last year's House Democratic consensus child care bill and will reach out to the
Democratic caucus for extensive Democratic co-sponsorship. Finally, a group of Republican
Senators, including Sens. Hatch, Snowe, and Chafee, will re-introduce their bill from last year,
which includes many of our provisions, including a significant increase in child care subsidies,
greater tax relief through the Dependent and Child Care Tax Credit, and a new tax credit for
stay-at-home parents.                           Q
,                                                                         Page 1 of 2


