RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L, Smith ( CN=Mary L, Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:15-MAR-1999 09:19:14,00

SUBJECT:   draft announcement and Q&A on response to NAS report

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L, Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N, Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here are the draft announcement and Q&A for the response to the NAS
report, We were hoping that we could release the report by 2:00pm today,
Thanks, Mary==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00,00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH,D19]MAIL482901972.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504370040000010A02010000000205000000F51700000002000019F6C7823F2C97390BDEBE
9C68F2097451EC5C11F219BA4B165660950A4BC347D26ADBAE59FE26CFDAF2681C62B3DADDE3D3
3CD214587FE7B4608955C7FBFD836F65099D8FE85E895EBB1F8157D354F141DB76788D62846C01
F71928616945BAC72E37EEC526322CE032F4C11028DD9B0490C07A869996997721CDDIF1DCD04C
                                          Hex-Dilmp COilve:sioil

              THE PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY
            LAUDS NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES REPORT,
        RECOMMENDS THOROUGH REVIEW OF FOOD SAFETY STATUTES
                            March 15, 1999

Today the President's Council on Food Safety released it response to the National Academy of
Sciences (NAS) report, "Ensuring Safe Food from Production to Consumption." The Council
response supports all the goals contained in the NAS's recommendations to strengthen the food
safety system. In its response, the Council agrees to conduct a thorough review of existing
statutes and to assess structural models and other mechanisms that could strengthen the federal
food safety system through better coordination, planning, and resource allocation.

The National Academy of Sciences report, "Ensuring Safe Food From Production to
Consumption," made three basic conclusions: (1) an effective and efficient food safety system
must be based on science; (2) the current statutes governing food safety should be revised in
order to achieve a food safety system based on science; and (3) Congress should enact legislation
to establish a unified and central framework for managing federal food safety programs, which
should be headed by a single official with responsibility for all federal food safety activities.

The Council lauds the NAS report as a constructive contribution to efforts to improve the
effectiveness of the federal food safety system through the strengthening of science and risk
assessment, strategic planning, and better federal integration with state and local governments.

The President stated: "I am committed to ensuring the safety of America's food supply, and my
Council's assessments will inform the process of developing a comprehensive strategic plan to
improve the safety of the nation's food supply and to establish a seamless, science-based food
safety system."

The Council responded to each of the recommendations in the NAS report with the specific
assessments briefly described below:

      Recommendation: The food safety system should be based on science. The Council
       agrees and provides numerous examples where this is already the case, including the
       development and implementation of the FoodNet and PulseNet systems for surveillance
       and identification offoodborne pathogens and the implementation of new science-based
       inspections of meat, poultry, and seafood. The Council has also identified areas that
       should be strengthened such as improving the ability to assess health risks from
       pathogens in food.

      Recommendation: Federal statutes should be based on scientifically supportable risks to
       public health. The Council will conduct a thorough review of existing statutes and
       determine what can be accomplished with existing regulatory flexibility and what
       improvements will require statutory changes.

      Recommendation: A comprehensive national food safety plan should be developed. The
       development of such a plan is already underway and is one of the primary functions of the
                                         Hax..i)ilmp COilve:SIOi\

       Council. One component ofthe plan will be exploring methods to assess the
       comparative health risks to the nation's food supply.

      Recommendation: A new statute should be enacted that establishes a unified framework
       for food safety programs with a single official with control over all federal food safety
       resources. The Council supports the goal of the NAS recommendation and will conduct
       an assessment of structural models and other mechanisms that could strengthen the
       federal food safety system through better coordination, planning, and resource allocation,
       keeping in mind the primary goal is food safety and public health.

      Recommendation: Agencies should work more effectively with partners in state and local
       governments. The Council agrees that the roles of state, tribal, and local governments in
       the food safety system are critical and that their efforts deserve the formal recognition that
       partnership in a national food safety system conveys.

        The President established the Council on August 25, 1998 to develop a comprehensive
strategic plan for federal food safety activities and ensure that federal agencies annually develop
coordinated food safety budgets.
                                          Hex-Dump COilremlOi\

     QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL ON FOOD SAFETY
                       RESPONSE TO NAS REPORT
                            March 15,1999

Q:     What did the Clinton Administration release today?

A:     The Clinton Administration released the President's Council on Food Safety's
       assessment of the report issued last August by the National Academy of Sciences
       (NAS) called Ensuring Safe Foodfrom Production to Consumption. The President
       directed the Council to conduct this assessment on August 25, 1998.

Q:     What were the recommendations of NAS, and what did the President's Council
       have to say about these recommendations?

A:     The NAS report provided the Council with useful insights into the strengths and
       weaknesses of the current federal food safety system. The Council responded to each
       of the recommendations in the NAS report with the specific assessments briefly described
       below:

      Recommendation: The food safety system should be based on science. The Council
       agrees and provides numerous examples where this is already the case, including the
       development and implementation of the FoodNet and PulseNet systems for surveillance
       and identification offoodbome pathogens and the implementation of new science-based
       inspections of meat, poultry, and seafood. The Council has also identified areas that
       should be strengthened such as improving the ability to assess health risks from
       pathogens in food.

      Recommendation: Federal statutes should be based on scientifically supportable risks to
       public health. The Council will conduct a thorough review of existing statutes and
       detennine what can be accomplished with existing regulatory flexibility and what
       improvements will require statutory changes.

      Recommendation: A comprehensive national food safety plan should be developed. The
       development of such a plan is already underway and is one of the primary functions of the
       Council. One component of the plan will be exploring methods to assess the
       comparative health risks to the nation's food supply.

      Recommendation: A new statute should be enacted that establishes a unified framework
       for food safety programs with a single official with control over all federal food safety
       resources. The Council supports the goal of the NAS recommendation and will conduct
       an assessment of structural models and other mechanisms that could strengthen the
       federal food safety system through better coordination, planning, and resource allocation,
       keeping in mind the primary goal is food safety and public health.

      Recommendation: Agencies should work more effectively with partners in state and local
                                           HeX-Dilmp COiWersioil

     governments. The Council agrees that the roles of state, tribal, and local governments in
     the food safety system are critical and that their efforts deserve the formal recognition that
     partnership in a national food safety system conveys.

Q:   What does the Council say about the NAS recommendation for a unified and central
     food safety framework, to be headed by a single official with responsibility for all
     federal food safety activities?

A:   The NAS called for a new statute that establishes a unified framework for food
     safety programs with a single official with control over all federal food safety
     resources. The Council agrees with the goal of this recommendation and
     acknowledges that there may be many organizational approaches to achieving the
     goal of a "single voice" for federal food safety activities. The Council will conduct
     an assessment of structural models and other mechanisms that could strengthen the
     federal food safety system through better coordination, planning, and resource
     allocation, keeping in mind that the primary goal is food safety and public health.

Q:   How did the Council develop its position?

A:   The task force that prepared the assessment for the Council discussed the issues at
     public meetings in Arlington, VA; Sacramento, CA; Chicago, IL; and Dallas, TX.
     Valuable input was also provided by public comments sent to the agencies and by an
     interagency task force.
Q:   What are the functions of the President's Council on Food Safety?

A:   The Council has three primary functions: (1) developing a comprehensive strategic
     Federal food safety plan; (2) advising agencies of priority areas for investment in
     food safety and ensuring that federal agencies annually develop coordinated food
     safety budgets; and (3) ensuring that the Joint Institute for Food Safety Research
     (JIFSR), which the President created to coordinate all federal food safety research,
     establishes mechanisms to guide federal research efforts toward the highest priority
     food safety needs. One of the Council's first orders of business was this review of
     the NAS report.

Q:   Who are the members of the Council?

A:   The Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and the
     Assistant to the President for Science and Technology serve as Joint Chairs of the
     Council. The other members of the Council are the Assistant to the President for
     Domestic Policy, the Director of the National Partnership for Reinventing Government,
     the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Secretary of Commerce,
     and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.

Q:   What will the Council do next?
                                       AuIomated Records Management System
                                              HeX-Oilmp COilt'e:sion

         A:   The Council will prepare its strategic plan for a seamless, science-based food safety
              system. The plan will emphasize surveillance; outbreak response; risk assessment;
              research; education; inspection and preventive controls; consistency of
              science-based standards; private sector incentives; and evaluation. As part of the
              strategic planning process, the Council will conduct a full assessment of the
              legislative authorities of the federal food safety agencies and evaluate changes that
              should be made. The purpose of the review will be to examine the similarities and
              differences in federal food safety statutes; identify the most suitable statutory
              approaches for reducing food borne illness; and assess both gaps in scientific
              knowledge and statutory barriers to implementation of the strategic plan.
              Specifically, the Administration will work with Congress to pass the already
              introduced Food Safety Enforcement Enhancement Act, which provides mandatory
              recall authority for USDA, as well as legislation to increase FDA's authority to
              ensure the safety of food imports.


