RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-MAR-1999" 16:03:10.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly Items -- Education

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Education-Ed-Flex/Class Size/Special Education. This week, the Senate
appointed all the members of the Labor and Human Resources Committee as
its conferees on Ed-Flex.   The House will likely appoint conferees next
week. When the House takes up appointment of its own conferees,
Democrats (Clay) are expected to offer a motion to instruct House
conferees.    The "message" for the instruction would be that the conferees
support the class size program as currently structured    (i.e. dropping the
provision allowing school districts to fund special education with class
size appropriations) and also support increased funding for special
education.   Although congressional staff level discussions will begin as
soon as House conferees are named, it is highly unlikely that the
conference will get underway before the two week Easter break that begins
next Friday.    Both WH legislative affairs and the Education Dept's
legislative affairs staff have heard from various sources that Lott,
Frist, Hastert, Goodling and others have agreed to take the special
ed/class size provision out of the Ed-Flex bill.   However, no one has been
able to confirm this (or find out where Jeffords is) and we are continuing
to work to ensure the special ed/class size measure is deleted in
conference. Meanwhile, Senate Democrats now have 26 of the 34 signatures
that they are seeking on a letter calling for a veto if the conference
fails to remove the special ed/class size provision.   We are continuing to
hold on the issuing a veto statement.


Education -- university Admissions Policy.   The San Francisco Chronicle
reported that today the University of California regents are expected to
approve a plan to open UC's eight undergraduate campuses to students in
the top 4 percent of each high school class in the state. To qualify
under the proposal, current high school sophomores would have to rank in
the top 4 percent of their junior year classes with no lower that a C in
eleven college-prep courses.  The students will still have to take the
SATs as well as four other required courses in their senior year.   About
12,000 students will receive invitations from UC to apply, including
roughly 3,600 who do not now qualify for UC.   Many of the 3,600 are from
urban and inner-city schools. They include 2,023 white students, 161
black students, 408 Asian-Americans and 716 Latinos --this would yield a
higher proportion of black and Latinos than in the rest of the student
body but not enough to drastically change the overall mix of students.
This policy is similar to one in Texas where the state legisature passed a
measure that guaranteed admission to state colleges for the top 10 percent
of each high school's graduates.


