RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.     ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-MAR-1999 12:09:54.00

SUBJECT:   Weekly

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=E~ena   Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D86]ARMSl1578678S.036 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750434C060000010A02010000000205000000A86400000002000068231B95363AABC8BB69D8
C4ADC6255630D862263776C7FA55DA150767F6823184AFCCEA47508BB4E2E5C2EBC27A7A695FE8
7B80EE3D669E778AOAB4245D60AED32154EEDC70EB2C1962DEOE922753EDAA96E2D4CC3A7267E5
                                                   HWt·Dump Conversion
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

FROM:           Bruce Reed
                Elena Kagan

SUBJECT:        DPC Weekly Report


        1. Tobacco -- Specter Amendment. On Thursday, the Senate firmly rejected an
amendment to the supplemental appropriations bill that would have ensured states spend half of
the tobacco settlement funds on programs to prevent tobacco use, promote public health, and
protect farmers. The 29-71 vote leaves intact the Hutchison amendment giving up the federal
share of the states' tobacco settlement without any commitment by the states to use these monies
on shared national and state priorities. The vote came the day after we issued our SAP outlining
your senior advisers' recommendation that you veto the supplemental bill if it contains
objectionable riders like the Hutchison tobacco provision.

          The amendment, offered by Senators Specter and Harkin, would have allowed the states
  to retain all of the tobacco settlement funds so long as they use 20 percent on programs to combat
  teen smoking and 30 percent for public health programs or assistance for tobacco farmers and
  their communities. Opponents of the amendment focused on the states' rights issue -- Senator
  Lott, for example, called the amendment an example of "typical federal government arrogance."
  Senators Daschle and Harkin are now in discussions with colleagues, like Hutchison supporter
  Bob Graham, in an attempt to gauge support for a watered-down version of the amendment that
  would ensure 50 percent of the funds be spent on a broad menu of purposes that include tobacco
. prevention, farmer assistance, education, public health, and children.

         2. Health Care -- Patients Bill of Rights (PBOR) markup. On Thursday night, the
Senate Labor Committee completed its mark up of the Patients Bill of Rights. Senator
Kennedy offered the Daschle-Kennedy PBOR as a substitute for the Chairman's mark and
it failed along a party line vote. Most of the subsequent strengthening amendments were
also defeated among party line votes. The Democrats were pleased with your statement in
support of a strong, enforceable, PBOR at the beginning of this mark-up process and have
indicated they wish to work closely with us to develop an amendment strategy when this
legislation makes it to the Senate floor. It is our hope that we will find a more receptive
group of Republicans on the Senate floor to these amendments. Senator Chafee and
Senator Specter's interest in this area provides some level of encouragement; however, as
each day passes it appears more clear that the House is likely to have a stronger set of
provisions, which will hopefully help us in a joint House-Senate conference if this
legislation reaches this stage.

        3. Health Care -- Update on Medicare. In the wake of the Medicare Commission
vote and your announcement of your intention to propose your own Medicare reform
initiative, we are developing a range of options for your consideration. This work will be
complicated by the March 30th release of this year's Social Security/ Medicare trustees
                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

report, which is expected to push out the exhaustion date of the Medicare trust fund by a
number of years. Not only will this impact on our strategy surrounding the dedication of
the surplus to Medicare, it will change the scoring of many of the underlying provisions of
any proposal. Because it is likely that it will be much easier to reach your previously stated
goal of pushing out the exhaustion date to 2020, we believe that it is advisable to stop using
any reference to the year 2020 and/or the number of years you wish to extend the life of the
trust fund. Instead, we suggest confining our comments to statements like: "We are
dedicating 15 percent of the surplus ($686 billion over 15 years) to Medicare." This will
protect our current policy position while enabling us to potentially modify how we describe
the impact of this infusion of dollars to the Medicare program.

        2. Health Care -- Update on nursing home quality and enforcement problems. In
recent days, the Senate Aging Committee, chaired by Senator Grassley, has been releasing
a series of GAO and HHS IG reports critical of HCFA's nursing home quality enforcement
activities. The reports indicate that HCFA has failed to ensure that the states are fulfilling
their nursing home quality obligations. The reports findings include that: HCFA has failed
to pursue the investigation of serious quality complaints, inadequately addressed problems
associated with repeat offenders, and inadequately intervened in cases where health and
safety violations resulted in actual harm to residents. Some of these findings have been or
are being addressed by a nursing home quality imitative you unveiled last year. Others are
new and are disturbing. In response, we have instructed HCFA to aggressively improve
their enforcement activities by requiring states to investigate complaints that allege harm to
residents within 10 working days, increasing the minimum fine for facilities violating quality
standards to $50 to $1,000, and making it easier for states to impose fines of up to $10,000 for
quality violations. We are also working on additional enforcement improvement provisions
which are outlined below.

         3. Health Care -- Signing ceremony for the Nursing Home Resident Protection Act.
Next week, you are tentatively scheduled to sign into law legislation which prohibits the
transfer of Medicaid patients by nursing homes wishing to privatize their entire resident
population. This legislation was inspired by cases in Florida in which residents actually
died as they were being transferred. The legislation that will be presented to you explicitly
prohibits nursing homes who decide to withdraw from the Medicaid program from evicting
Medicaid patients. At this event, we are contemplating one or more announcements to
underscore our commitment to nursing home quality enforcement. The first is a new
legislative proposal that creates new Federal criminal (5 to 10 years in prison) and civil
penalties (of up to $1,000,000 per facility in a corporate chain out of compliance) for individuals,
facility chains, or management companies if they engage in conduct that results in a pattern of
physical or mental harm to residents. In addition, we are contemplating using this as an
opportunity to criticize the Republican bill for its across the board 12 percent cut which
will result in a significant reduction in nursing home quality enforcement activities.

      4. Health Care --. Update on T ANF/ Medicaid guidebook. Next Monday, we have
asked HCFA to release new guidance for states to ensure that those eligible for
Medicaid --especially children --are enrolled. There have been a number of reports that
                                       Hex-Dump Conversion

some states may be inappropriately preventing families from obtaining Medicaid coverage by
imposing waiting periods for issuing an application or determining Medicaid eligibility. This
guidance makes it clear that these delays are impermissible and inconsistent with the law
and underscores your long standing commitment to ensure that welfare reform does not
reduce access to the Medicaid program. The letter and guidebook will be issued prior to
the release of a report from George Washington University's Center for Health Policy
Studies which implies that the welfare reform statute has created barriers to receiving
Medicaid. While we believe the guidance is expected to be well received by advocates, we
do not expect states to raise serious concerns about this communication.

        5. Health Care -- Update on the FDA's recent action to limit the use of antibiotics
in animal feed. The FDA has increased evidence that the routine use of antibiotics in
livestock to promote growth may diminish the drugs' power to cure infections in people. As
more people consume antibiotics through foodstuffs, they appear to be more resistant to
antibiotics when in need of pharmacological intervention. In response, the FDA has
released a draft of new regulations that would require manufacturers to test new livestock
drugs to see if they foster the growth of resistant bacteria that cause disease in people, both
before and after they are approved for use. If they are shown to foster resistance, FDA can
curtail their distribution or remove them from the market entirely. The drug and
agriculture industries say that the FDA is unnecessarily restricting access to antibiotics,
which they insist have not been proved to harm people and are essential to producing
affordable meat and poultry. Public health advocates believe that the use of these
antibiotics for animals should be severely restricted, if not eliminated altogether, in order
to prevent the further development of resistant bacteria. The new FDA proposal is
consistent with your "superbug" initiative that provides a significant increase in funding
($25 million) to finance a new electronic disease surveillance network that facilitates the
timely transmission of information to physicians in order to ensure that new strains of
bacteria are identified swiftly and treated effectively.

       6. Health Care -- Update on stem cell research. On Friday, the journal. Science
will publish a letter from 73 prominent scientists, including 67 Nobel prize winners, that
supports plans by NIH to consider financing research with stem cells that originate from
human embryos. This should bolster our efforts on Capitol Hill to push back legislation
designed to repeal NIH's authority to make this decision.

       7. Welfare Reform -- T ANF Rule: We have been working closely with HHS and
OMB to complete the final welfare regulations and have reached consensus on the major issues.
We have incorporated most of the suggestions made by the states and advocates while continuing
to hold states accountable for work, time limits, and maintenance of effort requirements.
The final rule provides states with more flexibility to use T ANF funds to provide supports to
working families such as child care, transportation, and job retention services. Because so
many families have left welfare for work, many governors have told us they want to use
TANF funds to support families who have gone to work to ensure they don't return to
welfare. We propose to do so through the rule by defining such supports for working
families as "non-assistance" ·and thus no longer subject to time limits and certain other
                                         Hex-Dwnp Conversion

T ANF requirements. Without such a change many states have been reluctant to use
T ANF to provide these supports to working families, since such supports would count
toward the federal five year time limit. We've also included work subsidies as
"non-assistance" something that labor unions and anti-poverty advocates encouraged us to
do and that we think will encourage more states to use such subsidies. (In 1997, only 1
percent of working welfare recipients were in subsidized jobs while 17 percent were in
workfare.) The rule should be ready for release in mid-April. We expect a generally
positive reaction and are exploring appropriate announcement opportunities.

       8. Welfare Reform -- Cuts in TANF Funds Restored: On Thursday, the Senate
agreed to an amendment by Senator Stevens to eliminate from the supplemental
appropriations bill the $350 million cut in T ANF funds (the provision deferred funds from
FY 1999 to FY 2002 and would have established a precedent for future TANF cuts). As
you know, our SAP opposed the TANF cut and Governors lobbied hard against it.
Stevens substituted a change to HUD's Section 8 housing program which OMB assures us
has no adverse programmatic impact -- essentially it defers spending from FY 1999 to FY
2000, which is merely an accounting change since so many housing contracts straddle both
years.

         9. Welfare Reform -- Urban Caseloads: You sent us a note saying we should do more
 to strengthen welfare to work efforts in cities with slower caseload declines. We wanted to
 report on two efforts now underway. The Department of Labor just launched a two-year
 technical assistance initiative to help 10 large cities (Boston, Houston, Detroit, Philadelphia,
 Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, Seattle, New Orleans, and Minneapolis) develop strategies to
 move hard-to-employ welfare recipients into good jobs, with an emphasis on job retention and
.advancement and ensuring close coordination between the welfare and workforce systems.
 Teams from these cities are meeting together for the first time next week. The Welfare to Work
 Partnership has a targeted effort in 30 cities with high poverty rates and large concentrations of
 welfare recipients, including Atlanta, Baltimore, Chicago, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans,
 New York, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. In August, the Partnership is holding a major
 convention in Chicago for delegations from these cities; this could be a good opportunity to mark
 the third anniversary of the welfare law and Eli Segal hopes you will participate.

       You also asked whether the slower rate of caseload decline in some cities is related to
unemployment. In general, those cities with slower rates of caseload decline did have higher
unemployment rates. For example, El Paso, Los Angeles, New York, and Philadelphia had the
slowest caseload declines and three of the four had central city unemployment rates above 7% in
August 1998 when the caseload decline was measured (Philadelphia's rate of 5.9% was also well
above the national average of 4.5%). However, Baltimore and Cleveland had high
unemployment, but also had somewhat greater caseload declines.

        10. Welfare -- Food Assistance: You asked what we could do to ensure that families
obtain food assistance, in light of reports that more working families are seeking help from
private food banks. We are working to address these issues on two fronts: first to ensure states
follow the food stamp law and provide assistance to all eligible individuals who seek assistance;
                                     Hex-Dwnp Conversion

and second, to develop and implement new initiatives to make the food stamp program more
accessible to working families. We have taken numerous steps in recent months to ensure states
follow the food stamp law. USDA has launched investigations of state and local practices,
including an inquiry in New York City which found local welfare offices were not allowing
individuals to apply for food stamps on their first visit to the office. (USDA has issued a formal
warning and will impose penalties if these practices are not changed. Meanwhile, a U.S. District
Court judge has issued an injunction and has required the city to provide a corrective action plan,
which remains sealed.) At the same time, USDA issued formal guidelines to every state
reminding them of their obligations to ensure that applicants are aware of their right to file an
application for food stamps, process applications in a timely manner, and continue food stamp
benefits when T ANF benefits are denied or terminated.

        In addition to these enforcement actions, we are working with USDA and others to.
develop and implement efforts to make food stamps more available to eligible families.
Historically, individuals with earned income who are eligible for food stamps have been about
half as likely to obtain them as individuals receiving cash assistance. There are several possible
reasons for this. First, individuals with earnings are eligible for far less in food stamps and they
may decide the amount is not worth it. For example, the monthly food stamp allotment for a
family of three with a $300 weekly income and $500 monthly rent is $40. When the same
family reaches weekly earnings of$342, the household is no longer eligible. Second, families.
need to follow somewhat cumbersome procedures to report their earnings to the food stamp
office and it is often difficult for working families to get to this office during open hours.

        We are currently working with USDA and OMB to devise administrative proposals to
help address these and other potential barriers and we will provide you with an analysis of our
options soon. While some of the options under consideration can be implemented through
regulation, they may cost several hundred million dollars. In order to ensure we maintain our
commitment to saving the surplus, we must enact other regulations saving a comparable amount
-- a requirement OMB imposes on an agency-by-agency basis (e.g., USDA savings must pay for
new USDA costs). These regulatory offsets could be difficult to obtain.

         In addition to possible administrative actions, we will be working to enact the proposals
in this year's budget to increase funds for food stamp outreach (the budget contains $3.5 million
to provide a 50 percent federal match for activities including media campaigns and distributing
informational materials at various community locations such as shelters, senior centers, and
churches) and to provide $60 million for eligibility for an additional 15,000 legal immigrants
who become elderly after their pre-1996 arrival. (The Agricultural Research Act restored
benefits to those elderly as of 1996, as well as children, people with disabilities, and refugees.)

          11. Children and Families -- New Study on Early Intervention: You asked that
we consider how to take advantage of the findings of a new study showing that school-based
early intervention can payoff in terms of reducing risky behavior and improving academic
achievement in young people. The 12-year study, based in Seattle, showed that children in
grades one through six and their parents who participated in a program designed to foster an
il1terest in learning and bolster self-esteem involvement were, by age 18, 19 percent less likely to
                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

have committed violent acts, 13 percent less likely to engage in sexual intercourse, 19 percent
less likely to have had multiple sex partners, and 35 percent less likely to have caused or to have
become pregnant, as well as more likely to stay in school and achieve higher grades. Currently,
the federal government funds similar programs through the $50 million in abstinence
education grants provided to states under the welfare reform law. In addition to bolstering this
welfare reform initiative, these new findings may be especially effective in advancing our ESEA
proposal to reform the Safe and Drug Free Schools and Communities program. As you'll recall,
under our proposal, the program will be changed from a formula grant program to a competitive
grant program, in which grant recipients will be required to use research-based drug and violence
prevention programs, such as that described in the Seattle study. We are seeking $591 million
for FY 2000, a $25 million increase over the prior year. Finally, these findings highlight
strategies that should be explored seriously as part of our National Strategy to Prevent Teen
Pregnancy to ensure continuation of the positive trends in reducing teen pregnancies and births.
We will work with HHS and the National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy to pursue this
further.

        12. Political Reform--Campaign Finance Reform: There have been some positive
signs, albeit small, that some of the key opponents of campaign finance reform maybe willing to
entertain some possible compromises. Specifically, Mitch McConnell indicated recently that a
soft-money-hard-money trade-off is "worth discussing." Other Republicans have signaled at
least a willingness to consider alternatives. Norm Ornstein believes there maybe a small
window of opportunity to resurrect campaign finance reform if Democrats and Republicans can
reach agreement on raising the $1,000 contribution limit and indexing it for inflation. Ornstein
has proposed a five-point plan that would 1) raise the contribution limit to $3,000 and index it for
inflation; 2) end soft money and increase limits on hard-money contributions to parties; 3) bring
greater disclosure to issue advocacy as proposed in the Senators Snowe and Jeffords amendment
which was passed in the Senate last year; 4) bring small donors back to politics by providing a
tax credit for contributions of $1 00 or $200 (the credit was repealed in 1986). In addition,
candidates who raise over a threshold of amount of small contributions -- like $25,000 in $100
contributions or less -- would become eligible for a voucher program for broadcast time, half to
be paid for by the broadcasters and halfby the Federal government. Under the Ornstein
proposal, for every $1,000 in small contributions raised, a candidate would receive a $500
broadcast voucher. Ornstein is planning to discuss this proposal with the authors oflast year's
bipartisan finance reform bill, Senators McCain and Feingold and Representatives Shays and
Meehan. We will be having discussions with Ornstein as well and will keep you apprised.


