RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Devorah R. Adler ( CN=Devorah R. Adler/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-MAR-1999 10:41:33.00

SUBJECT:     q&a for today

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Q:      What is your response to the story in todayO,s New York Times
criticizing HCFA for lax oversight of state nursing home complaint
investigations and insufficient penalties for facilities that are out of
compliance?

A:      One report of shorcomings in nursing home quality enforcement is one
too many. Protecting patients in these facilities has been and will
continue to be a priority of this Administration. Last July, the President
initiated a new nursing home quality initative that ensures swift and
strong penalties for nursing homes failing to comply with standards,
strengthened oversight of state enforcement mechanisms, and implemented
unprecedented efforts to improve nutrition and prevent bed sores. He also
invested over $73.7 million -- an unprecedented increase of 31.6 percent
over last yearD,s funding level -- in his FY 2000 budget to support these
new efforts.

Nonetheless, we are concerned about the GAO findings that suggest that
states and in some cases, HCFA, have not adequately pursued their nursing
home quality mandate. In response, just last week, we required States to
expedite the investigation of any complaint that alleges harm to a nursing
home resident, report all of these complaints to HHSO, national database,
create a $1,000 minimum fine for facilities violating quality standards,
and make it easier for states to impose fines of up to $10,000 for quality
violations. To facilitate these actions, we directed HCFA to immediately
reprogram $4 million to ensure the adequate financing of these nursing
home quality inforcement activities.

Q:         Why didnD,t the Administration testify at yesterdayO,s hearing?

A:      That was a decision made by the Department of Health and Human
Services. We understand that under both Republican and Democratic
administrations, it has been Department procedures for senior
Administration officials to testify at the beginning of any hearing. We
have been informed that this protocol was established during the Reagan
Administration, and HHS believes it is an appropriate practice.

Any additional questions on this matter should be referred to the
Department.

Q:      Today, the Washington Post reported that the fast track review
of Rezulin has led to 28 deaths and liver transplants in 7 others. What is
your response? Are you going to insist that this drug be pulled from the
market?

A:         Each time FDA recieved confirmed reports about liver damage or other


adverse side effects associated with Rezulin, the agency moved swiftly to
change the labeling on the drug to recommend more extensive testing of
patient liver function. After the labeling changes were implemented, the
number of reported adverse side effects has dropped -- however, FDA is
still concerned the drugD,s effect on patient liver function and will be
considering this week whether we should further restrict its regulation.
        Any further questions on Rezulin should be referred to HHS.

Q:      Today, the Washington Post reported that the fast track review
of Rezulin has led to 28 deaths and liver transplants in 7 others. what is
your response? Are you going to insist that this drug be pulled from the
market?

A:      Each time FDA recieved confirmed reports about liver damage or other
adverse side effects associated w~th Rezulin, the agency moved swiftly to
change the labeling on the drug to recommend more extensive testing of
patient liver function. After the labeling changes were implemented, the
number of reported adverse side effects has dropped -- however, FDA is
still concerned the drugD,s effect on patient liver function and will be
considering this week whether we should further restrict its regulation.
        Any further questions on Rezulin should be referred to HHS.


