    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:25-MAR-1999 13:27:54.00

    SUBJECT:    Draft comments on race book

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=E1ena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    My computer wouldn't send this as an attachment, but I wrote it in Word
    Perfect if you need it that way.  (It could be copied back into a Word
    Perfect file.)  Feel free to adjust the tone up or down -- I had more fun
    than I had expected.


                                                      March 26, 1999


    MEMORANDUM TO TODD STERN

    FROM:             Bruce Reed
                              Elena Kagan

    SUBJECT:                   Comments on Draft Chapters of Race Book


            In this memo, we outline our concerns about and changes to the
    policy chapters of the draft race book. With a little good faith, we
    believe these changes can easily be incorporated, although this is not the
    first time we have suggested them to the authors.

            For the most part, however, the real shortcomings of the current
    draft have little to do with policy. With all due respect to the time and
    talent that have already gone into this project, the current draft is a
    passable government report, not a bold vision of race and America for the
    21st Century. We doubt that this is the caliber of book the President was
    hoping for or expecting.

               We see three fundamentals problems:

            1. This draft does nothing to advance the PresidentO,s goal of launching
    a new debate on race.   The President has made clear that the whole point
    of the race initiative was to move beyond the old debates of the 0+60s and
    D+70s toward a new debate about race.   This draft could have been written
    20 years ago.   It lays out new rights, but deliberately goes out of its
    way not to mention responsibilities -- even replacing the presidentO,s
    trademark O&opportunity, responsibility, communityOB with D&opportunity,
    community, heart.OB Instead of advancing the PresidentO,s long-held
    philosophy that the best way to close the opportunity gap is through
    universal programs that expand opportunity for all but but
    disproportionately help minorities, the draft focuses almost entirely on
    narrow, targeted programs to help particular populations. And it does
    very little to reframe the race debate, focusing more on black-white
    concerns than on the complex new challenges we face as a nation that is


almost majority-minority. There is a chapter on Native Americans -- why
is there no chapter on the New Immigrants or the New Citizens?

        2. No one reading this draft would think it was written by Bill Clinton.
  Going back to his 1992 speeches in Detroit and Macomb County, the
President has never had one philosophy for minorities and another for
whites -- he has already tried to deliver the same message to both.   But
this draft is written in a different voice, oddly disconnected from the
tone, the policies, and the force of the man who has been working on these
issues for two decades.  The draft leaves the impression that we just
stumbled onto this issue of race, and scrambled to pull some policies
together to deal with it -- rather than that the underlying mission of the
Clinton presidency has been to expand opportunity for everybody.   The real
Clinton is missing from these pages:  If the President were talking about
social promotion -- to any audience, white or black -- he would extol what
Chicago is doing; this draft not only never mentions it, but talks at
length about the downsides of testing and ending social promotion. When
the President talks about race, he always wrestles with the many hard
issues that surround race -- what drives racial tensions and what can we
do to ease it; how much government can do and how much must change come
from the inside out. This draft attributes almost every problem to latent
racism and discrimination, either by the citizenry or the government.   The
result is little more than a disparate impact analysis of America.

        3.  It isnD,t bold and it isnD,t interesting.  This draft does a
serviceable job of conveying basic information about race.  It is replete
with (selective) facts and figures, but devoid of depth, complexity, or
emotion. But if the point of the race book was to put forth a bold
vision, provoke a good debate, or even just change a few minds, this draft
falls short. When the President talks about race in a speech or town
meeting, he comes across as honest, revealing, interesting. This draft
meets none of those tests, either. Neither the rhetoric nor the vision
rise to the occasion. We were hoping for something bolder.




EDUCATION CHAPTER

        The centerpiece of this chapter, about the D&Compact for Equal
Opportunity in Education,D8 just doesnD,t work.  Despite repeated meetings
on this topic, and direct guidance from the President on down that this
chapter needs to advance his existing education agenda, it still does
not.  This section (pp III.1-19 to III.1-27) needs a fundamental rewrite
or it will undermine the real centerpiece of the PresidentD,s education
agenda, which he laid out in the State of the Union.

        AS we have made clear throughout this process, the authors seem
intent on minimizing our sweeping ESEA proposals -- which the President
has called a D&sea changeD8 in education policy -- in one throwaway
paragraph, so they can devote most of the discussion to a new effort (the
D&CompactD8) that is inconsistent with what weD,ve already proposed.  This
is particularly troubling because our existing proposal is bolder, more
coherent, and more likely to reduce racial disparities in achievement than
the vague idea sketched out in the draft.

        As we said to the authors two months ago, D&Every time he speaks on this
subject, the President makes a powerful argument for why his plan is
fundamental to closing the education opportunity gap, by ensuring a
qualified teacher in every classroom, consequences for schools that fail,


and high expectations coupled with the help it takes to meet those
expectations. Obviously, the book need not be limited to proposals the
President has already made.  But since ESEA debate is the most important
shot he'll have at these problems in his Presidency, it deserves more than
a paragraph.D8

        This section needs to change in two fundamental ways: First, it
needs to make a strong, compelling case for the PresidentD,s ESEA proposal
(and related investments) as the centerpiece of his vision for increasing
educational opportunity. The President has given dozens of off-the-cuff
speeches that make his argument for equal opportunity in education better
than this draft does.  The book needs to explain why poor schools arenD,t
working and the sea change weD,ve proposed to fix them -- that low-income
students have suffered the most from decades of federal indifference to
results, and now for the first time, weD,re demanding accountability; that
every child has a right to functioning schools, qualified teachers, and
high expectations; and that failing schools, lousy teachers, and social
promotion will no longer be a local option.

        Second, the Compact section needs to be reworked to mesh with ESEA
or junked altogether. The most sensible change would be to make the ESEA
reforms the heart of this Compact, rather than a prelude to it. The
description of the Compact on p. 21 and in. the text box on p. 23 doesnD,t
work, for a variety of reasons. The whole proposal is too vague to make
much sense, but its few specifics conflict with what weD,re already
doing.  It combines some measures weD,ve already proposed to require
nationwide (like report cards and takeovers of failing schools) with
others weD,ve rejected (like expert panels). [As an example of what might
happen under the Compact, the draft cites Dade CountyD,s efforts to turn
around failing schools -- which is already required under our ESEA
proposal.]  The essence of the Compact is offering (and then taking away)
broader flexibility in federal grant programs -- which we have already
proposed to do through ESEA, and may already have signed into law through
Ed-Flex by the time the book comes out. Most troubling, it undercuts the
PresidentD,s ESEA proposal by suggesting that D&our ambitions must be
higherD8 (p. 25) and that D&the special challenge of racial disparities
requires special measuresD8 like the Compact (p. 26).   The whole point of
our ESEA proposal -- as well as our class size, school construction, and
after-school proposals -- is to close the gap.   We should make arguments
for it, not against it.

        We would be happy to rewrite this section, but Paul Glastris --
who writes all the PresidentD,s education speeches -- might be the best
candidate to do so.


CRIME

        Again, the centerpiece of this chapter is vague and not well
thought through.   The proposal to require community action plans for
targeted crime funds (p. 16) is a warmed-over version of BushD,s
weed-and-seed program. It is supposed to help D&Hot SpotsD8 -- but it
sets up a process of plans, reviews, and accountability that will make it
harder for those communities to get money than if they applied through the
regular COPS program.   ItO,s too modest a proposal to raise a fuss over,
but it bears little relation to what weD,re actually doing in our budget
or our crime bill.

40-41 -- We cannot say that the lack of trust in law enforcement D&may
even promote crimeD8 or imply that criminals are more likely to commit


repeat acts of domestic violence because of the way they were treated by
law enforcement. That kind of moral equivalence is unacceptable. We have
never made excuses for criminal behavior, and we should not start now. We
can make a persuasive argument about the need for greater trust without
accusing law enforcement of causing crime.

47 -- We canD,t commit to supporting legislation that Conyers D&is
preparingDB. We supported Conyers bill last year to promote data
collection, but we will not support data collection as a condition of COPS
money.

48 -- The section on rac~al profiling needs to be rewritten to reflect
what weD,11 actually do.

50 -- I canD,t imagine that if only 1% of police-citizen encounters
involve use of .force, we have statistically significant data to support
the notion that D&a disproportionate number of these incidents involve
persons of color.DB On the next page, the sentence D&There are just too
many examples, some horrific, to ignore the problernDB sounds like rhetoric
without citing an example.

56 -- We should not claim that some D&unfortunate cycleDB in which lack of
minority trust in law enforcement is making it difficult to attract
minorities to policing, unless we have studies to support it.

58 -- The concluding paragraph is hopelessly trite and naive -- suggesting
that childrenD,s world views will be shaped only by D&the investments we
make or donD,t makeDB in them and not, for example, by whether or not they
grow up in neighborhoods that are safe.   It suggests that if we just spent
money on schools instead of prisons, everything would be fine.   But the
real world is more complicated than that.   If we donD,t keep children
safe, they wonD,t grow up.  If we donD,t make neighborhoods safe, there
wonD,t be enough jobs, or taxes to pay for decent schools.   If we donD,t
continue to reduce crime, we will see more racial and class isolation, not
less.  So if our goal is to promote an honest dialogue about AmericaD,s
problems, letD,s not fall back on truisms like schools are better than
jails.


OTHER CHANGES

p. (Intro)-B: As noted above, the new litany of D&opportunity, community,
heartD8 is ridiculous.  The President canD,t and shouldnD,t walk away from
D&responsibilityDB in his race book.  It was the central theme of the most
important speech he has given on the subject, in Memphis.

P. (Intro)-10: As noted above, it would be inconsistent with the
PresidentD,s whole career to layout three new rights without talking
about responsibilities.

p. (1)-22: This page refers to D&hidden bigotsDB like D&the teacher in
your childD,s school, a policeman who might detain you, or your supervisor
at workDB.  D&Hidden bigotD8 is not a phrase to throw around lightly.
ItO,s certainly not fair to single out teachers and police, who are no
more likely to hold racist views than people in other professions, and
should not be stereotyped.

EDUCATION

5 -- The paragraphs on vouchers donD,t fit, and donD,t make sense.   For
'.
     one thing, the President is opposed to the federal use of funds for
     vouchers, not vouchers themselves. Moreover, weD,re just asking for
     trouble if we imply that vouchers will D&reinforce race and class
     segregation.DB This section should be dropped.

     17 -- These three principles donD,t exactly sing. The first principle
     ought to be along the lines of D&First, we must eliminate racial
     disparities in education by raising expectations for everyone and doing
     more to help everyone meet those expectations -- because every child can
     learn.DB

     28-29 -- The draft suggests we have given D&lip serviceDB and made
     D&compromisesDB in our ideals, but doesnD,t say how.

     32 -- Testing and standards should be discussed later, under expectations
     and acctountability (p. 41), not as the introduction to a section on
     school equity. And weD,re for the standards movement.   WeD,re for high
     standards now and everywhere -- not down the road after every aspect of
     unequal funding has been addressed.

     34 -- We have a host of proposals in our ESEA package to improve the
     quality of teaching for poor and minority children. TheyO,re not
     mentioned.

     44 --   [ask EK re civil rights laws)


