RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-MAR-1999 20:45:37.00

SUBJECT:   Race Book -- Education Draft

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
As an overall comment, this chapter does not appear to be in its "final
stages" as suggested in the cover memo.  While some things will clearly be
cleaned up with editing (the chapter is unduly repetitive in some places),
the centerpiece -- the proposed "Compact for Equal Opportunity
in Education" -- lacks a clearly thought out connection with ESEA.  The
compact mimics requirements in some places (e.g. report cards -- which is
ok since it wouldn't be perceived as an additional burden), and in other
areas I'm not sure whether it tracks at all (e.g. how does "broadest
possible flexibility in federal grant programs" square with whatever
Ed-Flex provision we put into ESEA) .

A meeting with Mike Smith, Mike Cohen and Chris Edley to try and square
the Compact with ESEA fell vitim to scheduling problems and Mike's
eventual departure . . Should we try and make this happen?

Due to time considerations,   toward the end I listed programs (e.g. Troops
to teachers) that I thought   should be added·without more specific
language). Bethany can run    over some suggested language on how to
reference those programs in   the morning.

On to more specific comments:

p.5, second para:  Should it state that President does not support
"federally-funded" vouchers as opposed to just "vouchers"? President
didn't come out squarely against state-funded vouchers.

p.5, last sentence: The fact that 90% of all children are in public
schools does not necessarily provide support for the proposition that most
Americans agree with the President's opposition to vouchers (some would
argue that they may simply have no other choice).  I would use the 90%
enrollment figure as support for why we must continue to reform public
schools -- as they                  .
are the schools that the overwhelming majority of our students attend,
and will continue to be likely to attend even with vouchers.


p.16, 2nd para: We must build the highest quality educational system
that will provide Americans of all backgrounds the opportunity to excel
[delete: continuously learn] .

p.16, last para: Need to check that data supports a racial disparity in
class size.  In some places - like DC, urban schools have better teacher


ratios -- everyone fleeing to suburbs. Also, should probably highlight, a
major step that we have already taken (in addition to one that is in its
first year)  to close opportunity gap is Title I -- holding students
accountable to the same high standards, getting rid of watered-down
curriculum and lower expectations. Need to push this along, class size
will help. Minority students especially benefit from one-on-one
interaction and results last.

Chapter B -- Centerpiece:   How is the accountability here the same and/or
different from ESEA? We need to have thought this out - especially since
the race book and ESEA will hit the public around the same time frame.  Is
the compact flexibility more, the same or less than that in Ed-Flex?


p.22   Mentions "shock therapy .   will districts will willingly sign up
for this?

p.22 Miami Fl example. A great example of turning around failing schools,
but not necessarily of closing the gap in racial achievement.   Data
probably shows that minority students still underperforming peers at
those schools.   Florida has recognized this problem by establishing
special reward for schools that improve while also improving across racial
categories.   (Should get more info from Florida Dept of ED)

P 25-27 - repeats arguments in introduction.    Needs editing to use best
of the arguments about the conditions of schooling for children in poor
schools, mention of earlier administration reforms seem to be too far at
the end of the chapter.

National Work plan

p.31 - Head Start discussion should mention the progress that we've made
in increasing funding for this program. Discussion simply mentions the
funding level.

p.32 -- We should check results from E.O. on service (POTUS asked agencies
to review flex plans to provide opportunities for service) to be sure that
federal employees have flexibility to volunteer at their schools every
month before we suggest it as a national goal.

p.33 -- do we want to take on the local school finance system -- is that
suggested by "I hope much more change of this sort is on the way."

p.34 -- Footnote 44 states that after controlling for poverty, teacher
quality has the largest impact on disparities in achievement between black
and white students.  Should the "compact" focus on community-wide efforts
to improve teacher quality? Especially since we are trying to reduce
class size and phase out unqualified teachers in ESEA.

p.35 -- Need to mention our efforts to recruit teachers to high-poverty
schools, Troops to Teachers, Native American teachers and other
recruitment efforts.

p.35 - Footnote 46 -- need to add information on how 1994 Title I reforms
moved states to align curriculums with challenging academic standards.

p.39 - Administration has secured increased funding for training teachers
to work with LEP studepts, should reference this.

p.40 -- safety discussion should talk reiterate the principles of our Safe
\.




and Drug free reauthorization i.e. using proven practices, a comprehensive
school-wide approach, report cars that include safety and drug-use data.

p.41 -- It seems that a discussion on high standards and accountability
would come first in the nation's work plan.   This discussion doesn't
really address solutions -- be they federal (high standards in Title I)
state (state standards and assessments) or other actors (teachers).

p.45 Charter schools --   New York should not be used as example of
"charter" school -- they just passed their law.  The schools that are
profiled in NY are part of a specially-designated group of schools -- good
example of choice, but not charter.


