RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-MAR-1999 15:10:56.00

SUBJECT:   late ... and lightweight

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP'[ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
BR:

Here are some comments on the new Edley draft.  I'm afraid I didn't spend
too much time on them, so they may not offer much more than my initial
comments. But here goes ...


Some comments on race book draft:

1. Additional facts/stats on victimization rates and criminal offending.
I would add some additional points here to help make the facts clear.
First, I would add (page '3, paragraph 2, after line 2) that blacks
represent nearly 50 percent of all violent crime victims. This is pretty
startling and should be mentioned.   (Actually, the number is 49 percent
according to the 1997 National Crime Victimization Survey, which -- by the
way -- was released at the end of last year and is not o&forthcoming,08 as
the footnotes say.)  Second, to reinforce the connection between higher
rates of victimization and offending, I would add (on page 5, paragraph 2,
after line 3) that blacks are 7 times more likely than whites to be
murdered -- and 8 times more likely than whites to commit homicide (BJS,
Homicide Trends in the U.S., 12/98). Also, we could mention that over the
past 20 years, black on black murders have accounted for about half of all
murders in our 10 largest cities. Finally, I would change the final
sentence in that same paragraph to read: o&Overall, however, whites commit
a majority of all crime.o8 I think this is a bit more accurate.

2.  Some thought on the community section (Page 6, paragraph 2).   I would
drop the first 3 lines here -- what do they mean? -- and change the focus
of this paragraph.   Instead of asking rhetorically why this conditions
exist, why donD,t we simply open by saying that -- despite what some may
think -- the past several years have shown us that we dono,t have too
tolerate these conditions; that we can substantially reduce crime -- even
the worst kinds (i.e., crack, guns, etc.) and in the neighborhoods with
the worst crime problems; and that the skeptics are wrong. We could even
give an example or two of inner city communities that are winning the
fight against crime.



Also, I would try and shift the emphasis of the next paragraph -- make it
principally about strong communities, not poverty demographics, etc.    For
instance, we should open that paragraph by saying that studies show that
strong communities -- those with a strong sense of shared values ... where
people to act to reinforce those values ... and where this sense of
responsibility is coupled with opportunity for all, especially young
people -- have lower rates of violence (In fact, according to the ongoing
Sampson/Earls Chicago Study, this shared sense of community is the biggest
predictor of violence ... by 40 percent). Then I would get into the fact
that pervasive poverty (lack of opportunity), broken families, etc., all
serve to undermine the strength of a community.

3. Chief Greenberg (page 13, last paragraph). The point on mentioning
Chief Greeberg was two-fold: first, that Clinton visited with him and
became sold on community policing; and second, that Greenberg as a
no-nonsense police chief, in the deep south, who was cracking down on
criminals, reducing crime, and simultaneously strengthening ties to the
community.  In short: he was overcoming many of the difficult issues
surround race and crime.  It is probably worth walking through this
example some.

4. Community Justice D&hot spotsD8 (page 15, last paragraph).   I continue
to believe that the term D&community justiceD8 does not clearly
communicate what weD,re trying to do here.  We are trying to bring the
lessons learned from community policing to the rest of the criminal
justice system. That means that prosecutors, courts, and other components
of the criminal justice system need to re-orient their emphasis from the
bureaucratic processing of cases to pro-actively solving peopleD,s
problems. They need to engage the community, understand local problems,
embrace solutions and strategies that address those problems, and be held
accountable for results.  We should probably walk through examples of how
neighborhood district attorneys, community courts, etc., are responding to
community needs, reducing crime and increasing confidence in the criminal
justice system. This is considerably different than the D&multiple hoses
to the fireD8 approach described.

Moreover, the D&multiple hosesD8 approach, as described in the draft,
sounds too much like the Bush AdministrationD,s response to the LA riots
-- Weed and Seed -- and our own under-achieving empowerment zones
program.   ItO,s not new policy that builds on the success of community
policing, but the same old community development rhetoric/policy that has
lar'gely failed.  No federally-mandated, comprehensive plan is going to
help overcome the most difficult crime and race problems in our
communities. However, federal resources that allow local leadership to
work with their community to solve specific problems -- one-by-one --
might help.

4.  Hot button issues.  I would resubmit the same concerns I had before I
had about race profiling, police brutality, and incarceration.  I am
especially concerned about the initial characterization of how law
enforcement officers use race profiling, which will be strongly disputed
by law enforcement at all levels -- and do little to increase
understanding of this difficult issue.


