RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jennifer M. Palmieri ( CN=Jennifer M. Palmieri/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-MAR-1999 16:26:02.00

SUBJECT:    fyi: Articles from FL papers on HR 540

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Loretta M. Ucelli ( CN=Loretta M. Ucelli/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Stacie Spector ( CN=Stacie Spector/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Douglas B. Sosnik ( CN=Douglas B. Sosnik/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Nursing homes ... they are huge.
---------------------- Forwarded by Jennifer M. Palmieri/WHO/EOP on
03/26/99 04:08 PM ---------------------------




JULIE B. GOLDBERG
03/26/99 08:41:38 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject:         fyi: Articles from FL papers on HR 540

Tampa Tribune: Nursing-home bill becomes law
(main feature of a special report on Nursing Homes)
            By LINDSAY PETERSON and JACQUELINE SOTEROPOULOS
                             of The Tampa Tribune


        WASHINGTON - Motivated by flagrant Medicaid patient dumping, a Tampa
        couple watches the president turn their cause into the law of the
land.

      Eleven months after a Tampa nursing home tried to evict his elderly
mother, Nelson
      Mongiovi stood Thursday in the Oval Office and watched President
Clinton turn his
      goal into national law.

      With much of the world's attention turned to U.S.-led strikes
against Yugoslavia,
      Clinton conducted a quiet signing ceremony Thursday morning with the
Mongiovis and
      Florida lawmakers determined to prevent Medicaid patient dumping.

      "This was an important issue for us and the country,"     Mongiovi
said, holding the


      keepsake pens that Clinton used to sign the legislation. His wife,
Geri, added, " I t was
      just kind of a hope and a dream that we could get something to pro
tect everyone."

      The Mongiovis brought to light the attempt last year of Vencor Inc.
to evict all 54 of
      its Medicaid residents from a nursing home in Tampa. U.S. Rep. Jim
Davis, a Tampa
      Democrat and the author of the House bill, said the Mongiovis' succes
s shows "that
      when someone sees an injustice ... we can do the right thing. We can
get something
      done.I   I




      Nelson Mongiovi credited The Tampa Tribune for writing stories that
exposed
      Vencor's actions and led to an end to the company's policies.

      Now, a loophole that Vencor exploited to rid some of its other
nursing homes of
      Medicaid residents is closed. U.S. Sen. Bob Graham, D- Miami Lakes,
and U.S.
      Rep. Michael Bilirakis, R-Palm Harbor, wrote the law with Davis.

      At Vencor's Rehabilitation and Health Care Center of Tampa, the
company used the
      pretense of remodeling to attempt to discharge Medicaid residents in
favor of
      higher-paying patients.

      But in other states, Vencor was getting rid of Medicaid residents by
withdrawing from
      the Medicaid program, which covers health care costs for the poor
and pays far less
      than private sources and Medicare, the program for people 65 and old
er.

      The new federal law requires homes that quit Medicaid to keep their
Medicaid
      residents. And if a home doesn't take Medicaid, it must make that
clear to prospective
      residents.

      "It's a good bill. It's needed,"  said Ed Boyer, lawyer with the
Florida Long-Term
      Care Ombudsman Program, a government-sponsored advocacy group. But
it's not a
      cure-all, he said.

      IT WAS WRITTEN to address the problem of all evictions, but many
people are
      asked to move quietly, one by one, when Medicaid begins paying their
bills after their
      Medicare coverage or private savings run out, Boyer said.

      State and federal laws have long existed to protect people from such
moves, but
      advocates say these laws are repeatedly flouted by some nursing home
officials.



      " I think some of these people stay up late trying to find new ways
to make people
      leave,"  said Martie Daemy, a local ombudsman coordinator.

      And many residents and their families don't fight back, either
because they don't
      understand the laws or they're afraid and exhausted.

     Davis said he realized the bill didn't offer absolute protection.

      State and federal regulators have a lot of responsibility as well,
Davis said.

      Chris Jennings, a Clinton health policy adviser, said the
administration is committed to
      working with the states to inform Medicaid patients and their
families about their rights
      under the new law.

      Clinton has also proposed giving more federal money to the states to
enforce nursing
      home laws.

      And Boyer is encouraged by a proposal now before the Florida
Legislature that
      would strengthen the ombudsman program and make it easier for
residents to appeal
      a discharge.

      The bill emerged from an investigation of the Vencor case by the
Senate Health, Aging
      and Long- Term Care Committee, which concluded that improper
discharges were
      hard to track but "fairly common."

      VENCOR WAS FOILED because the Mongiovis met with other family members
      and challenged the company's actions. But, the report said, if
Vencor had told the
      residents to go, one by one, over a period of time, family members
might never have
      become suspicious. One woman did complain recently when her mother
was told she
      had to leave her nursing home, IHS of Brandon. And it resulted last
month in the
      home being fined and banned from accepting new residents.

     The mother's Medicare was running out and she was told the home had
no Medicaid
     beds so it was moving her to a nursing home in north Hillsborough.

      "She was hysterical,"   said her daughter, Judy Vargas.

      This is a flagrant violation of the law, advocates say.

      Many nursing homes are required to serve a certain number of people
on Medicaid,
      but they're always allowed to serve more. So it's impossible to not
have a Medicaid
      bed available for someone who's already a resident, Boyer said.



      Regulations say residents can be forced to leave only under n,
specific circumstances -
      when if the facility can't meet the resident's needs, or the
resident is in danger, poses a
      danger to other residents, is well enough to leave the home or has
failed to pay for
      services.

      Residents cannot be discharged simply because their money starts
coming from a
      lower-paying source, Boyer said.

      MoS~ people come into nursing homes with their own savings, private
insurance or
      Medicare. But when payments from those sources run out, usually in a
matter of
      months, Medicaid takes over.

      Medicaid, however, only pays about $3,000 a month, 50 percent to 150
percent less
      than private payments and Medicare.

      The regulations also say that every resident facing a discharge must
be given a written
      notice 30 days in advance containing information on how to file an
appeal.

      But a lot of people don't realize they can appeal, said David Hicks
of the state
      Department of Elder Affairs. As supervisor of a division in Pinellas
and Pasco that
      determines whether people qualify for nursing home Medicaid
coverage, he sees
      about 15 suspicious discharge attempts a month, he said.

      People in this situation are overwhelmed, he said, and don't take
the time to read the
      discharge notices. Even when they do, many choose not to appeal.

      "They're afraid. They say 'if they don't want my family member, we
shouldn't stay
      here,I   Hicks said. "They let themselves be intimidated."

     THE DISCHARGE NOTICES can be confusing, Boyer said. Some are altered
to
      suit a nursing home's needs. He saw one recently that gave a
resident the option to
      waive the right to appeal, he said.

     Nursing home companies say the core of the problem is low government
     reimbursements.

      " I fear we're always going to have a problem in this area,"   said
Steve Rachin, head of
      the state ombudsman program. And the problems may only get worse as
new
      Medicare rules go into effect, the Senate committee said, because
they cut payments
      for many services Medicare has covered generously in the past.



      But the federal nursing home laws were written to protect residents.

     Companies may get more money for certain residents, Rachin said.
"But that doesn't
     give them the right to flout the laws."

      Lindsay Peterson covers aging issues and can be reached at (813)
259-7834.
      Jacqueline Soteropoulos covers federal government and can be reached
at (202)
      662-7673.

Miami Herald:    Nursing homes barred from patient 'dumping'

                By DONNA LEINWAND
                Herald Washington Bureau

                WASHINGTON -- The legacy of a Florida woman became law
Thursday,
             turning the tragedy of a nursing home eviction into
protection for elderly people
             who depend on Medicaid to live.

             The new legislation prohibits nursing home operators who
withdraw from the
             Medicaid program from evicting residents after they have
exhausted tOheir personal
             savings and turn to public assistance to pay for their stay.
It took effect with
             President Clinton's signature Thursday morning.

             "There is an enormous temptation to put profits ahead of
patients, " said Rep. Jim
             Davis, a Tampa Democrat who sponsored the legislation in the
House with Rep.
             Mike Bilirakis, a Republican from Clearwater. "A nursing
home is not going to
             use patient dumping to balance its books."

             Democratic Sen. Bob Graham of Miami Lakes sponsored the
legislation in the
             Senate.

             The quest for the new law began in Tampa after a facility
owned by one of the
             nation's largest nursing home operators, Vencor, sent
eviction notices to 54 oof its
             poorest residents. Among them was Adelaida Mongiovi, a
93-year-old woman
             suffering from senile dementia. Her son and daughter-in-law,
Nelson and Geri
             Mongiovi, got a court injunction to stop the evictions and
took her cause to the
             newspapers and lawmakers, learning a lesson in activism in
the process.

              "If you don't bring issues to your lawmakers, they cannot
work for you, " Nelson
              Mongiovi said. "If you need to be heard, by God, come to


Washington. ' ,

             Before the law passed, nursing homes could reduce or
eliminate the number of
             beds available to Medicaid patients with 30 days' notice to
the residents being
             evicted. Under the new legislation, nursing homes can stop a
ccepting Medicaid
             patients, but they cannot kick out patients who already live
there and become
             eligible for Medicaid during their stay.

             Nursing homes may choose not to accept Medicaid patients, but
they must notify
             new residents up front that if they spend down their assets
and become eligible for
             the federal-state insurance program for the poor, they could
be forced to move.
             Nursing home stays on average cost about $40,000 a year,
making Medicaid
             likely for all but the wealthiest patients.

             Vencor eventually reversed its decision to evict its Medicaid
residents, but in
             letters to lawmakers and the Clinton administration, company
executives
             complained that Medicaid rates are too low to cover the cost
of adequate care.

             Adelaida Mongiovi did not live to see the law that her plight
inspired. She died in
             November. But the Mongiovis stood in the Oval Office on
Thursday to watch
             President Clinton sign the bill. They emerged with official
presidential pens.

Associated Press(tops Orlando Sentinel Story wi photo): Nursing home
victory. President
 Clinton signs into law the Nursing Home Resident Protection Act of
1999. The legislation provides
new protections to nursing homepatients who rely on Medicaid to pay for
their care. Joining the
president from left are: the bill's sponsor Rep. Jim Davis, D-Fla.; Nelson
Mongiovi, Tampa, Fla.;
Sen. Bob Graham, D-Fla.; Geraldine Mongiovi, Tampa, Fla.; Rep. Michael
Bilirakis, D-Fla.; Alice
Hedt of the National Citizen's Coalition for Nursing Home Reform, and Sen.
William Roth, R-Del.

             Orlando Sentinel:         He won long battle on nursing homes

                   Published in The Orlando Sentinel on March 26, 1999.

                  Tamara Lytle
                   Washington Bureau

              WASHINGTON -- Nelson Mongiovi, a retired letter carrier from
Tampa, said he is not usually
the kind of guy to raise a ruckus.


            But he became outraged when a Tampa nursing home
            tried to boot out his ailing mother. He took his case to
            court, to state officials and eventually to Congress.

            On Thursday, he found himself standing in the Oval
            Office behind President Clinton to witness the results of
            his yearlong protest: Never again will a nursing home be
            able to evict a patient accepted as part of the Medicaid
            program in order to make room for a more lucrative
            client.

            "All nursing home residents deserve quality care, and this
            bill provides the needed protections to help ensure the
            health and safety of all residents," Clinton said after the
            Oval Office signing ceremony.

            The ordeal for.Mongiovi and his wife, Geri, began a
            year ago when they opened the mail to find an eviction
            notice from Vencor Inc., owner of the Healthcare and
            Rehabilitation Center of Tampa. Adela Mongiovi, in her
            90s, had lived with Nelson and Geri for 22 years until
            her Alzheimer's disease required 24-hour care.

            At the Tampa nursing home, Adela Mongiovi and other
            residents with dementia had enjoyed a certain familiarity
            in being wheeled to the same spot each day and sitting
            beside the same people, said Geri Mongiovi.

            And now they were about to be split up -- dispersed to
            whatever homes could take them.

            "The people were crying: 'This is my home. This is my
            home. Where am I going?' " 55-year-old Geri Mongiovi,
            a secretary, said after Clinton signed the bill.

            Vencor wanted out of the Medicaid business and was
            evicting 54 residents. Medicaid, a federal program for
            the poor, pays nursing homes a set amount per patient
            that is decided by the state.

            Patients who paid their own way -- at $40,000 a year
            on average -- were more lucrative for the homes. That
            steep a bill wouldn't have been possible for Adela
            Mongiovi, a homemaker whose late husband was a shoe
            repairman.

            Booting out the residents would have been legal if
            Vencor first had dropped out of Medicaid. Because it
            hadn't -- and because the Mongiovis put up a fuss --
            Vencor paid stiff fines to the state and now faces a
            class-action suit.

            State courts also ordered Vencor to stop the evictions.
            But Vencor, one of the nation's largest nursing home
            companies, also was moving to evict people in
            Indianapolis. The Mongiovis wanted to close the
            loophole that would have made the evictions legal if
            Vencor had first applied to drop out of Medicaid.

            So they took their case to Sen. Bob Graham and to


              Rep. Michael Bilirakis, R-Palm Harbor, and Rep. Jim
              Davis, D-Tampa. Their legislation requires that residents
              admitted with Medicaid coverage be allowed to stay in
              their homes, even if the facility drops out of Medicaid.

              And homes that don't take Medicaid patients must warn
              potential clients, so that people who might run out of
              savings and need Medicaid can choose a different
              facility.

              Even the nursing homes declined to oppose·the popular
              bill. Rep. Tom Coburn, R-Okla., complained that
              nursing homes might flee the Medicaid program for fear
              of being stuck with money-losing patients. States might
              use the law as leverage to deprive nursing homes of
              adequate Medicaid reimbursement, Coburn warned.

              Vencor representatives declined comment this week but
              has complained that Congress should do more to keep
              reimbursement rates up or face the probability of more
              nursing homes rejecting all Medicaid patients.

              The bill passed unanimously in the Senate and by a
              398-12 vote in the House.

              On Thursday, a tired-looking Clinton welcomed the
              Mongiovis to the Oval Office for a signing ceremony and
              thanked them for their activism. Nelson Mongiovi said
              he was grateful to the president for taking the time,
              despite the Kosovo crisis, which caused Clinton to
              cancel other parts of his public schedule Thursday.

              Standing in front of the White House after the ceremony,
              59-year-old Nelson Mongiovi fiddled with the two
              official "William J. Clinton" pens he will give his grown
              sons. He had learned a lesson, he said, that if you see
              some injustice "don't just jump off the bridge."

              His mother died last fall at age 93. Nelson and Geri
              Mongiovi still visit her nursing home daily to bring cheer
              to all her former neighbors. "This is a good memorial to
              her and all the elderly people.    . who cannot speak for
              themselves," he said.

              Nelson Mongiovi, with salt-and-pepper hair and a
              steady voice, is now a convert to the world of activism.
              His next project already is in sight. The average time a
              nursing home resident spends with a staff member is just
              one hour and 40 minutes a day, he said.

              [Posted 03/25/1999 10:34 PM EST]

St. Petersburg Times:   Nursing home residents protected

                        By KATHERINE PFLEGER

                        . St. Petersburg Times, published March 26, 1999


                        WASHINGTON -- President Clinton signed a bill


Thursday
                      that will let nursing home residents who rely on
Medicaid keep
                      their beds -- permanently.

                      The new law forbids nursing homes from evicting
residents
                      who pay their bills with federal-state health
insurance for the
                      poor.

                      "We have the completion of ... a very positive
American
                      affirmation of its commitment to its older
citizens," Florida
                      Democrat Bob Graham, the bill's Senate sponsor, told
                      reporters outside the White House.

                      Last year, the Rehabilitation and Healthcare Center
of Tampa,
                      owned by Vencor,   illegally tried to evict 54
residents on
                      Medicaid to replace them with patients carrying more
                      profitable insurance.

                      Geraldine Mongiovi, the mother-in-law of an
                      Alzheimer's-afflicted resident who was scheduled
for eviction,
                      says the experience was heart-breaking. She and her
husband,
                      Nelson, got a court order to stop Vencor and
launched an
                      11-month campaign to fix the problem nationally.

                      "Even if (patients) are demented, and they can't
speak for
                      themselves, they go to the same spots every day in
their
                      wheelchairs, they sit next to the same residents.
There's some
                      familiarity," Mongiovi said after attending the
bill signing in the
                      Oval Office.

                      About 91 percent of nursing homes take Medicaid and
can
                      leave the program at any time. If they do, under
the new law,
                      they are required to keep their current Medicaid
patients and
                      warn potential patients that they are no longer
accepting
                      Medicaid.

                      Tampa Democrat Jim Davis, the bill's House sponsor,
said the
                      new rules allow families to shop around for a home
that fits
                      their needs.

·
                              "Nursing homes have a right to participate in the
    Medicaid
                              program, but they are not going to use patient
    dumping as a
                              way to balance the books," he said.

                              The legislation is Davis' first bill to become law.

                              Though it flew through Congress with bipartisan
    support, a few
                              House critics argued that the bill would force
    facilities to keep
                              patients they could not afford, decreasing care and
                              bankrupting facilities.

                              "It's something that possibly might happen," said
    Rep. Michael
                              Bilirakis, R-Palm Harbor.     "But by gosh you don't
    hold back a
                              piece of good legislation because of something that
    possibly
                              might happen."

                                 ~ra ·
                               ·l·i k ~s, t h e Hea lth and ·
                              B~                           Env~ronment Sub ·
                                                                         comm~ttee
    chairman,                      I
                              said that Congress has ordered a study of Medicaid
                              rei~ursement rates and that if facilities are
    losing money,
                              ",Le"in   g will be done abouc H.·




    Message Sent
                             1
    TO: ______________________+-_____________________________________________
    Jennifer M. Palmieri/WHb/EOP
                           I
    Beverly J. Barnes/WHO/EOP
    Christopher C. Jennin~k/oPD/EOP
    Devorah R. Adler/OPD/EOP
    Elisa Millsap/WHO/EOP!
    Karin Kullman/OPD/EO~
    Dario J. Gomez/WHO/E'P


