RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES.MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-MAR-1999 18:29:36.00

SUBJECT:   DOL public statement on wage collection data

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Henry Solano the Solicitor from Labor made a public statement yesterday
that Labor will push ahead on its scheduling request, currently pending at
OMB, to collect detailed wage information at an earlier stage of the
compliance review process.  Even though we agreed internally that we would
collect wage data, we did not decide how we might modify the original
proposal to do it, and Solano's statements indicate that Labor will not
modify its position at all. This has angered employer groups, particularly
because they met with Gotbaum who assured them they could meet with Labor
in order to have input into the process.  The employer groups haven't met
with Labor yet, and now there is less incentive to do so.  Attached is an
article that appeared in BNA today.
---------------------- Forwarded by Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP on 03/26/99
06:22 PM ---------------------------




Daniel J. Chenok
03/26/99 06:19:06 PM
Record Type:     Record

To:      Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         DOL article


---------------------- Forwarded by Daniel J. Chenok/OMB/EOP on 03/26/99
06:19 PM ---------------------------



No. 58
Friday March 26,   1999
ISSN 1523-567X
Regulation, Law & Economics

Government Contracts
Labor Department will Push Forward
On Early Pay Data Request, Solicitor Says


BOCA RATON, Fla.--The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs is
pushing ahead with a controversial decision to request pay information
from federal contractors at an earlier stage of the compliance review
process, according to the Department of Labor's top lawyer.
DOL officials are preparing to argue to the Office of Management and
Budget that the changes in data collection--which have been criticized by
employer groups--are exempt from OMB review, recently installed Solicitor
of Labor Henry Solano told a meeting of labor lawyers March 25.
Although the department temporarily recalled the proposal--which had been
awaiting OMB approval--for additional study last month, Solano said that
DOL is now preparing to reiterate its position to the federal budget
office--that the changes are warranted, are within the Labor Department's
jurisdiction, and "are not subject to OMB review."
The proposal, which was first sent to the federal budget office at the end
of December, met with widespread criticism from employer groups--both for
its substance and what one attorney characterized as the "backdoor"
procedure in advancing the document. Employers argued that providing the
sensitive pay data at such an early stage of the review process could have
a serious negative impact on employers. "Compensation data is inherently
sensitive," noted one employer advocate and providing the information at s
uch an early stage could put employers at a competitive disadvantage and
make them "vulnerable to lawsuits and public relations attacks."
'Form over Substance'
Solano briefly addressed the department's position on the proposal during
a presentation to the mid-winter meeting of the ABA Labor and Employment
Law Section's Equal Employment Opportunity Committee. The mid-winter
meeting continues here through March 27.
The pay information has "always been available to OFCCP, " he asserted and
the criticism over the proposed change amounts to one of "form over
substance."
OFCCP is the Labor Department office that oversees the affirmative action
obligations of federal contractors and subcontractors under Executive
Order 11246 and other statutes. The office conducts its oversight
investigations through a multistep approach, initially subjecting a
selected contractor to a "desk audit" that sets the stage for a possible
on-site review and the initiation of enforcement proceedings. The office
conducts about 2,800 general compliance reviews annually.
currently, at the desk audit stage, the government requires employers to
submit an affirmative action plan, support data, including a copy of the
standard Employer Information Report, EEO-l, a copy of applicable
collective bargaining contracts, and a report of results of affirmative
action goals for the preceding year, with data on employment activity. The
new proposal, however, seeks detailed compensation information for
specific individuals in all positions.
"All that has happened is we're asking for the information earlier--in the
investigative stage," Solano said.
The solicitor also asserted that the department is prepared to re-argue
the position it took initially, when the proposal was quietly sent to OMB
last year--that the changes are exempt from the Paperwork Reduction Act
and do not require approval from the federal budget agency. "I'm
optimistic that they will recognize the exemption," Solano said.
'More Focused Reviews'
Expanding on the substance of the proposed change after his formal
presentation, Solano told BNA that the approach is intended to lead to
"more focused"  reviews of federal contractors and a more efficient
compliance review system. The changes, he suggested, would be beneficial
to employers, as well as the federal enforcement agency.
The contractors asked to supply the pay data are not randomly chosen,
Solano stressed, but have already been identified by OFCCP as potentially
violating the laws and regulations. "The companies who get scheduling


requests are under investigation," he explained.
With employers supplying the pay data at an earlier stage,   contract
compliance officers will be able to do more thorough initial
investigations, hone in on specific problems, and complete their reviews
more efficiently, Solano suggested.
"If the information is provided sooner, it can have a pro-active impact,"
he said. The change will permit OFCCP to conduct narrower reviews, he
posited. Getting the pay data earlier, he said, will lead to "more
effective, efficient" compliance reviews.
Solano, former U.S. Attorney for Colorado, also acknowledged the
"legitimate concerns" of employers regarding release of proprietary pay
information.
"We can be strong in asserting our right to that information," he said.
"But we have to be just as vigilant in protecting its non-disclosure.
That's our commitment."

By Nancy Montwieler

Copyright. 1999 by The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., Washington D.C.


