RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey L. Farrow ( CN=Jeffrey L. Farrow/OU=WHOIO=EOP [ WHO 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-MAR-1999 19:51:48.00

SUBJECT:   Puerto Rico & Our Schools Bill

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The Dept. of Ed's budget office gave the reasons below for proposing
unequal funding of Puerto Rico in the Even Start, Safe & Drug Free
Schools, and Migratory Children's Education sections of their draft
Elementary and Secondary Ed Bill. The draft would continue the current
provision providing 21% aid for Title I programs in PR vs. 32% in the
States. The reasons would not be considered good ones by Puerto Ricans
and others, but I have no doubt they are the reasons for the current law.

1. The draft would continue current law.   Comment: That will not go over
as a good policy reason for the President proposing unequal treatment.

2.  Puerto Ricans don't pay most taxes. Comment: The kids denied the
benefits of equal funding wouldn't pay the taxes not applied in PR in any
case. Many will wind up in the States less well educated.   If taxes is
the standard, why do we give PRs much anything at all? And why do we
treat the other insular areas better than the States in several Education
programs? Should we propose commensurate taxation or other cost-sharing
contributions from PR?

3.   Puerto Rico doesn't have votes.  Comment: Crass (reality).  If that's
the standard, why do we treat Puerto Rico equally in most laws? Again, why
do we treat the other insular areas better than the States in some Ed
programs? (Fact: There were Delegates on the House committee the last
ESEA reauthorization.)

4.   Cost. Comment:   Should education be the area to treat PR unequally?
Should we·phase-in equal treatment to make the increase less of a burden?
Why then treat other territorial areas better than equal? .( there's a 1%
set-aside for the smaller territories, which have less than 1/10 PR's
population. )

George Miller, second ranking Dem. on the committee, is concerned about
this. Romero-Barcelo, also on the committee, will make a push.
