RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-MAR-1999 18:34:19.00

SUBJECT:   questionnaire & speeches

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D29]MAIL478842002.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504389090000010A02010000000205000000CA6D000000020000DC808F142831CD9A3AFC9A
B81CDF4FFABAB46E9522984F484El166573FADE47C38FFF8CDOEF74F955734E14E31F39A4F9827
A929E324746046AB9DEA61EAF46AFED2ECFC5E63E2E9E5508B22DA4AB308A2C2A9E7CB65468FDA
9A1E9363BE88E8CB764E766E39A59BF6283963356C583BD5DF13CF29A7DD84C3DEOFDCAA53DB24
                                                            Hex.Dwnp Conversion
                   I. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION (PUBLIC)


1.    Full name (include any former names used.)

2.    Address: List current place of residence and office address(es).

3.    Date and place of birth.

4.    Marital Status (include maiden name of wife, or husband's name). List spouse's
      occupation, employer's name and business address(es).

5.    Education: List each college and law school you have attended, including dates of
      attendance, degrees received, and dates degrees were granted.

6.    Employment Record: List (by year) all businesses or professional corporations,
      companies, firms, or other enterprises, partnerships, institutions and organizations,
      nonprofit or otherwise, including firms, with which you were connected as an
      officer, director, partner, proprietor, or employee since graduation from college.

7.    Military Service: Have you had any military service? If so, give particulars,
      including the dates, branch of service, rank or rate, serial number and type of
      discharge received.

8.    Honors and Awards: List any scholarships, fellowships, honorary degrees, and
      honorary society memberships that you believe would be of interest of the
      Committee.

9.    Bar Associations: List all bar associations, legal or judicial-related committees or
      conferences of which you are or have been a member and give the titles and dates of
      any offices which you have held in such groups.

10:   Other Memberships: List all organizations to which you belong that are active in
      lobbying before public bodies. Please list all other organizations to which you
      belong.

11.   Court Admission: List all courts in which you have been admitted to practice, with
      dates of admission and lapses if any such memberships lapsed. Please explain the
      reason for any lapse of membership. Give the same information for administrative
      bodies which require special admission to practice.

12.   Published Writings: List the title, publishers, and dates of books, articles, reports,
      or other published material you have written or edited. Please supply one copy of
      all published materials not readily available to the Committee. Also, please supply
      a copy of all speeches by you on issues involving constitutional law or legal policy.
      If there were press reports about the speech, and they are readily available to you,
      please supply them.
13.   Health: What is the present state of your health? List the date of your last physical
      examination.                                          Hex.Dwnp Conversion

14.   Judicial Office: State (chronologically) any judicial offices you have held, whether
      such position was elected or appointed, and a description of the jurisdiction of each
      such court.

15.   Citations: If you are or have been a judge, provide: (1) citations for the ten most
      significant opinions you have written; (2) a short summary of and citations for all
      appellate opinions where your decisions were reversed or where your judgement
      was affirmed with significant criticism of your substantive or procedural rulings;
      and (3) citations for significant opinions on federal or state constitutional issues,
      together with the citation to appellate court rulings on such opinions. If any of the
      opinions listed were not officially reported, please provide copies of the opinions.

16.   Public Office: State (chronologically) any public offices you have held, other than
      judicial offices, including the terms of service and whether such positions were
      elected or appointed. State (chronologically) any unsuccessful candidacies for
      elective public office.

17.   Legal Career:

      a. Describe chronologically your law practice and experience after graduation from
         law school including:

         1. whether you served as clerk to a judge, and if so, the name of the judge, the
            court, and the dates of the period you were a clerk;

         2. whether you practiced alone, and if so, the addresses and dates;

         3. the dates, names and addresses of law firms or offices, companies or
            governmental agencies with which you have been connected, and the nature
            of your connection with each;

      b. 1. What has been the general character of your law practice, dividing it into
            periods with dates if its character has changed over the years?

         2. Describe your typical former clients, and mention the areas, if any, in which
            you have specialized.

      c. 1. Did you appear in court frequently, occasionally, or not at all? If the
            frequency of your appearances in court varied, describe each such variance,
            giving dates.

         2. What percentage of these appearances was in:
            (a) federal courts;
            (b) state courts of record;
            (c) other courts.
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
         3. What percentage of your litigation was:
            (a) civil;
            (b) criminal.

         4. State the number of cases in courts of record you tried to verdict or judgment
            (rather than settled), indicating whether you were sole counsel, chief counsel,
            or associate counsel.

         5. What percentage of these trials was:
            (a) jury;
            (b) non-jury.

18.   Litigation: Describe the ten most significant litigated matters which you personally
      handled. Give the citations, if the cases were reported, and the docket number and
      date if unreported. Give a capsule summary of the substance of each case.
      Identify the party or parties whom you represented; describe in detail the nature of
      your participation in the litigation and the final disposition of the case. Also state
      as to each case:

         (a)     the date of representation;
         (b)     the name ofthe court and the name of the judge or judges before whom
                 the case was litigated; and
         (c)     the individual name, addresses, and telephone numbers of co-counsel and
                 of principal counsel for each of the other parties.

19.   Legal Activities: Describe the most significant legal activities you have pursued,
      including significant litigation which did not progress to trial or legal matters that
      did not involve litigation. Describe the nature of your participation in this
      question, please omit any information protected by the attorney-client privilege
      (unless the privilege has been waived.)
                                                                            1 an
                                                                                 crcment System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion

        II. FINANCIAL DATA AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST (PUBLIC)

1.   List sources, amounts and dates of all anticipated receipts from deferred income
     arrangements, stock, options, uncompleted contracts and other future benefits
     which you expect to derive from previous business relationships, professional
     services, firm memberships, former employers, clients, or customers. Please
     describe the arrangements you have made to be compensated in the future for any
     financial or business interest.

2.   Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest, including the
     procedure you will follow in determining these areas of concern. Identify the
     categories of litigation and financial arrangements that are likely to present
     potential conflicts-of-interest during your initial service in the position to which you
     have been nominated.

3.   Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements to pursue outside employment,
     with or without compensation, during your service with the court? If so, explain:

4.   List sources and amounts of all income received during the calendar year preceding
     your nomination and for the current calendar year, including all salaries, fees,
     dividends, interest, gifts, rents, royalties, patents, honoraria, and other items
     exceeding $500 or more (If you prefer to do so, copies of the fmancial disclosure
     report, required by the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, may be substitutes here.)

5.   Please complete the attached financial net worth statement in detail (Add
     schedules as called for).

6.   Have you ever held a position or played a role in a political campaign? If so, please
     identify the particulars of the campaign, including the candidate, dates of the
     campaign, your title and responsibilities.
                                               NET WORTH                   Hex-Dump Conversion

         Provide a complete, current financial net worth statement which itemizes in detail all assets
(including bank account, real estate, securities, trusts, investments, and other financial holdings) all
liabilities (including debts, mortgages, loans, and other financial obligations) of yourself, your spouse, and
other Imme d'  late mem b ers 0 f your h ouse h 0 Id ,
                            ASSETS                                              LIABILITIES
Cash on hand and in banks                              Notes payable to banks - secured

  U.S. Government securities - add                     Notes payable to banks - unsecured
 schedule

  Listed securities - add schedule                     Notes payable to relatives

  Unlisted securities - add schedule                   Notes payable to others

  Accounts and notes receivable:                       Accounts and bills due

     Due from relatives and friends                    Unpaid income tax

     Due from others                                   Other unpaid tax and interest

     Doubtful                                          Real estate mortgages payable - add
                                                      schedule

  Real estate owned - add schedule                     Chattel mortgages and other liens
                                                      pay-able

  Real estate mortgages receivable                     Other debts - itemize:

  Autos and other personal property

  Cash value - life insurance

  Other assets - itemize:




                                                       Total liabilities

                                                       Net Worth

  Total Assets                                         Total liabilities and net worth

    CONTINGENT LIABILITIES                                GENERAL INFORMATION

  As endorser, comaker or guarantor                    Are any assets pledged? (Add
                                                      sched-ule.)

  On leases or contracts                               Are you defendant in any suits or
                                                      legal actions?

  Legal Claims                                         Have you ever taken bankruptcy?

  Provision for Federal Income Tax

  Other special debt
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion




                                        II. GENERAL (PUBLIC)


1.   An ethical consideration under Canon 2 of the American Bar Association's Code of Professional
     Responsibility calls for "every lawyer, regardless of professional prominence or professional
     workload, to find some time to participate in serving the disadvantaged." Describe what you have
     done to fulfill these responsibilities, listing specific instances and the amount of time devoted to
     each.

2.   The American Bar Association's Commentary to its Code of Judicial Conduct states that it is
     inappropriate for a judge to hold membership in any organization that individiously discriminates
     on the basis of race, sex, or religion. Do you currently belong, or have belonged, to any
     organization which discriminates -- through either formal membership requirements or the
     practical implementation of membership policies? If so, list, with dates of membership. What
     have you done to try to change these policies?

3.   Is there a selection commission in your jurisdiction to recommend candidates for nomination to the
     federal courts? If so, did it recommend your nomination? Please describe your experience in the
     entire judicial selection process, from beginning to end (including the circumstances which led to
     your nomination and interviews in which you participated).

4.   Has anyone involved in the process of selecting you as a judicial nominee discussed with you any
     specific case, legal issue or question in a manner that could reasonably be interpreted as asking how
     you would rule on such case, issue or question in a manner that could reasonably be interpreted as
     asking how you would rule on such case, issue, or question? If so, please explain fully.

5.   Please discuss your views on the following criticism involving "judicial activism."

     The role of the Federal judiciary within the Federal government, and within society generally, has
     become the subject of increasing controversy in recent years. It has become the target of both
     popular and academic criticism that alleges that the judicial branch has usurped many of the
     prerogatives of other branches and levels of government.

     Some of the characteristics of this "judicial activism" have been said to include:

        a. A tendency by the judiciary toward problem-solution rather than grievance-resolution;

        b. A tendency by the judiciary to employ the individual plaintiff as a vehicle for the imposition
           of far-reaching orders extending to broad classes of individuals;

        c. A tendency by the judiciary to impose broad, affirmative duties upon governments and
           society;
                                                    Hex-Dwnp Conversion
d. A tendency by the judiciary toward loosening jurisdictional requirements such as standing
   and ripeness; and
e. A tendency by the judiciary to impose itself upon other institutions in the manner of an
   administrator with continuing oversight responsibilities.
                                                                          Hex-Dwnp Conversion
                                           IV. CONFIDENTIAL


 1.    Full name (include any former names used).

 2.    Address: List current place of residence and office address(es). List all offices and home telephone
       numbers where you may be reached.

 3.    Have you ever been discharged from employment for any reason or have you ever resigned after
       being informed that your employer intended to discharge you?

 4.    Have you and your spouse filed and paid all taxes (federal, state and local) as of the date of your
       nomination? Please indicate if you filed "married filing separately". Did you make any back tax
       payments prior to your nominations? If so, give full details .

. 5.   Has a tax lien or other collection procedure (to include receipt of computer balance due noticed,
       ever been instituted against you by federal, state, or local authorities? I~ so, give full details.

 6.    Have you or your spouse ever been the subject of any audit, investigation, or inquiry for either
       federal, state, or local taxes? If so, give full details.

 7.    Have you or your spouse ever· declared bankruptcy? If so, give particulars.

 8.    Have you to your knowledge ever been under federal, state, or local investigation for a possible
       violation of either a civil or criminal statute or administrative agency regulation? If so, give full
       details. Has any organization of which you were an officer, director, or active participant ever
       been the subject of such an investigation with respect to activities within your responsibility? If so,
       give full details.

 9.    Have you ever been the subject of a complaint to any court, administrative agency, bar association,
       disciplinary committee, or other professional group for a breach of ethics, unprofessional conduct
       or a violation of any rule of practice? If so, give particulars.

 10.   Have you ever been the party (whether plaintiff, defendant, or in any other capacity) to any
       litigation?

 11.   Please advise the Committee of any unfavorable information that may affect your nomination.
                                               AFFIDAVIT            Hex-Dump Conversion


 I,                                    do swear that the information provided in this statement is, to the
best of my knowledge, true and accurate.




              (DATE)                                           (NAME)




                                                 (NOTARy)
..                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

                                    Speeches and Briefings


     DATE/TIME                    GROUP                         SUBJECT

     April 23, 19973: 15 PM       Schedule C Appointees         General OPC Agenda

     June 25, 19973:30 PM         Senior Executive Service      General DPC Agenda
                                  Orientation

     January 7, 19982:00 PM       Irv's class from NYC          General OPC Agenda

     February 10, 1998 11:00 AM   IGA Democratic Governor's     Tobacco
                                  Staff brief

     April 25, 1998 12:45 PM      Cabinet Staff Luncheon at     General OPC Agenda
                                  State Dept.

     January 26, 19995:00 PM      Women's Mayors IGA Brief      General OPC Agenda

     February 2,19997:30 PM       MSNBC On-Line Interview       General OPC Agenda

     February 22, 19999:30 AM     NGA Lt. Governor's Briefing   Budget/General OPC Agenda


