 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Dan MarcuS ( CN=Dan Marcus/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-MAR-1999 19:58:25.00

 SUBJECT:   Memo re Helms v.picard

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Charles F. Ruff ( CN=Charles F. Ruff/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a further revision of the memo per our discussions.   I have
tried to give greater emphasis to the Secretary's concerns. And I have
presented our compromise approach in the last few paragraphs, and
previewed it at the end of the opening paragraph.==================== ATTACHMENT    1
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D70]MAIL485086100.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF57504370040000010A02010000000205000000624800000002000012DA3C5952COOC7E131FE9
 ED85682CBA3COEOC7E037374E8B90F5D44E78B563BDBA92B64D625A9B9A1295E996C07A9C08C1A
 B247B4535FF416BCEEECD181CBB93426DEA39FE8767408DC2CFE16EA563BB26341F98BF95B7B48
 B9C66040A86B11ABBFCOE7826CEEA468A68EC231C4D842CA7569847COB1BAA15F67C684B4CFA87
 D0331A830C8D25B2710A9491EDD788C2A5A07CF43129D44F6B88F817E8A70F49900F83123A497D
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                       DRAFT 3/28/99

MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

FROM:          Charles F.C. Ruff, Elena Kagan, Daniel Marcus

RE:            Petition for certiorari in Helms v. Picard

        This is to advise you of a diffi'cult decision that the Solicitor General must make
concerning whether to seek review by the Supreme Court of a Fifth Circuit decision holding that
a federally funded program under which public school authorities lend computers and other
instructional materials to sectarian elementary and secondary schools violates the Establishment
Clause of the First Amendment. The Solicitor General feels strongly that a petition for certiorari
should not be filed, and Secretary Riley feels strongly that one should be filed. Weare trying to
develop a middle course that would serve the Secretary's needs by making clear to the Court that
we believe that it needs to revise its Establishment Clause jurisprudence to permit programs of
this kind while also reflecting the Solicitor General's view that this particular case may not
present the best vehicle for doing so.

        In Helms v. Picard, a case arising in Jefferson Parish, Louisiana, the Fifth Circuit held
that a provision of Chapter 2 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) that
authorizes local educational agencies (LEAs) to use federal funds to purchase computers and
other materials for loan to private schools, including sectarian schools, is, as applied, in violation
of the Establishment Clause. (That ESEA provision was replaced by a similar provision in Title
VI of the ImprovingAmerica's Schools Act of 1994.) The U.S. Department of Education, as
well as the Louisiana and the Jefferson Parish public school authorities, were defendants in the
case and are subject to an ongoing injunction.

        Ifthe Solicitor General is to file a petition for certioran seeking to overturn the Fifth
Circuit's decision, he must do so by April 13. He has discussed with us and with the
Department of Education his view that the United States should not file a petition because he
believes that the record is insufficient to convince the Court (in essence, Justice O'Connor, who
is the swing vote) to overturn a series of earlier decisions limiting aid to sectarian schools.

        In Helms, the Fifth Circuit found that two longstanding Supreme Court precedents --
Meek v. Pittenger, 421 U.S. 349 (1975), and Wolman v. Walter, 433 U.S. 229 (1977) dictatedn




the conclusion that the Title VVChapter 2 program is unconstitutional. In those cases the
Supreme Court struck down state laws that authorized public authorities to lend instructional
equipment and materials to private schools, including sectarian schools, reasoning that such
materials -- unlike secular textbooks, the lending of which to sectarian schools the Court had
upheld in Board of Education v. Allen, 392 U.S. 236 (1968) -- could be used directly in aid of
the sectarian enterprise of parochial schools. The Fifth Circuit rejected arguments that the Title
VVChapter 2 program was distinguishable from those held unconstitutional in Meek and
Wolman and also rejected arguments that Meek and Wolman had been repudiated or modified by
the Supreme Court itself in later decisions particularly Agostini v. Felton, 521 U.S. 203 (1997),
                                            n
                                                                   Hex-Dwnp Conversion

in which a closely divided Court upheld the constitutionality of using Title I ESEA funds to send
public school teachers into private sectarian schools to provide remedial education to
disadvantaged children.

        The Fifth Circuit's decision conflicts with an earlier decision of the Ninth Circuit in
Walker v. San Francisco Unified School District, 46 F.3d 1449 (1995), upholding a similar Title
VI/Chapter 2 program. In Walker, the Ninth Circuit found that Meek and Wolman were no
longer good law in light oflater Supreme Court decisions, particularly Agostini, that the Ninth
Circuit viewed as establishing the principle that the Establishment Clause simply required
"neutrality" between secular and religious schools in the provision of government aid.

        The Solicitor General believes that, although it is important to persuade the Supreme
Court to revise its Establishment Clause jurisprudence to perinit programs of this kind, this is not
the appropriate case in which to ask the Court to take that step. His reasoning is basically as
follows: While the Supreme Court (most notably and recently in Agostini) has opened the door to
some forms of assistance by public authorities to sectarian schools (or their students), its
decisions have not called into question its longstanding holdings that direct aid to the sectarian
school enterprise -- even on a "neutral" basis -- is forbidden. Thus, the provision of
instructional materials that are capable of use by the sectarian school for religious purposes is
forbidden. The Justice Department was unsuccessful in arguing to the Fifth Circuit that this
case can be distinguished from Meek and Wolman, and we agree with the Solicitor General that,
if we do seek Supreme Court review, we will have to ask the Court directly to overrule, at least in
part, the Meek-Wolman precedents. (The two proffered distinctions are unconvincing: The fact
that Title VI provides benefits to both public and private schools, while the programs invalidated
in Meek and Wolman provided aid only to private schools provides no basis for distinction since
the Meek and Wolman statutes were designed to provide private school students with what
public school students already had. And the fact that the Tile VI aid "supplements" rather than
"supplants" private school expenditures, while relevant in some other contexts, probably is
irrelevant here, where the focus is whether the aid promotes the private school's religious
mission.)

        The Supreme Court could be asked to overrule these precedents on one ofthree theories.
First, we could embrace the "neutrality" principle advocated by Justices Rehnquist, Scalia, and
Thomas, and argue that the Court should allow direct aid to parochial schools so long as it does
not prefer one religion to another and does not favor the religious over the non-religious.
Second, we could urge the Court to abandon its treatment of elementary and secondary sectarian
schools as "pervasively religious" institutions, regarding them instead -- like religiously-affiliated
universities -- as institutions in which the secular and the sectarian aspects of operations can
easily be kept separate. The Solicitor General believes that neither of these broad arguments
would be successful or should be made, and we and the Department of Education agree.

       There is a third, less radical argument that the Solicitor General believes can and should
be made in an appropriate case. This argument would not challenge the principle that the
Government cannot directly aid the religious mission of a sectarian school, but would urge the
Court to abandon its insistence that materials provided to such schools be "incapable of
                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


diversion" to sectarian purposes, and substitute a test that would look to whether there are
adequate safeguards against such diversion.

         Justice O'Connor is the key to the success of any such argument. Four Justices --
Rehnquist, Scalia, Kennedy, and Thomas -- have indicated a willingness to go this far, and
probably further. But the four "liberal" Justices -- Stevens, Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer, all of
whom dissented in Agostini -- would almost certainly reject it. O'Connor wrote Agostini, but
she has not gone so far as to question the principle that public funds may not be used to support
the religious enterprise of a sectarian school. The Solicitor General believes, however, that she
could be persuaded to uphold programs such as Title VI if she were convinced that there were
adequate safeguards to ensure that the computers or other materials lent to the sectarian schools
would, in fact, be used for secular, not religious, purposes. These safeguards could take the
form of certifications by the private schools, monitoring visits by public school teachers or
officials, prescreening of library books, and sanctions for violations. (The Court would have to
find that such safeguards did not amount to the "excessive entanglement" of state with church
that is forbidden by decisions such as Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602 (1971), or would have
to revise its "excessive entanglement" doctrine.)

        After the Fifth Circuit decision, the Department of Education, in consultation with the
Department of Justice, did publish a Guidance on compliance with Title VI, directing LEAs to
employ several safeguards to ensure that equipment and materials lent to sectarian schools will
not be diverted to religious purposes. For the first time, this Guidance amplifies the very general
requirement in the statute and the Department's regulations that the LEA "ensure secular use." It
provides that the LEA should obtain written assurances from private schools that materials will
be used only for secular purposes; should review the contents of library books lent to private
schools and conduct periodic on-site monitoring; and should ensure that violations are promptly
corrected, including, if necessary, removing the materials from the private school.

         Nonetheless, the Solicitor General believes that Helms v. Picard is not the right case in
which to make the "adequate safeguards" argument. The case was brought in 1984, challenging
the former Chapter 2 of ESEA, and neither the ESEA nor Title VI of the 1994 statute nor the
regulations in place at the time the case was decided contained any restrictions on the use of
loaned materials'other than the general requirement that the public agency ensure that the loaned
materials be used only for secular purposes. Nor had either Louisiana or Jefferson Parish
implemented an effective monitoring program to meet that requirement. Since the Solicitor
General believes that it will be difficult, even on a good record, to persuade Justice O'Connor to
embrace an "adequate safeguards" exception to the Meek and Wolman line of cases, he worries
not only that she will reject that argument, but also that she will react negatively to what she will
regard as a disingenuous argument by the Solicitor General that there were adequate safeguards
in this case. He is concerned, as well, that her unhappiness will carry over to other cases in
which we need her vote. The Guidelines adopted recently by the Department of Education are an
improvement in this regard, but the Solicitor General thinks they are too late to be of much help
in this case and, in any event, has advised the Department to adopt an amended Guidance or
(preferably) regulations embodying more specific safeguards against diversion of computers and
other materials to use for sectarian purposes.
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                                      Of course, if no cert petition
is filed, the injunction in Helms v. Picard would remain in effect. The Solicitor General notes,
however, that the Fifth Circuit decision does not strike down the statute on its face, and applies
only to the particular program at issue in the Helms case.
The decision is the law only in the Fifth Circuit (Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi), and, even
there, LEAs are free to devise other programs under Title VI. The Solicitor General hopes that,
with a new Guidance or regulations, a more attractive program (with safeguards) could be
adopted by an LEA and become a more promising vehicle for winning over Justice O'Connor
and, thus, a majority of the Court.

        The Secretary of Education and his General Counsel strongly disagree. They do not
want to wait for that better case. They are convinced that the private school community will not
understand why the Administration, having supported the legality of this program during more
than a decade oflitigation in the lower courts, is abandoning them at the Supreme Court stage
and allowing the Fifth Circuit decision to stand. Indeed, Secretary Riley feels that he has made a
personal commitment to the private school groups to defend the current program. They believe
that we should not give up on the distinctions urged unsuccessfully in the Fifth Circuit but
successfully in the Ninth Circuit. And they think the Justice Department understates the
difficulty that LEAs will have in devising viable Title VI programs during the time (perhaps a
long time) before a better case can be found and work its way up to the Supreme Court. They
recognize that Helms v. Picard is not the ideal case to present to the Court and that it is by no
means a sure winner. But they are not as pessimistic as the Solicitor General is, and they think
the importaI)ce of this kind of program from both a policy and a political standpoint should lead
us to take the risk involved in petitioning for certiorari.

         The disagreement between the Solicitor General and the Secretary is a strong one, but is
basically over strategy and tactics, not principle. All agree that it is important to persuade the
Supreme Court to move away from a strict "incapable of diversion" test to a more flexible,
realistic test that permits the implementation of programs to provide computers to all children,
whether they are in public or private schools. We agree with the Solicitor General's conclusion
that this will not be an easy "sell" to Justice O'Connor, the swing vote on the Court on this issue,
and that we would be better off presenting that argument in a case in which there was a stronger
record of safeguards in place to assure that the computers would not be used for religious
purposes. (We do think, however, that the Solicitor General's fears about the consequences of
losing this case are somewhat overstated.)

        A possible middle course is suggested by the fact that some of the other
intervenors/defendants in this case are almost certain to seek Supreme Court review even if we
do not. The Solicitor General had proposed to us that, in that event, the United States should
file an opposition to their petition for certiorari, arguing that while the Meek-Wolman precedents
need to be reconsidered by the Court, this is not the appropriate case in which to do so. But we
have begun to discuss with the Solicitor General and the Secretary a somewhat different
possibility -- one that we believe would be more acceptable to the Secretary and the private
school community while still accepting and presenting the Solicitor General's view on the legal
"
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

    issues and the nature of this case. Instead of opposing certiorari, the Solicitor General would
    take no position on whether the Court should take the case, but would instead file a response to
    the intervening defendants' petition that emphasizes the importance of programs like Title VI,
    particularly in providing access to computers for all children; explains the need for the Court to
    modify its precedents; presents the "adequate safeguards" approach that we think the Court
    should adopt; points to the recent Department of EdU(:ation Guidance and possible additional
    guidance from the Department to LEAs; and concludes that the Court has the option of taking
    this case and deciding this important constitutional question on the record before it or waiting for
    a case presenting a record containing more specific safeguards in line with the subsequent
    Guidelines.

           If this approach makes sense to you, we will continue our efforts to convince the
    Secretary and the Solicitor General to agree to it.




                                                                                                               /

                                                                                                           /
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 092 - FOLDER -008


[03/31/1999]

     ...
..   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Elisa Millsap ( CN=Elisa Millsap/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:31-MAR-1999 08:41:21.00

     SUBJECT:   Boston

     TO: Phillip Caplan ( CN=Phillip Caplan/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Minyon Moore ( CN=Minyon Moore/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Douglas B. Sosnik ( CN=Douglas B. Sosnik/OU=WHOIO=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Charles J. Payson ( CN=Charles J. Payson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Stacie Spector ( CN=Stacie Spector/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Craig Hughes ( CN=Craig Hughes/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Charles E. Kieffer ( CN=Charles E. Kieffer/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN=Ann F. Lewis/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Loretta M. Ucelli ( CN=Loretta M. Ucelli/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Jeffrey A. Forbes ( CN=Jeffrey A. Forbes/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Charles M. Brain ( CN=Charles M. Brain/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Janet Murguia ( CN=Janet Murguia/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Lisa M. Kountoupes ( CN=Lisa M. Kountoupes/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Lawrence J. Stein ( CN=Lawrence J. Stein/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Rep. Marty Meehan sponsored a bill, H.R. 193, that designates 29 mi·les of
     the Assabet,
     Concord, and Sudbury rivers in Massachusetts as components of the national


wild and
scenic rivers systems. The legislation arose from a grassroots movement
started over a
decade ago and hundreds of people have worked extremely hard to make this
legislation happen.

This is the very first piece of legislation that Meehan has passed, and he
is hoping for a
bill-signing ceremony.  If we can coordinate the timing on receiving the
bill, what about
signing this in Boston on April 16? Sen. Kennedy took the lead in the
Senate and Reps. Olver,
Neal, McGovern, Frank, Tierney, Markey, Moakley, and Delahunt are all
cosponsors.
..
