     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-APR-1999 18:16:19.00

     SUBJECT:   questionnaire #2

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D25]MAIL43306570P.136 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF57504398060000010A02010000000205000000684A0000000200002263C4C5BFF50BA4AA2054
     AD518770E2AD34508A08640743DEE1E7075DD01B8D7B099855E8AD178B893FD01300Al18482388
     OA40D3D7665BOEC95A19DD8856C804592A8A48223775AF6F50201B688E9710FA67E91EA8A14F01
     DB083D226693501BB53072A073165917C5530A30A7745D43599DDO6D42305ED37473FB57F34DEB
                                         Hex-Dump Conversion ·

     INFORMAnON REOUESTED OF PROSPECTIVE JUDICIAL NOMINEES



A.   NAME AND POSITION

     1.   Name: (include any former names used)

     2.   Government position for which you are under consideration.

     3.   Address: List current residence address and mailing address.

     4.   List aU office and home telephone numbers where you may be reached.

     5.   Marital Status: If married, identify spouse's present employer and spouse's
          employer for the five preceding years.

     6.   List all jobs held in the past 10 years, including the title or description of job,
          name of employer, location of work, and dates of inclusive employment.


B.   PERSONAL DATA

     1.   Have your federal or state tax returns been the subject of any audit or
          investigation or inquiry at any time? If so, please explain.

     2.   Are you currently under federal, state, or local investigation for a possible
          violation of a criminal statute? If so, please give full details.

     3.   List all memberships and offices held in professional, fraternal, scholarly and
          civic organizations.

     4.   Have you ever been disciplined or cited for a breach of ethics or
          unprofessional conduct by, or been the subject of a complaint to, any court,
          administrative agency, professional association, disciplinary committee, or
          other professional group? If so, please give full details.

     5.   Have you ever been involved in civil litigation, or administrative or legislative
          proceedings of any kind, either as plaintiff, defendant, respondent, witness,
          or party in interest, which may be appropriate for consideration by the
          Committee of the Senate to which your nomination will be submitted? If so,
          please give full details.

     6.   List all offices with a political party held during the past 10 years. List any
          public office for which you have been a candidate during the past 10 years.
                                             Hex-Dump COOve:-sion

     7.    List all contributions to political parties or election committees during the
           past 6 years.

     8.    What is the condition of your health?

     9.     Have you had a physical examination recently?

     10.   Without details, is there or has there been anything in your personal life
           which you feel, if known, may be of embarrassment to the Administration in
           the event you should be nominated?

           What about any near relative?

C.   FINANCIAL DATA

     Please note that federal law and regulations governing conflicts of interest require
     Presidential appointees within 30 days of their entrance on duty to provide reports
     of specified financial interests as to themselves, their spouses and any other member
     of their immediate households. The initial four matters listed below are designed to
     elicit rmancial information similar to -- although, in some cases, broader in scope --
     than that which all Presidential appointees are required to provide by Executive
     Order of the President. The remaining paragraphs in this section seek elaboration
     on your financial status beyond that which the existing Executive Order and
     regulations require. The information which you provide will not be transmitted to
     the Senate Committee considering your nomination, or otherwise be made public,
     without your consent. As to all matters, please provide the requested information
     for yourself, your spouse, minor children and any other member of the immediate
     household.

     1.     List the names of all corporations, companies, firms, or other business
            enterprises, partnerships, nonprofit organizations, and education or other
            institutions --

            (A)    with which you are now connected as an employee, officer, owner,
                   director, trustee, partner, advisor, attorney, or consultant.
                   (Attorneys and consultants need list only their major clients, but
                   should include all of those whom you represent on a regular basis or
                   which might give rise to an appearance of bias on your part in
                   connection with your proposed appointment.);

            (B)    in which you have any continuing financial interests, through a
                   pension or retirement plan, stock bonus, shared income, severance
                   pay agreement, or otherwise as a result of any current or prior
                   employment or business or professional association. As to each
                   financial arrangement, provide all details necessary for a thorough
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

                 understanding of the way in which the arrangement operates,
                 including information concerning any renewal right you may have if
                 the arrangement is allowed to lapse and whether lump sum or
                 severance benefits are available in lieu of continuation of the interest;

          (C)    in which you have any financial interest through the ownership of
                 stocks, stock options, bonds, partnership interests, or other securities.
                  Any interests held indirectly through trusts or other arrangements
                 should be included. (Please provide a copy of any trust or other
                 agreement).

     2.   Provide a complete, current financial net worth statement that itemizes in
          detail:

          (A)    the identity and value of all assets held, directly or indirectly. This
                 itemization should include, but not be limited to, bank accounts, real
                 estate, securities, trusts, investments and other financial holdings;

          (B)    the identity and amount of each liability owed, directly or indirectly,
                 which is in excess of $1,000. This itemization should include, but not
                 be limited to, debts, mortgages, loans and other financial obligations
                 for which you, your spouses or your dependents have a direct liability
                 or whic4 may be guaranteed by you, your spouse or your dependents ..
                  In identifying each liability, indicate the nature of the liability and
                 the entity or person to which it is owed.

          A sample net worth statement is attached for your convenience. You may
          use any form you like.

          (C)    List sources and amounts of all items of value received during the
                 previous two calendar years. (Including but not limited to, salaries,
                 wages, fees, dividends, capital gains or losses, interests, rents,
                 royalties, patents, honoraria, and other gifts other than those of
                 nominal value).

          (D)    Please provide for review by this office (but not for submission to
                 Senate Committee staff or to the public) copies of your federal income
                 tax returns for the proceeding three-year period.

D.   FUTURE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIPS

     1.   Will you sever all connections with your present employers, business firms,
          business associations or business organizations, if you are confirmed by the
          Senate.
                                          Hex·DiJmp COilve:-sion ·

     2.   Do you have any plans, commitments or agreements to pursue outside
          employment, with or without compensation, during your service with the
          government? If so, explain.

E.   POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

     1.   Describe aU rmancial arrangements, stock options, deferred compensation
          agreements, future benefits and other continuing relationships with business
          associates, clients or customers

     2.   Describe any business relationship, dealing or financial transaction which
          you have had during the last five years, whether for yourself, on behalf of a
          client, or acting as an agent, that c~uld in any way constitute or result in a
          possible conflict of interest in the position to which you have been nominated.

     3.   Describe any activity during the past five years in which you have engaged
          for the purpose of directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat or
          modification of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution
          of law or public policy.

     4.   Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest, including any
          that may be disclosed by your responses to the above items.
                                           FINANCIAL STATEMENT                             Hex-Dump COilversioil
                                                NET WORTH
         Provide a complete, current financial net worth statement which itemizes in detail all assets
(including bank accounts, real estate, securities, trusts, investments, and other financial holdings) all
liabilities (including debts, mortgages, loans, and other financial obligations) of yourself, your spouse, and
other Immed'   tate mem b ers 0 f your h ouse h 0 Id
                            ASSETS                                              LIABILITIES
Cash on hand and in banks                              Notes payable to banks - secured

  U.S. Government securities - add                     Notes payable to banks - unsecured
 schedule

  Listed securities - add schedule                     Notes payable to relatives

  Unlisted securities - add schedule                   Notes payable to others

  Accounts and notes receivable:                       Accounts and bills due

     Due from relatives and friends                    Unpaid income tax

     Due from others                                   Other unpaid tax and interest

     Doubtful                                          Real estate mortgages payable - add
                                                      schedule

  Real estate owned - add schedule                     Chattel mortgages and other liens
                                                      payable

  Real estate mortgages receivable                     Other debts - itemize:

  Autos and other personal property

  Cash value - life insurance          -
  Other assets - itemize:




                                                       Total liabilities

                                                       Net Worth

  Total Assets                                         Total liabilities and net worth

    CONTINGENT LIABILITIES                                GENERAL INFORMATION

  As endorser, comaker or guarantor                    Are any assets pledged? (Add
                                                      sched-ule.)

  On leases or contracts                               Are you defendant in any suits or
                                                      legal actions?

  Legal Claims                                         Have you ever taken bankruptcy?

  Provision for Federal Income Tax

  Other special debt




     Automated Records Management System
             Hex-Dump COilverslili\


