 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-APR-1999 01:12:06.00

 SUBJECT:   Equal Pay Panel

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Here are choices for the comparable worth story and the older woman story
 that Karin and I talked to:

 Choices for D&Comparable WorthD8 Story

 This first one was sent by AFSCME

Trish Higgins, Nurse, Cleveland Metro Hospital
Ms. Higgins, 50, has been a nurse for 25 years and has worked at Cleveland
Metro Hospital for 16 years.   She is currently involved in a union drive
and is very articulate about being underpaid and undervalued as a nurse.
She feels that nursing is a predominantly female profession and that it
has been traditionally underpaid.   She has three children -- a son who is
30 years old, a daughter in college who wants to be a nurse, and a son who
is 20 and disabled.   It was only when her daughter indica~ed that she
wanted to be a nurse that MS. Higgins became more vocal about trying to
get more pay for nurses. Ms. Higgins admitted that if she did not have
her husbandD,s salary it would have been very difficult to raise her
children and that she certainly could not have paid for her daughterD,s
college tuition.   She definitely believes in comparable worth and stated
that the predominantly male profession of pharmacists is paid better than
nurses, even though they have similar skills and experience.   She is the
unionD,s choice, but if we use her we should be very careful to stay clear
of her views .on comparable worth.

Debbie Watkins, Park Street Children's Center, Rockville, Maryland
Ms. Watkins has a degree from Bowie State College in elementary education,
and she has 15 years experience as a childcare worker, yet she earns about
the same as she did teaching elementary school twenty years ago.   She said
that she could not continue working in this area if she did not have her
husband's income.  She said that even if she were single with no children,
she could not really live on her current salary.  She believes that in
order to raise the pay of childcare workers, there should be alternate
funding sources, both governmental and private.

Marcia Ansel, Social Worker, State of Maryland
Ms. Ansel who is single has been a social worker for 26 years for the
State of Maryland.  She has fought to get equal pay for social workers.
She stated that, in the past, the few men who were social workers always
received the supervisory positions. Ms. Ansel herself received two of her
promotions to supervisor because of cognizance of remedying past
discrimination against women. Recently, Maryland State social workers who


    work in the area of protective services (such as child abuse) have gotten
    a pay increase. Ms. Ansel is fighting so that all the other social
    workers get the same increase.  She also helped the social workers who
    work in the Department of Corrections facilities to get the same hazard
    pay that correctional officers do.  While Ms. Ansel believes in comparable
    worth personally, her recent efforts have been in the area of regular
    equal pay, and she would be willing to talk about the need to increase the
    wages of social workers generally.

    Senior Women

    Carolyn Gantt, Clerk, RSVP (a senior program), Washington, D.C.
    Ms. Gantt is 74 years old, African American, and has seven children.   She
    worked for the D.C. Housing Department between 1976 and 1980, and again
    between 1985 and 1992. Ms. Gantt, who has a G.E.D., admitted that when
    she worked for the D.C. government she was paid low wages and that men who
    had less education than she (high school drop outs) received better
    positions and more training.   Ms. Gantt retired in 1992 and hoped that she
    would be able to relax, travel, and take some classes.   However, she
    realized that she couid not make ends meet on her social security check,
    and she, therefore, took a position where she works as a clerk for a
    senior program, RSVP.   (She is actually paid by the National Black
    Caucus). While Ms. GanttD,s story is excellent, she is not as articulate
    as some of the other women and will have to be asked very pointed
    questions in order to get her story out in a concise and clear manner.

    Ann Marie Lemillard, retired, Millersville, MD
    Ms. Lemillard ran one of the five Anne Arundel County senior centers.   She
    believes that dire


