RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-APR-1999 16:19:40.00

SUBJECT:   Draft -- Ending TK

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Nicole R. Rabner ( CN=Nicole R. Rabner/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 4/8/99 4:15pm
Tamagni
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
RADIO ADDRESS ON WELFARE REFORM
THE WHITE HOUSE
April 9, 1999

        Good morning. Today, I want to talk to you about our continuing
efforts to break the cycle of dependency and make responsibility and work
a way of life for all Americans.

        Work is more than just a weekly paycheck -- it is at the heart of
our way of life. Work lends purpose and dignity to our lives, and
instills in our children the basic values that built our nation.   But for
too long, too many Americans were trapped in a broken welfare system that
exiled generation after generation from the mainstream of American life.

        I took office determined to change that.  From giving the states
the flexibility they need to make welfare a second chance, not a way of
life ... to signing the historic bipartisan welfare Reform bill that ended
welfare as we knew it ... to launching the Welfare to Work partnership to
create private sector jobs for welfare recipients, we have made remarkable
progress.

        Today, I am pleased to announce that since 1993, we have cut the
welfare rolls nearly in half, by a record 6.5 million people.  Thanks to a
strong economy and the strong efforts of the private sector, the number of
Americans who have replaced welfare checks with pay checks has tripled
since 1992.  I am proud to announce that we in the national government are
doing our part to help, surpassing the goal we set for ourselves by hiring
almost 12,000 welfare recipients in just two years.

        You can see evidence of our progress in communities across the
country. You can see it in hard-pressed neighborhoods where bus drivers
who used to pass by empty stations now report that their buses are filled
with people on their way to work.  And you can see it on inner city
streets where new store-front tax preparing services are helping people
file their income tax returns -- some for the first time in their lives.

        Reforming our broken welfare system was the right thing to do
now we must finish the job. Today, I am pleased to unveil the final
welfare reform rules that we envisioned in 1996. The new regulations
.,

enforce strict work requirements and hold states accountable for moving
people from the welfare rolls to the workplace.  Just as important, the
new regulations encourage states to help families moving from welfare to
work with child care, transportation, and job-retention services.

        These final welfare reform regulations are a milestone in our
efforts to restore responsibility and make work a way of life again for
all Americans. But to finish the job of welfare reform, we must do more.
Now, in this time of great prosperity, with our economy booming and our
confidence high, we cannot afford to leave anyone behind.

        One of the biggest obstacles facing all working families    and
especially families on welfare -- is lack of access to child care.  I have
proposed a comprehensive plan to make child care better, safer, and more
affordable.  I am pleased that with bipartisan support the Senate recently
approved $5 billion in new funding that could provide child care to up to
850,000 more children.  I hope this is the year the Congress takes action
to address our nationD,s long-term child care needs and gives AmericaD,s
working families the support they need to thrive.

        Finally, we cannot finish the job of welfare reform without doing
more to help people who have the hardest time moving from welfare to
work. Very often these people live in the poorest neighborhoods and have
the poorest job skills.  Some have never worked in their adult lives. The
Department of LaborD,s Welfare to Work program has already helped tens
thousands of long-term welfare recipients like these to leave welfare
behind. That is why I call on the Congress to pass my plan to invest
another $1 billion in this vitally important program.

        Robert Kennedy once said that "Work is the meaning of what this country
is all about. We need it as individuals, we need to sense it in our
fellow citizens, and we need it as a society and as a people."

       Thanks for listening.


