              RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

              CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

              CREATION DATE/TIME:12-APR-1999 15:40:03.00

              SUBJECT:   Update on status of EEOC federal sector rule

              TO: Irene Bueno ( CN=Irene Bueno/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              TO: Charles F. Ruff   ( CN=Charles F. Ruff/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              TO: Edward W. Correia ( CN=Edward W. Correia/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
              READ:UNKNOWN

              TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
              READ:UNKNOWN

              TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              CC: Leslie Bernstein ( CN=Leslie Bernstein/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              TEXT:
              Here is an update, prepared by OIRA, on the status of the EEOC Federal
              Sector rule which is
              currently in final clearance at OMB.    The two major issues, which are
              detailed below, center on:
              (1) the EEOC administrative judge (AJ) issuing a ruling and the agency
              only having the ability to
              accept or reject the AJ's decision but not to modify it.   In this way,
              agencies will take final action
              on complaints referred to AJs by issuing a final order, but they will not
              introduce new evidence or
              write a new decision in the case.   (2) the ability of obtaining interim
              relief after the AJ's decision but
              before the end of the administrative process.

              OMB plans on meeting with EEOC later this week to go over its concerns,
              and thereafter plans
              on contacting the agencies about the rule and requesting that their
              general counsels or
              deputy secretaries contact OMB if they still have major concerns.   I will
              also send around a
              copy of the proposed rule and all of the agency comments. please let me
              know if you need
              anything else.


While the agencies may raise other issues, here is OMB's analysis of the
major outstanding issues:

Overview of the Rule
EEOC's objective in issuing this final rule is to streamline, and make
more fair, the process by which
a federal employee pursues a discrimination complaint.   The most
significant provisions of the rule
eliminate an agencyO,s ability to reverse or amend decisions of the EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ).
Under the current process, an complainant/employee can opt for a hearing
with an AJ.  The
agency can then reverse or amend the AJ decision. The only options for
the complainant/employee
at that point is to accept the agency decision or appeal to the EEOC's
Office of Federal Operations
(OFO). The final rule would provide that in cases in which the agency
does not agree
with the decision of the AJ:   (a) the agency issues a final order
notifying the complainant that it will not
fully implement the AJ decision; (b) the agency automatically files an
appeal with the EEOC on behalf
of that employee; and (c) in cases involving removals or separation of the
employee, the agency
would provide interim relief (i.e., retroactive restoration) consistent
with the finding of the AJ pending
a final decision from the AJ.

Other significant provisions of the rule: (a) require all agencies to make
available an alternative
dispute resolution (ADR) program for the pre-complaint process;  (b)
provide EEOC AJs with the
authority to award attorney's fees and costs to winning complainants for
services rendered
prior to the filing of the formal complaint (e.g., during the counseling
and ADR phases) .

Views of the Stakeholders
During EEOCO,s development of the proposed rule, and following publication
of the NPRM on
2/20/98, approximately 30 different Federal agencies expressed significant
concerns with
many of the provisions in the rule.  The agencies are primarily concerned
with the elimination of
an agency's right to reverse or amend an AJ's decision.   Agency arguments
range from legal
(EEOC lacks the authority to eliminate this agency action) to policy (the
AJ's lack the expertise to
adjudicate these claims and agency amendments or reversals are a proper
check and balance) .

On the other side of the spectrum, OrRA has met with a Federal employees
union and a member
of the plaintiff's bar who feel that EEOC's proposed changes to the
complaint process do not go
far enough in limiting agency control in adjudicating cases in which the
agency is accused of
discrimination.

orRA Analysis


OIRA agrees with EEOC that the current process of allowing the agency (or
the "defendant" in
discrimination cases) to amend or reverse the decision of the EEOC AJ may
be legitimately
perceived as inherently unfair.  OIRA is further impressed by data
provided by EEOC which
demonstrates that agencies reverse a significant majority of AJ findings
of discrimination, and
that in a majority of those cases that are appealed to the EEOC, the
result is a reversal of those
agency decisions on appeal from the employee. However, OIRA does have
some concerns
with the provisions that would implement this change to the process.

The agency issues a final order notifying the complainant that it will not
fully
implement the AJ decision.  As stated above, OIRA believes that. this
change will improve the
fairness of the current process.  Further, OIRA, upon consultation with
DOJ, agrees with EEOC that
a "final agency order" meets the legal requirement in Section 717(c) of
Title VII that the agencies
have some "final" action they can take following an AJ decision.

If the agency disagrees with the AJ, the rule as drafted would require the
agency
to automatically file an appeal with the EEOC on behalf of that employee.
OIRA has
two main concerns with this provision:

Assume that the AJ rules in favor of the agency, finding that no
discrimination occurred. However,
the agency now wants to amend or not fully implement that decision because
its review did uncover
discrimination. Why would there necessitate an appeal to the
Commission?    EEOCD,s reg strategy
appears to assume a certain outcome which may not in fact always occur.

A separate provision in the rule contains the requirement for the agency
to provide notice to
the complainant with all final orders of a complainants right to appeal to
EEOC.  EEOC has not
demonstrated that this notice requirement would be insufficient to allow
an employee to exercise
a right of appeal.   A process in which the employee has the burden to file
an appeal following an
agency order may be more consistent with other processes of jurisprudence
in the U.S.

- In cases involving removals or separation, the agency would provide
interim
relief (i.e., retroactive restoration) consistent with the finding of the
AJ. OIRA has
several concerns with this provision:

This provision was not proposed or addressed at the NPRM stage. OIRA is
believes that this
substantial change to the process should go through a notice and comment
process before
becoming effective.
'"


     Section 717(c) of Title VII requires some kind of "final" agency action
     following an AJ decision.
     An interim relief provision would basically render the "final" action by
     agencies as moot, and thus it
     is no longer clear that EEOC has fulfilled the Section 717(c)
     requirement.

     OIRA is sympathetic to the concerns voiced by agencies that this provision
     could create
     significant disruption in an agency's workforce when considering that
     that 33% of agency reversals
     are upheld on appeal to the EEOC, and that it traditionally takes a long
     period of time for EEOC to
     issue a final decision on appeal.

     Based on the above concerns, it is not clear why more traditional remedies
     of back pay and
     damages would not be sufficient to make an employee whole.

"



