 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:21-APR-1999 17:46:12.00

 SUBJECT:   Revised New Events Memo

 TO: Elena Kagan   CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
   Attached is the new version of our possible policy announcements memo,
 incorporating Bruce's comments, and adding Jose's new reports and the
 Family Report.

 please let me know if there are further revisions/additions you would like
 me to make.==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D70]ARMS27303882I.136 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

 FF57504300070000010A020100000Q02050000008F4D00000002000065BF458D037C356E11B253
 CCAD5EEC08544102B9B4F716E7C1FE570B1F57219997EE61519BFOB6071825692492911C1BDB27
 9B3B5620BD9DD91347BAEFA712FD5DDB74A96D419AOA9D0068977E3683166C334742684B7C0047
 58297BC4FD7F8D8DF799ED5F88728F9DAE5A7A93195B7A97A5034923AE3847BAE5653DB1BC3D9F

                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                               Hex-DiJmp Conversion
                                              April 22, 1999


     MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

     FROM:                 BRUCE REED
                           ELENA KAGAN

     CC:                   LORETIA UCELLI
                           STEPHANIE STREETI

     SUBJECT:              POSSIBLE POLICY ANNOUNCEMENTS


     CHILDREN AND FAMILIES

     1. Introduction of Legislation to Prohibit Discrimination Against Parents (Early May) The
     President proposed new federal legislation to protect parents from discrimination in the
     workplace. Senator Dodd is almost ready to introduce the President's proposal. Building on
     state law in Alaska, Michigan, New Jersey, and others, this legislation would protect workers
     from unfair assumptions about their commitment to their job that can affect hiring, advancement
     and other employment decisions. While this law would clearly not prohibit employers from
     making hiring and promotion decision on the basis of job performance, it would ensure that
     workers are not unfairly discriminated against simply because they are parents. NOTE: This
     could be coupled with the HHS report on child care. It is a potential topic for a Mother's Day
     radio address.

     2. Release New Child Care Report (Early May) At our request, HHS is developing a report
     on the high cost of child care for low and moderate income working families, and their needs for
     child care assistance. The report would include information on the expense of child care and
     present data on the specific costs of child care for families at certain income levels, making the
     case for the need for child care assistance. The report would also include previously released
     data on the small numbers oflow income families currently receiving subsidies. NOTE: This
     report could be coupled with the legislation to prohibit discrimination against parents. It is
     also a potential topic for a Mother's Day radio address.

     3. Announce New After-School Grants (By First Week in May -- possibly ready last week in
     April) The President (or Vice President or First Lady) could release $100 million in 21 st Century
     Learning Grants for after-school programs across the country, the second part of the $200 million
     total grant distribution for FY 1999. This is an opportunity to highlight the after-school
     initiative in the President's FY 2000 budget, which triples funding for the program from $200
     million to $600 million.
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

4_ New Adoption Numbers (Early Summer) The President (and First Lady) could announce
the significant increases in adoptions since 1996. We will also be able to announce the
awarding of the financial bonuses to states for their adoption increases.

5. Family Report (The report is still in preparation but we hope to have it ready within three .
weeks.) The Council of Economic Advisors has prepared a report on changes in the labor market
over the last 30 years that effect families. The report will demonstrate the increased difficulty of
 balancing work and family and highlight the need for policies that support parents trying to raise
a family. Specifically, the report will identify a decrease in the amount of time available to
parents to be with their children since 1969 and identify several related developments, including:
 an increase in the number of women working and the hours they work; an increase in the
number of single parent families; and increases in income for most families. NOTE: This report
could be released as part of the President's Grambling State University commencement address.


CRIME

1. Victims/Bioterrorism (Before May 12) The President could highlight provisions in his
crime bill to address the threat ofbioterrorism, and provide additional assistance to victims of
cnme.
       Bioterrorism: The crime bill includes new tools for law enforcement to address the
       emerging threat ofbioterrorism and prevent future bioterrorism catastrophes.
       Specifically, the bill contains new criminal and civil penalties for:
       - Possession of harmful dangerous biological agents not justified for peaceful purpose, in
       order to limit the availability of biological weapons to the general public;
       -Unregistered possession of certain biological agents to ensure that appropriate authorities
       can track who is handling the most deadly agents;
       -Reckless handling of harmful biological agents, similar to those already in place for
       radioactive materials and pharmaceutical products; and
       -Possession of selected biological agents by restricted individuals, such as felons,
       fugitives, and the mentally unstable.
       Victims: The crime bill contains a number of provisions to support victims, including
       expanded federal assistance to the victims of non-federal crimes and additional
       compensation and assistance to victims of terrorism and mass violence. The President
       could also renew his call for the Congress to pass a Constitutional Victims Rights
       Amendment.

2. Release 1997 Local Police Departments Report (could be done with Crime Bill Launch on
May 12) This report presents data collected from more than 13,000 general-purpose local police
departments nationwide, and should confino at broad level that the goals of our community
policing efforts are being met. The report includes data on law enforcment levels, hiring, and
the numbers of officers engaged in community policing.

2. Race and Crime Event (May) The President could release one or several reports on
community perceptions regarding 1) crime and police and 2) police use of force.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

3. Release 1998 ADAM Report (late April/May) The President could release the Arrestee
Durg Abuse Monitoring (ADAM) Report, which includes data on the prevalence of drug use by
arrestees.   The report will include findings from several ADAM sites regarding use of cocaine, .
heroine, and methamphetamines among adult and juvenile arrestees.

4. Release 1998 Brady Check Report (TBD) The 1998 Presale Handgun Checks Report
provides a national estimate of handgun purchase applications, the number rejected, and the
reasons for rejection. The estimate includes the entire interim period provided for under the
Brady Act, as well as the first month's activities under the permanent provisions of the Act that
took effect on November 30, 1998.


EDUCATION

1. Release Charter Schools Study (Ready now) This is the third year of a five year study.
The study contains updates from previous years on such issues as school size, reasons parents
give for sending their kids to charter schools, reasons for starting schools, etc. The President
could visit a DC charter school and 1) release the report, 2) highlight the school choice funding
in the President's FY2000 budget, 3) perhaps announce the competition for the new funds won in
the FY99 budget, and 4) reaffirm support for charter schools and refute allegations that Bill Lan
Lee is using civil rights enforcement to undermine charter schools.

2. Release of Update on Tennessee STAR Study on Class Size (April 29) Sen. Murray, NEA
and other education groups are planning to release this report at the National Press Club. The
STAR study is a longitudinal study that is tracking the academic progress of children in
Tennessee who were assigned to small classes in grades K-3 as part of an academic reform
experiment. Earlier results from the study showed that children that were in these smaller
classes did better in the early grades, and continued their academic performance even after being
returned to larger classes.

3. Release Department of Education Report on School Choice (Scheduled to be ready in
June, but slightly flexible) This report will describe the various options for public school choice
in districts across the country. The report could be released during a visit to a worksite, charter,
magnet or other innovative school. We could also highlight the public school choice section of
ESEA. [If the President travels to FL, MN or CA we could highlight the new initiative on
worksite schools. These are mainly K-3 schools that allow working parents to have their
children attend a school at the work site. Parental participation at these schools is particularly
high.]
                                                                          Hex-Duillp Conve:-sion
HEALTHCARE

1. New Actions to Protect Blood Donors and Transfusion Recipients. (June) We could
announce new actions by the Food and Drug Administration to safeguard the safety of our
blood supply. These actions include adding new requirements for testing of blood or
plasma prior to release or shipment, requiring blood banks to take measures to prevent the
spread of Hepatitis C, such as quarantining prior collections from donors who
subsequently test positive for Hepatitis C, taking action to identify donors at increased risk
of transmitting the disease, and conducting outreach efforts to locate transfusion recipients
who may have received infected blood. These actions respond to a series of
recommendations made by the GAO, the Institute of Medicine, and the House Committee
on Government Reform and Oversight and take critical new steps towards assuring the
safety of our blood supply.


CIVIL RIGHTS/IMMIGRATION

1. Asian American and Pacific Islander Executive Order (May) A proposed EO, entitled
Increasing Participation ofAsian Americans and Pacific Islanders in Federal Programs, is
currently pending clearance.    This EO was proposed by Asian Pacific American leaders to
address the fact that Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders are underserved in certain federal
programs, including health, education, housing, labor, and economic and community
development. The EO is similar to EOs addressing under-representation of African-Americans
and Latinos in federal education programs. This EO is more focused on health and human
services. The President could participate in a signing ceremony or event during May, which is
Asian Pacific American Heritage Month.

2. Public Charge Regulation Roll-Out          (May) The INS is expected is to release a
proposed regulation that clarifies the basis upon which a immigrant may be found a
"public charge" for the purposes of exclusion, adjustment of status and deportation.
Studies and anecdotal evidence have shown that legal immigrants and sometimes U.S.
citizens who are eligible to receive federal public benefits such as Medicaid and participate
in the Children Health Insurance Program (CHIP) are not applying for those benefits for
fear that they will be penalized under immigration laws. State and local governments,
immigrant advocacy groups, health care organizations, Members of Congress and others
have been pressing for guidance on this issue for nearly a year and are very anxious to get
clarification as soon as possible. The President could make a public statement about the
regulation and urge Congress to enact his FY 2000 budget proposals that provide states the
option to provide health services to immigrant children and pregnant women and provides food
stamps benefits to legal immigrants.


WELFARE/EMPLOYMENT

1. Welfare to Work Transportation Grants (Ready early to mid-May) The President could
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

announce the awarding of$75 million in welfare to work transportation grants, using the
opportunity to promote our welfare to work spending proposals including doubling funding for
these grants in FY 2000. These will be the first grants awarded under the Administration's
Access to Jobs initiative included in TEA-2. This would ideally be announced in a state or
community who is receiving a grant.


2. Announce Federal Government's Model Plan for Employment of People with
Disabilities (May) (currently being revised). This plan, directed by the U.S. Office of
Personnel Mangament (OPM), is based on recommendations from the Presidential Task Force on
Employment of Adults with Disabilities .. The Model Plan will address the following areas:
recruitment and hiring; reasonable accommodation; career opportunities; and data collection.

3. Food Stamp Regulations (May-June) Announce new Food Stamp regulations to improve
access for working families (in development; regulatory offsets needed).

4. Fathers Day Message (June 20 -- note that the President will be out of the country on this
day) Issue guidance/promising practices to states and communities on how federal programs
(including TANF, WtW, child support, and others) can support responsible fatherhood, using the
opportunity to plug our Welfare-to-Work reauthorization initiative. There are two related
conferences occurring around this time: the National Fatherhood Institute Summit in Washington
on June 14th, which will include a bipartisan group of mayors, and an International Fatherhood
Conference sponsored by the National Center for Strategic Non-Profit Leadership in San
Francisco 5/31 - 6/3. (Could also make a good VP announcement.)

5. Welfare to Work Partnership Convention, Chicago, IL (August 2-4) Address the Welfare
to Work Partnership convention in Chicago, August 2 - 4 of several thousand businesses from
dozens of cities. The President could announce the $200 million in high performance bonuses for
states that have done the best job placing welfare recipients in jobs and ensuring they succeed in
those jobs, and announce the first Individual Development Account grants to help low income
families build assets, which should be ready July 27th. If caseload reductions continue at
current pace, the President should be able to announce that the President has cut welfare rolls in
half since he took office. This event could serve to mark the third anniversary of the welfare
reform law (8/22/96) and the 2nd anniversary of the Welfare-to-Work program (8/5/97).


FOOD SAFETYINUTRITION

1. Food Safety Event.    (June) We can urge Congress to pass funds for our food safety
initiative, support Harkin's bill to give USDA recall authority for tainted food, and
announce a new rule regulating eggs to prevent salmonella. The FDA rule now at OMB
(and its USDA companion already completed and set to go into effect in August) will
require eggs to be kept at 40 degrees and put warning labels to consumers on each carton.
There are at least 800,000 cases of salmonella a year and eggs are the leading culprit.
They project a median savings of $700 million in reduced health care costs (OMB analysis
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conve~sion .

includes a range of $87 million to $6 billion). The cost of the rule to companies is $60
million the first year, $10 million a year afterwards. USDA also has a reinventing
government rule clearing OMB to move from a regulatory approach on sanitation of meat
and poultry plants to a performance setting standard method which companies will like
and shows we are interested in flexible means of achieving goals.


