RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: June Shih ( CN=June Shih/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:22-APR-1999 17:34:04.00

SUBJECT:    latest school safety draft

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Joshua S. Gottheimer    ( CN=Joshua S. Gottheimer/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 4/22/99 5:30 p.m.
Shih

PRESIDENT   WILLIAM J. CLINTON
STATEMENT   ON SCHOOL SAFETY GRANTS
THE WHITE   HOUSE
APRIL 23,   1999

        Good Morning.  Before I leave for the NATO Summit, ID,d like to say
a few more words about the tragedy in Littleton, Colorado that has shaken
all Americans this week -- and the latest steps we are taking to bring our
police and communities together to make our schools safer.

        First, I have spoken to Attorney General Reno, who was in
Littleton yesterday to assist law enforcement officials in their
investigation and to help the families of Columbine High School cope with
their loss and shock.  ID,d like to announce that the Justice Department
will make $1.5 million available to help the victims in their long journey
toward recovery -- from mental health and crisis counseling to assistance
with medical and funeral bills. As more needs become apparent, we will
move quickly to respond to them.

        Perhaps what is most disturbing to all Americans about the events
of Tuesday morning is that what we saw in Littleton has become all-too
familiar.  WeD,ve seen the grieving families, the terrified children, the
police tape and ambulance sirens before -- though not to this extent -- in
Pearl, Mississippi; Paducah, Kentucky; Jonesboro, Arkansas; and
Springfield, Oregon. Littleton is just the latest reminder that no
community is immune to senseless violence.

         It is important not to exaggerate the size of this problem.  Let
me say again: AmericaD,s schools are indeed safe.   Nearly everywhere in
America, a child is still safer sitting in school than he or she is
walking down the street. But there is always more we can do to make our
schoo.ls even safer.


,'.             For the past six years, my administration has made school safety
      a top priority.   In 1994, we put in place a policy of zero tolerance for
      guns in school, requiring principals to expel any student who brings a
      firearm on campus. We are cracking down on the illegal gun markets that
      supply firearms to children and criminals, and expanding after-school
      programs to keep children safe in the hours when parents work and juvenile
      crime soars.

              And last year, after consulting with parents, students, and school
      officials from Pearl, Paducah, Jonesboro and Springfield, we developed a
      comprehensive plan to help communities prevent youth violence in our
      schools. At our White House Conference on School Safety, I launched a new
      initiative to bring the same community policing efforts that are reducing
      crime on our streets into our schools.   Today, I am pleased to announce
      that the first round of these grants will be awarded to 336 schools and
      communities, enabling them to hire more than 600 police officers.   Like
      their counterparts on the street, these 600 officers will work closely
      with the citizens they serve -- with students, teachers and parents to
      improve campus security, to counsel troubled youth, and mediate conflicts
      before they escalate into violence.    ID,d like to thank Senators Robb,
      Hollings and Judd for efforts to secure these funds.   By the end of the
      year, we hope to have some 2,000 new officers in our schools -- and I
      encourage all communities to apply for these grants.

              One of the most important lessons we learned at the White House
      Conference on School Safety last fall was that preventing youth violence
      requires the commitment and the participation of all members of a
      community. That is why we have also put in place a new Safe
      Schools/Healthy Students initiative, run jointly by the Departments of
      Justice, Education and Health and Human Services, to support
      community-wide efforts to improve school safety. Communities all across
      America have until June 1 to apply for grants that can support the full
      range of violence prevention strategies -- from boosting security measures
      to hiring mental health and drug counselors to establishing new mentoring
      programs.

              These are some of the things that we are already doing to protect
      our children in school. Many of our newest ideas will require
      legisation. And next week, I will have more to say on those pieces of my
      budget.

              As the days pass, and the grief becomes less raw, this weekD,s
      tragedy must steel our nationD,s resolve to act -- to prevent violence from
      ever again shattering the peace of our SChoolyards; to keep guns and
      firearms out of the hands of children and away from our schools; to reach
      out to our troubled youth and help them resolve their anger and alienation
      with words, not weapons. That will be the best way to honor the memories
      of those who lost their lives Tuesday morning.  Thank you.


