RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Melissa N. Benton ( CN=Melissa N. Benton/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TlME:26-APR-1999 10:46:06.00

SUBJECT:   LRM MNB53 - - LABOR Report on S385 Safety Advancement for Employees (SAFE)

TO: Janet R. Forsgren    CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Peter Rundlet ( CN=Peter Rundlet/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Caroline R. Fredrickson ( CN=Caroline R. Fredrickson/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sandra Yamin ( CN=Sandra Yamin/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Cordelia W. Reimers ( CN=Cordelia W. Reimers/OU=CEA/O=EOP@EOP [ CEA 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lisa B. Fairhall ( CN=Lisa B. Fairhall/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Daniel J. Chenok ( CN=Daniel J. Chenok/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Larry R. Matlack ( CN=Larry R.o Matlack/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Iratha H. Waters ( CN=Iratha H. Waters/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Courtney B. Timberlake ( CN=Courtney B. Timberlake/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert G. Damus ( CN=Robert G. Damus/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Richard J. Turman ( CN=Richard J. Turman/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ': UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sarah Rosen ( CN=Sarah Rosen/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: John E. Thompson ( CN=John E. Thompson/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Stuart Shapiro ( CN=Stuart Shapiro/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Debra J. Bond ( CN=Debra J. Bond/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 ·

READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Barry White ( CN=Barry White/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB J )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Barbara Chow ( CN=Barbara Chow/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB J )
READ:UNKNOWN

cc: OPBRE ( CN=OPBRE/OU=ONDCP/O=EOP [ ONDCP J )
READ: UNKNOWN

cc: lrm@os.dhhs.gov ( lrm@os.dhhs.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN"J
READ: UNKNOWN

cc: cIa ( cIa @ sba.gov   @ inet [ UNKNOWN J )
READ: UNKNOWN

cc: clrm ( clrm @ doc.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN J )
READ: UNKNOWN

cc: ca. legislation ( ca. legislation @ gsa.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN J )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: ola ( ola @ opm.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN J )
READ: UNKNOWN

cc: justice.lrm ( justice.lrm @ usdoj.gov   @ inet [ UNKNOWN J ) (OA)
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: jwedekind ( jwedekind @ nlrb.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN J )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
NOTE: DEADLINE IS 4 p.m. TODAY.

EOP staff: you will not receive a hard copy of this LRM. The attachment
is approximately 9 pages long.
---------------------- Forwarded by Melissa N. Benton/OMB/EOP on 04/26/99
09:29 AM ---------------------------
LRM ID: MNB53
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

Monday, April 26, 1999

LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

TO:                     Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution
below
FROM:           Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for
Legislative Reference
OMB CONTACT:    Melissa N. Benton
                                PHONE: (202)395-7887 FAX: (202)395-6148
SUBJECT:        LABOR Report on S385 Safety Advancement for Employees
(SAFE) Act of 1999

DEADLINE:               4 p.m. Monday, April 26, 1999
In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the


program of the President.  please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

COMMENTS: The Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committtee is
scheduled to consider S. 385 on Wednesday, April 28th.

DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:
80-National Labor Relations Board - John E. Higgins Jr. - (202) 273-2910
25-COMMERCE - Michael A. Levitt - (202) 482-3151
61-JUSTICE - Dennis Burke - (202) 514-2141
107-Small Business Administration - Mary Kristine Swedin - (202) 205-6700
88-0ffice of Government Ethics - Jane Ley - (202) 208-8022
92-0ffice of Personnel Management - Harry Wolf - (202) 606-1424
52-HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES - Sondra S. Wallace - (202) 690-7760
51-General Services Administration - William R. Ratchford - (202) 501-0563
89-0ffice of National Drug Control Policy - John Carnevale - (202)
395-6736

EOP:
Barbara Chow
Iratha H. Waters
Barry White
Larry R. Matlack
Debra J. Bond
Daniel J. Chenok
Stuart Shapiro
Lisa B. Fairhall
John E. Thompson
Karen Tramontano
Sarah Rosen
Cordelia W. Reimers
Elena Kagan
Sandra Yamin
Richard J. Turman
Caroline R. Fredrickson
Robert G. Damus
peter Rund1et
courtney B. Timberlake
Janet R. Forsgren
LRM ID: MNB53    SUBJECT:  LABOR   Report on S385 Safety Advancement
for Employees (SAFE) Act of 1999
RESPONSE TO
LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
MEMORANDUM

If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's line) to leave a
message with a legislative assistant.

You may also respond by:
         (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct'line (you will be
connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
         (2) sending us a memo or letter
please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.



TO:             Melissa N. Benton phone:   395-7887   Fax:  395-6148
                Office of Management and Budget
                Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant):
395-7362

FROM:                                                     (Date)

                                                          (Name)

                                                          (Agency)

                                                          (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:

               Concur

               No Objection

               No Comment

               See proposed edits on pages

               Other:

               FAX RETURN of _____ pages, attached to this response sheet

==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D37]ARMS20060213U.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750436BOA0000010A0201000000020500000032930000000200005ED6F008905EFCB1D878CE
2CEFC32BFA5CBOA214E79C697C8311BB48FOD455641F8EF07C3CF1CA4E57F108FC3B3190F87E73
F3165D14A87FAC61ADA180A3F093FC141D44BECOEE3465CA01A99B2AA85F892D91A9D1A1852BCA
                                                             Hex-DiJmp Conversion

draft -- March 8, 2010




The Honorable James Jeffords
Chairman
Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions
united States Senate
washington, DC 20510-6300

Dear Chairman Jeffords:

I understand that the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and
Pensions has scheduled a mark-up session for April 28, 1999 on S.
385, the "Safety Advancement for Employees Act of 1999" (SAFE Act).
 I am writing to reiterate the Department's view that the SAFE Act,
if passed, would unintentionally undermine OSHA's ability to protect
workers.   As Assistant Secretary for Occupational Safety and Health
Charles Jeffress testified on March 4, 1999, before the Subcommittee
on Employment, Safety and Training, if S. 385 is passed by Congress
and presented to the President, I will recommend that he veto the
legislation.

The effort to enact S. 385 ignores the very real successes that have
been achieved since the bipartisan sponsorship and enactment of the
Occupational Safety and Health Act nearly 30 years ago.      The
successes of the 1990's are particularly compelling.      Workplace
injuries and illnesses have declined for five consecutive years.
The rate for 1997 was the lowest since the Bureau of Labor Statistics
began reporting this information in the early 1970s.     OSHA and the
OSH Act have been catalysts for these achievements by private sector
employers and workers.

OSHA is having success through results-driven enforcement efforts,
compliance assistance and standard setting. The agency has
developed a broad range of successful partnership programs that
promote cooperative efforts among employers, workers and government.
 OSHA also is making its enforcement programs smarter and fairer
by spending more time at the most hazardous workplaces and less time
at safer ones.   Finally, OSHA is measuring results, where possible,
not by numbers of citations or penalties, but by real improvements
in the lives of working people, such as reduced injury and illness
rates.   The five-year decline in injury and illness rates is evidence
that this combination of approaches is working. The SAFE Act focuses
on old problems that OSHA has moved beyond, not new challenges the
agency, workers and employers will face in the future.
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
draft -- March 8, 2010


We all agree that more must be done to protect workers.      Too many
workers continue to die or suffer injuries or illnesses because of
work-related causes.  Any legislation must increase workplace safety
and heal th. The Department is concerned that S. 385 would,. instead,
place workers at increased risk.

The overwhelming majority of discussion relating to S. 385 has focused
on the third-party certification provisions of the bill, about which
the Department has made its position clear.     As we have previously
stated, private consultants, as a whole, provide a valuable service
to employers and execute their responsibilities in a highly
professional manner.   OSHA encourages employers to use consultations
to help detect and control hazards.     But S. 385 provides only a
marginal incentive for employers to hire third-party consultants,
while creating significant conflict-of-interest problems by enabling
employers to hire private, for-profit consultants to, in effect,
exempt them from OSHA penalties. The SAFE Act also limits the
accountability of consultants and employers. Under S. 385, OSHA
has little recourse against consultants whose improper
certifications put workers at risk. The SAFE Act also allows employers
and consultants to negotiate the terms and time frames of compliance
and fails to guarantee that all hazards will be corrected before
a certificate of compliance is granted.

Although the Department is pleased that S. 385 emphasizes the
importance of safety and health programs, it differs from OSHA's
Safety and Health Achievement Recognition Program (SHARP) in
significant ways.   For example, while OSHA's SHARP program enables
employers to receive a one-year exemption from programmed
inspections, it does not provide a penalty exemption.  In addition,
employers participating in SHARP only receive their exemption from
programmed inspections after they have received significant
attention from OSHA and demonstrate the highest commitment to safety
and health. Moreover, if OSHA is called in for a complaint or
fatality investigation and discovers uncorrected violations, the
SHARP employer is subject to citation and penalties.

In addition to the SAFE Act's third-party certification provisions,
other provisions of the bill pose a significant threat to workplace
safety and health.   The Department's position on each of those
provisions is detailed in the attached analysis. For the convenience
of the Committee, I will highlight some, but by no means all, of
the most significant issues that concern the Department:



                                  2
                                                      Hex·Dump ConverSion
draft -- March 8, 2010

      Expanded Inspection Methods. Although investigation of
      complaints by telephone, facsimile and other similar methods
      is desirable in many situations, section 6 would enable those
      methods to be used at the expense of the fundamental worker
      right to an inspection.

      Worksite-Specific Compliance. Section 7, which would require
      OSHA to vacate citations if the employer had at least as
      effective a means of protecting its employees as those required
      by the OSH Act, could render OSHA standards academic. This
      new employer defense could convert every enforcement action
      into a time-consuming litigation effort, imposing substantial
      burdens on agency resources and the court system. OSHA
      standards would become guidelines for open debate each time
      an employer received a citation.

      Technical Assistance. The Department is concerned that section
      8 runs counter to the agreement reached last year to codify
      OSHA's consultation program.  Last year, the Congress enacted
      H.R. 2864 with bipartisan and Administration support and
      codified OSHA's consultation program with enhanced employee
      protections.  The Department was proud of that cooperative
      effort and believes it is premature to amend this new law.
      In addition, the fee-for-service element of S. 385 would give
      priority to those who can afford to pay for consultation, not
      those who need it most.   Consultation is and should remain
      prioritized for small, high-hazard industries, not for large,
      wealthy ones.

      Discretionary Compliance Assistance. Section 11 would allow
      OSHA to issue warnings in lieu of citations, even for violations
      that have killed employees, as long as the employer agrees to
      abate the violation promptly. The Department believes that
      such unlimited discretion is inappropriate and sends a message
      that employers need not take preventive steps to protect their
      workers prior to an OSHA inspection.

The attached analysis discusses these issues in greater detail, along
with the Department's position on Sections 4, 5, 9 and 10 of the
bill.

Mr. Chairman, S. 385 would greatly diminish the ability of the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration to administer and
enforce the OSH Act. The bill would undermine OSHA's effort to
achieve the Act's stated purpose: "to assure so far as possible every
working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working

                                  3
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
draft -- March 8, 2010

condi tions and to preserve our human resources _" The SAFE Act would
result in an increased risk of occupational injuries and illnesses,
jeopardizing the lives and well-being of our Nation's workers and
their families. This legislation, drafted in the name of retooling
and augmenting compliance-related resources, is a step backward and
would require OSHA to devote valuable resources to monitoring private
consultants rather than workplace safety and health. Accordingly,
the Administration opposes its enactment.

The Office of Management and Budget advises that there is no objection
to the submission of this report and that enactment of S. 385 would
not be in accord with the Administration's program.

                                Sincerely,



                                Alexis M. Herman

Enclosure




                                  4
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion

draft -- March 8,2010

                                                                                         Enclosure

                      DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ANALYSIS OF S. 385

                                           April 1999

Section 3. Third Party Consultation Services Program

Section 3 requires the Secretary to establish a program to "qualify" individuals who could then
serve as consultants to employers to assist them in identifying and correcting safety and health
hazards in their workplaces. An employer who contracted for and received such services and
who was declared by the consultant -- after the initial visit to the workplace, agreement on an
Action Plan, and a possible follow-up "reinspection" visit -- to be in compliance with the Act,
would be exempt from any assessment of a civil penalty under the Act for a period of one year,
with certain limited exceptions.

The Department of Labor strongly opposes this section.

Initially, although we agree that employee safety and health are paramount, the Department is
compelled to object to the new "purpose" that has been added to this section. The new
"purpose" statement would codify the erroneous opinion that all employers are unable to read,
understand and comply with the OSH Act. It would further codify the opinion that OSHA is
unable to satisfy the compliance needs of each employer and employee within its jurisdiction.
The addition of such sentiments to the OSH Act is, at best, inappropriate.

The incentives created by coupling the third party consultation provision with a penalty
exemption leave the program extremely vulnerable to conflict-of-interest and accountability
problems. At the most obvious level, a consultant paid by an employer would be likely to feel
pressured to approve the employer's program or to fail to recommend costly engineering controls
even when they were necessary to prevent an injury or illness. Likewise, businesses may feel
obligated to purchase unnecessary services proposed to them by their consultant in order to
ensure being granted a certificate of compliance. In addition, the provision permitting
employers and consultants to agree upon the terms of the Action Plan would invite abuses that
could result in seriously delayed abatement, if abatement is agreed to at all. Further, there is no
provision in the bill that would prevent an employer from utilizing one of its own employees, or
a former employee, to provide consulting services. Though this is no doubt not the intent of the
bill's authors, section 3 would in effect enable employers to "purchase" immunity from OSHA
inspections and penalties.

Reliance on the private sector for compliance declarations, coupled with exemptions from the
possibility of civil money penalties for those employers who receive such declarations, would
leave the agency without sufficient recourse if an inspection is necessary within the exemption
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conver:Jloil

draft -- March 8, 2010

period. For example, even if conditions in a certified workplace had undergone major change
during the exemption period, a penalty could only be levied if OSHA could demonstrate the
occurrence of a "fundamental change in the hazards" of the workplace or that the employer had
not made a good faith effort to remain in compliance. The only large-scale study to date that
correlates worksite injury data with worksite inspection history over time has shown that
inspections in which penalties are assessed result in a significant reduction in injuries at the
inspected site for three years following the inspection, and that inspections without penalties
have no appreciable impact (Wayne Gray and John Scholz, "Does Regulatory Enforcement
Work? A Panel Analysis of OSHA Enforcement," Law and Society Review, pages 177-213 (July
1993)).

The new version of the SAFE Act has been modified to include a safety and health program
component. This is a positive addition to the bill, but does not cure flaws inherent in the third
party consultation proposal. OSHA's Safety and Health Achievement Recognition Program
(SHARP), part of OSHA's consultation program, exempts employers from aprogrammed
inspection only after the employer requests and receives a full-service consultation visit, and
works with the consultation program for a period of at least a year from the date of the initial
visit to correct and abate all hazards, implement a fully effective worksite safety and health
program and lower the lost workday and accident rates to a level at or below the national average
for their industry. Unlike S.1237 in the 105 th Congress, S. 385 incorporates a requirement for
employers to implement a safety and health program before they can receive a certificate of
compliance. However, unlike OSHA's SHARP program, there is no guarantee that all hazards
will be abated before a certificate is granted. In addition, the ability of private, for-profit
consultants to 'provide penalty exemptions, rather than the exemptions from programmed
inspections that the SHARP program provides, gives those private, for-profit consultants power
well beyond any power granted to an OSHA' compliance officer or a state consultant. SHARP
companies never receive blanket exemptions from penalties. Finally, under the SHARP
program, OSHA has the final say over whether companies should receive SHARP recognition.
This system provides an additional check to ensure that a workplace is safe and has an effective
safety and health program before it becomes exempt from a programmed inspection.

The Department remains concerned that the bill is completely silent about a consultant's
obligations when an employer is found NOT to be in compliance. This means that the
consultant then has the option of refusing to provide a declaration, which leaves the employer
free to seek out another consultant. While the bill now requires the consultant to identify
violations of the OSH Act and possible corrective measures, there is still no clear requirement
that employers abate the identified hazards or that consultants report to OSHA in the event of an
employer's refusal to abate. Moreover, because reinspections are not necessarily required, there
is no way for the consultant, employees or OSHA to verify either abatement or whether the
elements ofan effective safety and health program have been fully implemented.



                                                2
                                                                                 Hex-Dilmp Convemion

draft -- March 8, 2010

The Department is concerned that the bill could allow an employer to receive a certificate of
compliance even ifit has not yet completed the process of hazard abatement. This would allow
an employer that is out of compliance with the law to be declared in compliance. The problem
is further compounded because an employer with a certificate of compliance who has not yet
abated hazards identified in the written plan could not be penalized by OSHA for one year.
Finally, unlike OSHA's abatement verification rule, the employer would not have to "inform
affected employees and their representatives about abatement activities" the employer had
promised to undertake. Elimination of a mandatory reinspection requirement worsens this
problem. Without reinspection, an employer could obtain a certificate without having to show
that it has abated a single hazard. In the event that a reinspection does actually occur, there is no
provision for further action if the employer has not satisfied all the elements in the consultation
report.

In addition, relying on the private sector for such certifications, while at the same time exempting
the employer's worksite from the possibility of a penalty, would deprive the agency of sufficient
"quality control" over both certifications and the safety and health audits performed by
Federally-sanctioned, certified individuals. The only oversight granted to OSHA under this bill
is meaningless. The bill requires OSHA to maintain a registry of safety and health consultants it
deems qualified, but hamstrings the agency in the event problems occur. In addition,
maintaining a registry would place a substantial burden on the agency's already limited
resources. Those resources should be targeted toward making workplaces and workers safer, not
toward policing a new army of consultants.

These problems are compounded because the disciplinary action anticipated by this legislation is
insufficient to redress or deter the abuses for which S.385 creates an incentive. Removal of a
consultant from participation in the program is simply not enough to prevent or punish abuses
such as fraud or collusion. Further, the circumstances under which an employer or consultant
could be disciplined are so limited that the bill would permit a consultant to continue to
participate where injuries and illnesses continue to occur as a result of incompetence or simple
negligence. In addition, it appears that a consultant's failure to identify a hazard would exempt
the employer from penalties for that hazard.

Further compounding these problems is the bill's failure to clearly identify the minimal
qualifications for a consultant. For example, section 8A(b)(2)(A) identifies practitioners of
certain state-licensed occupations as "eligible to be qualified" as consultants, but neglects others
and does not specify what experience in hazard identification and occupational safety and health
eligible consultants must have. OSHA is further concerned that this provision requires states to
create licensing programs for safety and health professionals. We believe that this requirement
may impose a significant burden upon the states.

The Department is unaware of any concrete evidence that a third party certification program
would be successful. At the outset ofthis Administration, the idea of third-party audits was

                                                  3
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conve~siDil
draft -- March 8, 2010

raised at a meeting of OSHA's stakeholders, where it met with little enthusiasm from either labor
or business representatives. More recently, a State of North Carolina survey demonstrated a
resounding preference on the part of employers for an OSHA consultant over a private
consultant. Cost, as well as suspicion that the private consultant might attempt to sell an
employer unnecessary services, were among the reasons given in support of OSHA consultants.


Section 4. Establishment of Special Advisory Committee

Section 4 would require the Secretary to establish a new advisory committee consisting of
employees, employers, members of the general public, and an official from a state plan state.
The committee would advise and make recommendations to the Secretary concerning the
establishment and implementation of third-party consultation services programs under section 8A
of the bill.

Section 7(a) of the current statute establishes the National Advisory Committee on Occupational
Safety and Health (NACOSH), which exists to make recommendations on matters relating to the
administration of the current Act. Mandating the establishment of a new advisory committee
dealing with the new consultation program in section 8A of the bill would duplicate part of the
existing jurisdiction ofNACOSH and, as such, would be redundant and not in keeping with the
concept of reinvention and streamlining. In the event the Secretary needs to consult with experts
on the specifics of consultation programs, Sections 7(c)(1) and (2) of the OSH Act now give the
Secretary broad powers to hire consultants and experts, and to utilize the services of experts from
other Federal agencies and states. If the Secretary wishes to obtain advice through the
instrumentality of an advisory committee, she may establish such a committee pursuant to the
requirements of the Federal Advisory Committee Act.


Section 5. Continuing Education and Professional Certification for Certain Occupational Safety
and Health Administration Personnel

Section 5 requires Federal employees who enforce the Act to meet the eligibility requirements
established under new section 8A(b)(2) for third-party consultants. In addition, these employees
must receive professional education and training every five years.

OSHA agrees that effective training of enforcement personnel is vitally important. OSHA and
the State Plans conduct a wide range of training programs to ensure that compliance officers
conduct fair and effective investigations.

The OSH Act is not industry-specific; it applies to a wide variety of workplaces throughout the
nation. Therefore, it has been OSHA's experience that individuals with broad professional
backgrounds become the best inspectors. During their first three years of employment, new

                                                4
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

draft -- March 8, 2010

Compliance Safety and Health Officers (CSHOs) are teamed with experienced inspectors and are
given over 250 hours of training on investigative techniques at the OSHA Training Institute
(OTI) in Des Plaines, Illinois. Additional training is mandatory for experienced CSHOs at least
once every three years. Finally, whenever new standards are promulgated, OTI offers
specialized training in these standards.

As this discussion illustrates, OSHA does train and educate its employees, but not in a manner
that matches the bill's inflexible requirements. We are concerned that the bill is unclear about
which employees would be required to receive this training. For example, would the agency's
attorneys be considered "responsible for enforcing this Act"? Weare further concerned about
the cost of providing the required training.

Finally, we note that the bill contains no specific training requirements for the consultants for the
program created under section 5, whose inspections and reports may result in employer
exemptions from civil money penalties.


Section 6. Expanded Inspection Methods

Section 6 of the bill would allow OSHA to investigate an alleged violation or danger by
telephone or facsimile. The bill also states that OSHA is not required to conduct complaint
inspections if "a request for inspection was made for reasons other than the safety and health of
the employees of an employer" or if OSHA determines that workers are not at risk.

OSHA has two primary concerns about this section. First, although investigation of complaints
by telephone, facsimile and other similar methods is desirable in many situations, these methods
should not replace a worker's fundamental right to an inspection. In the past two years, OSHA
has reduced the time from the filing of a complaint to the time hazards are abated by using
telephone and facsimile methods for investigating informal complaints. In addition, several
offices have experimented with these methods for investigatingformal worker complaints, but
only where the complaining worker agrees. However, these methods should not be allowed to
interfere where a worker seeks to exercise his or her statutory right to an inspection.

Second, section 6 would allow OSHA to forgo a formal complaint inspection if it determines that
the complaint was made for reasons other than safety and health -- even if the information
provided by the complainant suggests that the workers in question may be facing substantial risk.
 Again, the agency's determination as to whether to inspect following a formal complaint should
be based on the likelihood that workers are at risk -- not on the motivation of the complainant.
Where workers face substantial hazards, OSHA should act -- and is compelled by statute to act --
to protect them. Moreover, it would be very difficult for OSHA to determine the complainant's
motivation. This exercise would consume scarce agency resources and delay inspections.


                                                  5
                                                                              Hex-Dump ConVer510i1

draft -- March 8, 2010

Ultimately, the agency should continue to inspect where it has reasonable cause to believe that
workers are at risk.


Section 7. Worksite-Specific Compliance Methods

Section 7 would create an entirely new statutory defense to an OSHA citation, based on an
employer's demonstration that employees were protected by alternate methods equally or more
protective than those required by the standard the employer violated.

The OSH Review Commission and the courts have held repeatedly that when OSHA's standards
require employers to adopt specific precautions for protecting employees, employers must
comply in the manner specified. Under current law, employers have the right to select
alternative means of compliance when literal compliance is impossible or would pose a greater
hazard to employees. In "greater hazard" cases, the Commission requires an employer to show
that a variance has either been sought or would be inappropriate.

Under these rules, the contest rate has remained relatively low; less than ten percent of all
citations are currently contested. Under this provision of S. 385, however, virtually every
employer cited for violations of the OSH Act or OSHA standards could claim that an alternative
means of compliance was as effective as the standard in question. In effect, standards would
become guidelines, subject to challenge -- and potential waiver -- in every individual contested
case. This provision could seriously undermine OSHA's standards, tum every enforcement
action into a costly and time-consuming variance proceeding, and impose substantial burdens
upon agency resources, the OSH Review Commission, and the Federal courts.


Section 8. Technical Assistance Program

Section 8 amends the OSH Act's "Training and Employee Education" provision to require
cooperative agI'eements between OSHA and States to provide consultation programs. The
Department objects to amending the new consultation law Congress passed less than a year ago
with bipartisan support after extensive negotiations between Congress and the Department «P.L.
105-197, 112 Stat. 638 (July 16, 1998) (the "Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Compliance Assistance Authorization Act of 1998")).

We are particularly concerned with further amending the program in the way contemplated by
section 8. Under section 8, the Secretary must establish a pilot program in three states for a
duration of up to two years, the purpose of which would be to test a fee-for-service system. The
fifty state agencies that already administer the consultation program have expressed very strong
reserv~tions about charging fees in the consultation program. The Administration shares these



                                                6
                                                                               Hex-Dilmp Conversion'      .
draft -- March 8, 2010

concerns. Those who could pay would be visited first, defeating the philosophy that this service
is aimed at small or highly hazardous businesses that cannot afford to hire other consultants.


Section 9. VoluntarY Protection Program

Section 9 attempts to codify OSHA's Voluntary Protection Program, requiring the Secretary to
establish cooperative agreements with employers, who would create and maintain comprehensive
safety and health management systems. The bill requires enhanced OSHA efforts to include
small businesses in the VPP. Participation in this program would result in exemptions from
inspections and certain paperwork requirements.

OSHA has supported codifying the VPP program, but we do not support this provision as
drafted. The VPP has traditionally been, and should remain, a program for work sites, not
employers. Although there are references to "the worksite" in the section, this vital mainstay
of the program must be emphasized. OSHA is also concerned that codification could jeopardize
the high standards of the program currently in operation. As drafted, this provision does not
reflect the idea that the VPP program is reserved exclusively for those employers who have
demonstrated the highest commitment to worker safety and health. Ideally, any codification of
this program should limit participation to employers who have truly superior safety and health
records, but should allow OSHA the flexibility to define (and modify as necessary) the specific
criteria for participation in the program. We further note that the bill does not include a program
requirement for VPP participants to provide meaningful employee involvement in safety and
health matters, which we believe to be an important component of the program. These changes
must be made before OSHA would withdraw its objections.


Section 10. Prevention of Alcohol and Substance Abuse

Section 10 authorizes the Secretary to test employees and management for drugs and alcohol
following any work-related fatality or serious injury. It also permits employers to institute their
own testing programs conforming to HHS and Federal workplace guidelines. Testing is
permissible on a for-cause basis, as part of a scheduled medical examination, where an accident
involving actual or potential loss of human life, bodily injury, or property damage has occurred,
during participation in a drug treatment program, or on a random basis.

OSHA strongly supports measures that contribute to a drug-free work environment and
reasonable programs of drug testing within a comprehensive workplace program for certain
workplace environments, such as those involving safety-sensitive duties, and which take into
consideration employee rights to privacy. However, OSHA is concerned that it may not have
the resources to oversee drug and alcohol programs.


                                                 7
                                                                                   Hex-DiJiTip Conv(;r~ion -
draft -- March 8, 2010


Section 11. Discretionary Compliance Assistance

This section provides that the Secretary may issue warnings in lieu of citations where the
violation has no significant relationship to safety or health or where the employer has acted in
good faith to promptly abate the violation. The Secretary may not exercise this discretion where
the violation has a "significant relationship to employee safety or health" or where the violation is
willful or repeated.

Currently, the OSH Act provides that OSHA "shall" issue a citation for each violation it
discovers during an inspection. This provision would change this provision to "may." As a
practical matter, the impact ofthis proposed change is unclear. Federal case law demonstrates
that OSHA possesses a greater degree of prosecutorial discretion than was recognized in the early
years of the agency's existence. The agency has discretion under existing law to establish
programs in which it does not issue a citation for every violation it finds. For example, OSHA
has used this discretion to establish programs such as Maine 200.

Among other things, OSHA is particularly troubled by paragraph 3(B), which allows the issuance
of a "warning in lieu of a citation" for violations that the employer "acts promptly to abate[.]"
Even though it allows OSHA the discretion to issue citations in such circumstances, this
provision may signal employers that they need not take preventive steps to protect their workers
prior to an OSHA inspection. As such, this provision could undermine both the preventive
purpose as well as the deterrent effect of OSHA's enforcement program.

Prompt abatement of hazards should be encouraged, but it should be encouraged through penalty
reductions, not by eliminating any citations whatsoever for violations. Otherwise, employers
who make good faith efforts to protect workers before an OSHA inspector arrives at their door
will be treated the same as neglectful employers ,!\,ho have ignored their workers' safety until the
inspection.

Finally, the limitations on the Secretary's discretion are so narrow that they could lead to
outrageous results. For example, the Secretary's discretion is not limited to cases in which an
employer has shown good faith by implementing a safety and health program or in which no
employee has been killed or seriously injured because of the employer's violation. Rather, the
bill authorizes the Secretary to issue a warning in lieu of a citation if the employer "acts promptly
to abate the violation" even if the employer has a long history of previous violations and causes
the death of several employees.




                                                 8


