RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna ( FORTUNA_D)   (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-SEP-1996 11:05:25.10

SUBJECT: Decision on HHS Proposal on welfare waivers

TO: Carol H. Rasco                            RASCO C      (WHO)
READ: 5-SEP-1996 16:28:01.57

TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED B     (WHO)
READ: 5-SEP-1996 11:48:20.61

TO: Jacob J. Lew                              LEW J ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                     . ( APFEL K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ: 5-SEP-1996 11:37:25.18

TO: Jeremy D. Benami                          BENAMI J      (WHO)
READ: 6-SEP-1996 09:15:15.12

CC: Emily Bromberg                            BROMBERG E      (WHO)
READ: 9-SEP-1996 10:05:42.26

CC: Keith J. Fontenot                         FONTENOT K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addre
READ: NOT READ

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
HHS now has a proposal on what to tell states about how existing
waivers will fit within welfare reform. We still have no paper
from them on this (although we are allegedly about to get some).
However, John Monahan and Ann Rosewater just laid out their
proposed approach to Emily and me. Here is a quick description
with some pro's and con's. with Monday's conference coming up,
we need to decide quickly whether to go with this approach, bring
HHS in immediately for further discussion, or tell them we need
more time to decide.
As you know, the law is unclear about how to accommodate existing
waivers. The 3 key issues are:
o       whether states can continue to use the looser definition of
work that many waivers include, in meeting the law's work
participation rates;
o       whether states can enforce time limits as their waivers
allow, rather than meet stricter requirements in the bill;
and
o       how waivers' cost neutrality requirements will be enforced.
HHS's preferred approach is surprisingly non
o
-prescriptive. They
propose to ask states, via,the state plan guidance, to identify
areas where their waivers are inconsistent with the law and they
would like to continue to operate them.  This would be part of a
state's plan submission. HHS would then allow the waiver
practice to continue, unless it was incredibly egregious (the
 ,                                                                  Page 2 of2


example they gave was if a state didn't want to run a child
support enforcement system).
Eventually HHS would expect to issue regulations that might
affect state waivers, but any changes would only be applied
prospectively so states wouldn't be disadvantaged for past
behavior, and there would be opportunity for public comment on
any regulations.
Rich Tarplin of HHS has been working with congressional staff
both to clarify their intent and try to move them toward at least
a grudging acceptance of HHS's preferred approach.  They are
seeing some progress there.
Potential problems with this approach:  States may react to HHS's
presentation of this on Monday with mistrust, or with a desire
for more guidance. Also, relying solely on states'
representations may hurt states that fail to flag certain issues.
For example, if a state failed to list in its state plan that its
waiver allows for a looser definition of work, then HHS would
consider the law's tougher requirements to be in place, and the
state would potentially be subject to sanction. Also, it is
possible that Congress would criticize HHS for not drawing lines
if Rich Tarplin's efforts are unsuccessful.
Alternatives: Despite problems, it is not clear that the
alternatives are better.  If HHS were to try to draw some kind of
line as to which waiver practices were OK and which were not,
some states would be angry at them.  If they explicitly draw the
line so broadly that "anything goes", the Congress can say we are
thwarting the law.  So their concept is to let the states decide.
Let me know your recommendation on how to proceed.  It may be
that we have enough outstanding issues with HHS prior to Monday's
conference that we need a meeting today or tomorrow. We are
still waiting for the latest draft of their guidance to states,
and there is the unsettled issue of whether to require a 45
o
-day
comment period de novo for all states.


