RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]       )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 11-MAY-1999 10:55:41.00

SUBJECT:   draft of briefing for Podesta for 5/12 meeting with the Northern Plains Tr

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ]    )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is a draft briefing memo for Podesta for the meeting tomorrow
with the Northern Plains tribal leaders.  Karen T. has told Lynn Cutler
that she would like to get this to Podesta by llam today. Could you
please review this? Thanks, Mary ==================== ATTACHMENT     1 =============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D90]ARMS239775444.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043A60EOOOOOIOA0201000000020500000016DI00000002000073F5AOBE21AFD6D86ADDD7
E0641C8B4453602EFE95EOA2BFF9643A15303A5E07394D9923A9DA2265E45216DF3307FB33BOOl
BD081B19FA91DCB0478E4CD6CC4247A9B8D3E463208031CE7BD72A2278B91101E6FFFF83962CFB
9B1313F25B33A44BB82942A685F1DOF8A4CDE4DB8F72505407BF0356CE7A98881FF47FF924A099
824D87DE7AE4FE6FE3A1EA2816607B147C32B6632AEDCE7F37FIF8C22DCFD1B7C579118F2FCE71
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


                                          May 11,1999


 MEMORANDUM FOR THE CHIEF OF STAFF

 FROM:                 LYNN CUTLER
                       BRUCE REED
                       MARY SMITH

 SUBJECT:              MEETING WITH NORTHERN PLAINS TRIBES ON MAY 12

        On Wednesday, May 12, you are scheduled to attend a meeting in the Roosevelt Room with
 about 20 Northern Plains Tribes from Montana, North Dakota, and South Dakota (see attached
 list).   Senators Daschle (D-SD), Baucus (D-MT), Conrad (D-ND), Dorgan (D-ND), and
 Johnson (D-SD) are also expected to attend as well as Secretaries Babbitt, Cuomo, Riley, and
 Deputy Secretary of the Department of Heath and Human Services (HHS) Kevin Thurm,
 Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, Kevin Gover, and the Indian Health Service Director,
 Michael Trujillo.

       The main topics to be discussed at the meeting are health care, education, and housing.
 Even though the unemployment rates and poverty rates are high for Native Americans in general,
 the Northern Plains tribes are even worse condition because offactors such as geographic
 remoteness and harsh weather conditions. This memorandum outlines the format of the
 meeting; provides some background on the health care, education, and housing needs of Native
 Americans in general and these tribes in particular; and describes some of the actions the
 Administration is taking to address these needs. This meeting is primarily a listening session to
 hear about the issues of concern to these Tribes.

 I.   Purpose and Structure of the Meeting

       This meeting grew out a December 1998 letter to the President from several Senators
  on behalf of several tribes in North Dakota, South Dakota and Montana which had
  declared "states of emergency" on their respective reservations. The letter requested that
  the President meet with these tribes to address dismal housing, severe overcrowding,
. homelessness and extreme poverty on these reservations. The letter also noted that the
  consistently poor health issues threatening these communities are a direct result of "unmet
  housing needs." The tribes have since agreed to discuss their education needs as well.

       Senator Daschle is expected to give a brief introduction, followed by Senator Dorgan.
 Tex Hall of the Three Affiliated Tribes of Fort Berthold will'then give a brief introduction
 to the concerns of the tribes and other designated speakers will follow with discussion of
 the specific topics of health care, housing, and education.

                                                 1
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

II.   Discussion of Housing, Health Care, and Education for Native Americans

     The following discussion outlines some of the issues concerning housing, health care, and
education; and the efforts taken by the Administration to address these problems.

      A.   Housing Needs

       1. Scope of the Housing Problem

     While economic conditions in Indian country have improved in recent years,
American Indian and Alaska Native communities continue to lag behind the rest of the
United States with respect to social, economic, and educational attainment levels.

       Income levels of American Indians and Alaska Natives are substantially below those
        of all other Americans, and, in 1989, about 31 percent continued to live below the
        poverty level. In comparison, in 1989, about 13 percent of all Americans lived
        below the poverty level.
       According to Interior, 50% of the work force in Indian Country is unemployed.
        On the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota, almost 75% of the labor force is
        unemployed.
       30% of the employed in Indian Country live below poverty guidelines.

      Many American Indian and Alaska Native (AllAN) communities are in remote
locations subject to harsh weather conditions in both the summer and winter. Under such
conditions, inadequate housing can be a matter of life and death. The 1990 Census
revealed that there were 234,400 occupied housing units in Indian country, and that
housing problems of AIIANs are considerably more severe than those of other Americans.
       The percentage of AVAN households that are overcrowded or lack plumbing or kitchen
        facilities (28%) is over 5 times greater than that for other Americans (5.4%).
       Nearly 21 % of all AVAN households in tribal areas, or 49,224 households, experienced
        overcrowding.
       According to HUD, approximately 87,600 out of the 812,400 AVAN households in the
        entire United States (not just in Indian Country) are either overcrowded or without
        kitchens or plumbing; 40,400 AVAN households pay more than 50% of their income for
        housing; and over 142,000 units of affordable housing is needed in AVAN households.
       Between 1992 and 1996, lenders made only 91 conventional home mortgages to Native
        Americans on trust land.

       2. Administration Efforts on Native American Housing

      The Department of Housing and Urban Development is the lead federal agency responsible
for the provision of housing and community development assistance to Indian tribes and tribal
members. The enactment of the Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination
Act of 1996 (NAHASDA), now called the Indian Housing Block Grant program, transformed the

                                               2
                                                                      Hex텱iJmp Conversion

way in which HUD provided housing assistance to Indian tribes and Native American families.
Unlike previous programs which were competitive grants, the Indian Housing Block Grants are
formula grants based on need that go directly to tribes or their tribally designated housing entity.

Indian Housing Block Grants (formerly NAHASDA). The Administration's FY 2000 budget
maintains funding for this program at $620 million. This program provides a needs-based
formula grant for housing and housing-related assistance either directly to eligible Indian tribes
or through their tribally designated housing entities (TDHE).

Bureau of Indian Affairs Housing Improvement Program (HIP). BIA, through its Housing
Improvement Program (HIP), improves quality oflife by providing decent, safe, and sanitary
housing for needy American Indians and Alaska Natives. It repairs substandard housing in an
attempt to prevent poor housing conditions from forcing Indian families into homelessness on
reservations. In addition, the emphasis of the HIP program is on houses that need repairs for the
health and safety of the occupants. Other federal programs focus on building new homes; most
new housing construction on Indian reservations is funded by HUD. As in FY 1999, the FY
2000 budget includes $16 million for the HIP program.

One-Stop Mortgage Center. At the Native American Economic Development Conference, the
President announced this initiative which would streamline lending procedures and coordinate
the work of federal agencies that provide mortgages on reservations. The objective of the
initiative is to improve access to mortgage loans on all Indian reservations, initially through
pilot programs on the Navajo Nation and the Pine Ridge reservation. This initiative will
also work to encourage private-sector lending in Indian Country.

Empowerment Zones. For the first time, a tribe was selected as the lead entity for an EZ -- the
 Oglala Sioux Tribe on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota. In total, eighteen
American Indian and Alaska Native tribes were selected to participate in the Round II
Empowerment Zones (EZs) and Enterprise Communities (Ees).

Native American Housing and Economic Development Initiative. In March, Secretary
Cuomo announced this initiative, designed to boost home ownership and economic development,
which will encourage tribal governments to create non-profit groups that will be able to apply for
a share of more than $1 billion in annual assistance under several major HUD programs. This
initiative will examine HUD programs for which non-profits entities are eligible and identify
barriers that prevent Indian non-profits from participating.

Shared Visions--Pine Ridge Building Summit. The Shared Visions initiative is a
comprehensive effort to build more affordable housing and increase homeownership on
American Indian reservations across the country. The Summit has a goal of building 50 new
homes on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota and will enlist volunteers to begin
building homes sometime this year. In addition, this Initiative will assist a newly established
model housing nonprofit on the Pine Ridge Reservation to provide homeownership services to
Native Americans, including low-cost financing, down payment assistance, and homeownership


                                                  3
                                                                          Hex-DiJmp COfl"v'e:aioil .
     B.    Health Care

       1. Health Care Needs

      Native Americans have particularly poor health status, and it is widely recognized that the
Indian Health Service (IHS), the main resource for Indian tribes who deliver health programs to
their communities, is not sufficiently funded. As the Native American population increases (by
2050, the Native American population will more than double to 4.6 million) there is increased
demand for services from a system that is not sufficiently funded to meet current needs.

      American Indians suffer from diabetes at three times the rate of the non-Native
       population.
      American Indians are over two times more likely to have a child die from Sudden Infant
       Death Syndrome (SIDS).
      AllAN women have the worst survival statistics for breast cancer than any other ethnic
       groups because of late detection.
      Native Americans, particularly in the Northern Plains, often have life expectancies that
       rival third-world countries. The average life expectancy for the Oglala Sioux men at the
       Pine Ride Reservation in South Dakota is 56.5 years, and for women, it is 66 years.
      Substance abuse, especially alcohol, among youth is a serious problem in many Indian
       communities. The problem is already manifesting itself through alcoholism death rates
       for Indians, 15 to 24 years of age. The Indian rate is 5.5 deaths per 100,000 population
       compared to 0.3 for the entire population.
      Indian youth are also more likely to die from accidents and suicide than youth in the
       general population.
      Death from traumatic injury is the leading killer ofIndian people from the early age of7
       months to age 44. Native Americans die of injury death at 2-3 times the rate of other
       Americans.

      IHS estimates that its per capita appropriations are about $1,800 (approximately $1,400
personal services and $400 MedicaidlMedicare/private insurance collections) compared with the
approximate $3,000 per capita expenditure for Medicaid. While these figures have not been
adjusted for comparability and for substantial differences in population and services, the tribes
will argue that these figures demonstrate that we are not meeting our trust responsibility.

       2. Administration Health Care Initiatives

      For IHS, the budget proposes $2.4 billion, a substantial increase of eight percent over the
1999 level. This increase would enable IHS to continue expanding accessible and high-quality
health care to its Native American service users. This funding includes an initiative to help
alleviate complications from diabetes and to provide almost 35,000 breast cancer screenings to
Native American women.


                                                4
                                                                          Hex-Dump COlive:sioil

Indian Health Service. The President's budget proposes $2.4 billion, an increase for the
Indian Health Service (IHS) of $170 million or 8 percent over the FY 1999 level. This
increase would enable IHS to continue expanding accessible and high-quality health care to
its 1.4 million Native American service users. The budget enables IHS to further enhance
current levels of direct health care services, including providing 34,000 breast cancer
screening mammographies to Native American women between ages 50-69; creating 44 new
dental unit teams to provide an additional 25,000 dental visits; reducing the incidence of
complications related to chronic diseases such as diabetes through clinical monitoring and
health promotion on life style changes; and enabling approximately 100 new
community-based public health nurses to provide outreach activities, including home
visitations, well-child examinations, immunizations, prenatal care, health fairs, follow-up
visits, and missed clinical appointments.

IHS Medicaid and Medicare Reimbursements. In addition, from FY 1998 to FY 2000, IRS
expects to collect an additional $82 million in reimbursements due to Medicaid collections rate
increases. Based on IRS' hospital-based cost data, IRS' Medicaid inpatient rates will rise by 40
percent between 1997 and 1999 and Medicaid outpatient rates will increase by 13 percent. IRS
will collect a total of $335 million in Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements in FY2000,
helping to bring the total IRS program level to $2.8 billion.

Diabetes Treatment and Prevention Grants. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 provided $30
million per year for 5 years to be appropriated to the Children's Health Insurance Program to be
transferred to IRS for diabetes prevention and treatment.

Women's Health. The budget provides $6 million to advance the GPRA goal of assuring that at
least 30% of the AVAN female population 50-69 years of age have had mammography
screenings. AVAN women have the worst survival statistics for breast cancer than any other
ethnic groups because oflate detection. With the FY 2000 increases, IHS will be able to finance
an additional 34,000 breast cancer mammography screenings for Native American women
between the ages of 50-69.

Injury Prevention. This is a primary health initiative. Death from traumatic injury is the
leading killer ofIndian people from the early age of7 months to age 44. Native Americans die
of injury death at 2-3 times the rate of other Americans. A total of $120 million is provided for
the Facilities and Environmental Health Services Program. Of which, an increase of$7 million
is provided for injury prevention activities.

Mental Health. The budget provides $48 million, an increase of$7 million (+ 17%) to provide
essential services such as crises intervention,. victim and child protection services, family mental
health counseling, suicide prevention and intervention, and response to domestic VIolence.

Alcohol and SUbstance Abuse. The budget provides $96 million (+1.65 million, +1.7%).
Additional funds will be used to increase the capacity of treatment centers, with emphasis placed


                                                 5
                                                                         Hex-Dump COfive:;;ion
on톚revention and health promotion services.

Sanitation Facilities Construction. The budget proposes $93 million (+$4 million, +4%), for
IHS to continue to provide water supply and waste disposal to Indian homes and communities
and clean up and replace open dumps.
Montana-Specific. The FY 2000 budget provides $8 million for the phase-in of staff and related
costs for newly-opened outpatient facilities, including the Lame Deer, MT Indian Health Center
($2.4 million).


     C.   Education

       1. Lack of Educational Opportunities for Native Americans

     There is generally not high educational attainment for Native American children.

      The Bureau ofIndian Affairs (BIA) funds 185 schools that serve more than 50,000
       students on 67 reservations in 23 states. Overall BIA funds about 120 day schools and
       65 boarding schools and several dormitories.
      Of the 185 BIA-funded elementary and secondary schools on reservations today,
       approximately half of the buildings are over 30 years old, and approximately 20 percent
       are over 50 years old. Many of these schools require replacement or much-needed health
       and safety-related repairs and improvements that together comprise a roughly $700
       million backlog.
      Specifically in the Dakotas and Montana, the BIA funds the operations of 35 elementary
       and secondary schools.
      About 90 percent of American Indian children attend local public schools, while only
       about 10 percent attend BIA-funded schools.
      Approximately 50 percent of American Indian fourth-graders scored below the basic level
       in reading and mathematics.
      Native Americans have some of the highest high school drop out rates.
      Less than two-thirds of Native Americans are high school graduates compared with 75
       percent of the rest of the population.
      Less than 10 percent of Native Americans have bachelor's degrees compared with 20
       percent of the total population and studies show that only about 35 percent of Native
       Americans who enter mainstream institutions as freshman graduate.

       2. Administration Efforts Related to Native American Education

     The Administration is continuing its commitment to education by expanding the BIA
school construction initiative and by including a new initiative to train 1000 new Native
American teachers.

BIA School Operations. In FY 2000, $504 million (6% over FY1999 enacted) will fund basic

                                               6
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

school operations, child development programs, transportation, salaries, and facilities operation
and maintenance.

BIA School Construction and Repair with New Bonding Initiative. The Budget provides
$108 million (80% over FY 1999 enacted) to replace at least two of BIA' s oldest and most
dilapidated schools, as well as numerous major facilities improvement and repair projects.
Within this amount, up to $30 million may be used to ensure the repayment of principal on
school modernization bonds. The Administration's FY 2000 school modernization initiative
includes a $200 million set-aside in bonding authority for FY 2000 and FY 2001 and tax credits
to be paid to bond holders in lieu of interest payments.

FY99 BIA School Construction and Repair for the Dakotas and Montana.
   11 portable classroom buildings (of 44 BIA-wide) (another 5 of25 in FY 2000)
   2 roof repair/replacement projects in ND (2 more in 2000)
   11 environmental projects (assessments/inspections/abatements) including the replacement
    or upgrading of 16 underground fuel storage tanks.
   advance planning and design work for major rehab proJect at I SD school

Class Size Initiative. As part of the President's second installment to help schools recruit, hire,
and train 100,000 new teachers by 2005, the Department of Education requests $1.4 billion ($200
million over FY 1999), to reduce class size in the early grades from 22 to 18 students in grades
1-3 and ensure that all students learn to read proficiently and master the basics. This new
initiative includes a $7 million set-aside for territories and for BIA-funded schools located on or
near reservations.

Native American Education Executive Order. At the Native American Economic
Development Conference in August 1998, the President signed an executive order which is
designed to improve the academic performance of American Indian and Alaska Native
students in grades K-12. This order establishes an Interagency Task Force which will
plan budget initiatives, develop an education resource guide, and assist in implementing a
comprehensive research agenda on Indian education; mandates a series of regional forums
to be convened to identify promising practices; and sets up pilot sites which will receive
comprehensive technical assistance in support of the goals of the order.

1000 New Native American Teachers. The FY2000 budget proposes $10 million to begin
training and recruiting 1000 new teachers for areas with high concentrations of American Indian
and Alaska Native students. This initiative provides financial assistance to students who commit
to teach in the targeted areas, provides assistance for the creation of programs to train teachers,
and allows for continuing education to ensure that the quality of teachers remains high.

American Indian Education Foundation. Just last week, the First Lady announced the
Administration's support for legislation to create a nonprofit entity called the American Indian
Education Foundation, similar to the National Park Foundation, in order to help leverage
private resources for the education of Native American children. This Foundation would be able

                                                 7
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion

to fund projects such as teacher training and development programs; family literacy programs;
the provision of materials and equipment; model programs to advance the educational
opportunities of Native American students; and the development of American Indian cultural
programs for use in schools.

Tribally Controlled Community Colleges. TCCCs are predominantly two-year institutions,
primarily located on remote reservations. TCCCs serve American Indian communities with very
limited access to other post secondary institutions. The colleges address the needs of some of
the most economically depressed regions in the country and often serve as community centers,
libraries and career centers, economic development centers, or public meeting places. More
than half(16) of the TCCCs are located in ND, SD, or MT. The FY 2000 BIA budget includes,
$38.4 million ($7. 1million or 23% over FY 1999 enacted) for the TCCCs.

III. Options and Recommendations

      While the above statistics demonstrate that more needs to be done with respect to
improving the lives of Native Americans living on reservations, particularly in the Northern
Plains, the President has made a number of important announcements for Indian Country, most
notably at the Native American Economic Development Conference last AugUst. We should
emphasize the some of the initiatives already announced:
       An executive order to improve the academic performance of American Indian and Alaska
        Native students in K-12;
       The first-ever comprehensive technology infrastructure study which will be completed.
        this summer;
       A plan to direct $70 million to assist seven tribes to establish small start-up technology
        companies to obtain government contracts;
       A project to streamline the mortgage lending process in Indian Country and to improve
        access to mortgage loans on Indian reservations with pilots at the Navajo Nation and the
        Pine Ridge Reservation; and
       The EZ at Pine Ridge and the participation of other tribes in EZ/ECs.

      In addition to emphasizing some of our accomplishments, we should call upon the Senators
and the tribes to help us pass our budget and pass some of our legislative initiatives such as:
       Funding the $10 million for 1000 new Native American teachers;
       Fully funding our $2.4 billion request for the Indian Health Service;
       Funding our request for BIA-school construction and repair;
       Funding HUD's request for its Native American housing initiatives;
       Passing legislation to enable the leveraging of private funds for the federal BIA schools
        on reservations through the Administration's bonding initiative; and
       Passing legislation for the American Indian Education Foundation in order to leverage
        private resources to improve Native American education.

Attachments
    List of Tribes Attending

                                                 8
                                                                  Hex-DiJmp Conversioil -

   The American Indian, Eskimo, and Aleut Population (U.S. Census Bureau)
   Key Facts About American Indian and Alaska Native Children and Youth (prepared by
    IHS)
   Washington Post article on Pine Ridge
   Tribal problems (prepared by HUD)
   Photographs




                                           9
                                                               Hex텱ump Conversion

                 TRIBES EXPECTED TO ATTEND MAY 12 MEETING

NORTH DAKOTA
Three Affiliated Tribes of Fort Berthold
       Chairman Tex'Hall (designated spokesperson for this meeting)
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe (of North and South Dakota)
       Chairman Charles Murphy
Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa
       Chairman Richard LaFramboise
Spirit Lake Tribe
       Chairwoman Myra Pearson
       (tribal elections held 5/4, so two chairs old and new, might attend).

SOUTH DAKOTA
Rosebud Sioux Tribe
       Chairman Norman Wilson
Pine Ridge Sioux Tribe
       President Harold Salway
Lower Brule Sioux Tribe
       Chairman Michael Jandreau
Crow Creek Sioux Tribe
       Chairman Harold Miller
Sisseton-Wahpeton Dakota Nation
       Chairman Andrew Grey
Yankton Sioux Tribe
       Chairman Steve Cournoyer
Flandreau-Santee Sioux
       Chairman Tom Renfranz
Cheyenne RiverSioux
       Chairmen Gregg Bourland

MONTANA
Fort Peck
       Chairman Spike Big Horn
Northern Cheyenne Tribe
       Chairman Joe Walks Along.
Blackfeet
       Chairman William Old Chief
Rocky Boy
       Chairman Burt Corcoran
Fort Belknap
       Chairman Joseph McConnell
Flatland Reservation
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion -
     Chairman Mickey Pablo
Montana-Wyoming Tribal Leaders Council
     Chairman Dennis Big Hair




                                         2
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conve:-sion 

                   List of Tribes' Concerns (As Prepared by HUD)

                                MONTANA

Note:     The "Operation Walking Shield" Program is a civil-military
partnership program funded through the Department of Defense to provide
"readiness training" while transporting goods (medical supplies, surplus
equipment, excess housing) to Indian reservations across the country.

BLACKFEET TRIBE

The 3,000 square mile Blackfeet Reservation is located in northwestern
Montana adjacent to Glacier national Park. The current Tribal chairman,
William Old Chief, was elected late last year and succeeded Earl Old Person
who held the Office since 1959.

       Because of high unemployment achieving homeownership is
significantly difficult for tribal members. Few families can afford even
moderate mortgage payments. The reservation has a single landfill for solid
waste disposal which, unfortunately, fails to meet EPA standards and may
have to be closed. The cost for closure and building a new landfill would be
prohibitive. As a result of the Tribe's exemption from Welfare Reform, many
off-reservation tribal members are moving to the reservation, further straining
the Tribe's ability to provide adequate housing, infrastruc(ure and services


CHIPPEWA CREE TRIBE of the Rocky Boy's Reservation

The unemployment rate of this reservation is 72%. Bert Corcoran is the
elected Tribal Chairperson of this Self Governance Tribe. The reservation is
located in north-central Montana, 50 miles south of the Canadian Border.
This is the smallest reservation in Montana. The Tribe is in the process of
acquiring housing units through the US Air Force Radar Base from Havre,
MT to alleviate the housing shortage.

FORT BELKNAP -Gros Ventre and Assiniboine Tribe

The current unemployment rate of the reservation is 68% and at least 52%
                                                               Hex-Dump Co~ve!'Sioil

  of the reservation residents' annual income is below $4,999.           Joseph
. McConnell is the current elected Tribal Chairperson of the Fort Belknap
  Indian Community located in Harlem, Montana. The Tribe is in the process
  of acquiring 13 units through the US Air Force Radar Base near Havre, MT in
  order to alleviate the shortage of housing. The Tribe is experiencing water
  problems on the reservation and are in need of new water systems for their
  different communities. Some of the existing water pipes have asbestos.

FORT PECK

The Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Reservation are facing high
unemployment (52%) and an accompanying high poverty rate of 31.6%.
Both the reservation and the neighboring Roosevelt County make up one of
the poorest areas in the state. A significant portion of the population (38.6%)
have less than a high school diploma. The Fort Peck Assiniboine and Sioux
Tribal community was designated to be an Enterprise Community to assist in
addressing the problems facing their people.

      The reservation is relatively isolated along the Canadian - Montana
border. The economic base is agriculture with government employment and
seasonal construction providing about 56% percent of the jobs. The Tribal
Chairperson, Spike Bighorn has been in office for two years. He has served
on the Tribal Council for about 8 years. His education background is in
education and is very active on the school board.


NORTHERN CHEYENNE TRIBE

The Northern Cheyenne Tribe is located in an isolated area of southeastern
Montana. The location has made it impossible for the tribe to establish an
economic base. The TDHE manages over 800 units of HUD subsidized
housing. The tribe has a high crime rate and the drug usage is rampart on
the reservation. The social problems are a direct result of the lack of
economic opportunity for the tribal members. The tribe has been unable to
develop partnerships with the business community that could help generate
jobs.
The Tribal President is Joe Walksalong. He is serving his first term as
President.


                                       2
                                                        Hex-Dump COili'e!'Sioil 

     The Northern Cheyenne Tribe would like to establish an economic base
through economic development and generate long term employment
opportunities that do not rely on federal dollars.
     Note: On May 7t \ 1999, the Montana Office of HUD and the Montana
     Office of SBA signed a Memorandum of Agreement to coordinate efforts
     in working with the Montana tribes to create business opportunities and
     jobs. Their approach is one job at a time. There is no misconception
     by either HUD or SBA that they can change the reservations' economic
     situation overnight. Also, the week of May 10, 1999, the community
     builders from MT, NPONAP and the Secretary's Representative's office
     will be touring the 4 tribes of western Montana to survey the tribes'
     needs and potential for economic development. A similar tour of the
     tribes in eastern Montana was conducted in March, 1999.

                         SOUTH DAKOTA

FLANDREAU SANTEE SIOUX TRIBE

The Flandreau Santee Sioux Tribe is located in southeastern South Dakota.
Thomas Ranfranz is the current elected Tribal Chair of the approximately
1,828 member tribes. The housing authority has recently acquired Walking
Shield units to assist in their housing shortage.         The reservation is
experiencing difficulty with their water system.        All residents of the
reservation must have water softeners and bottled water.

LOWERo BRULE SIOUX

The Lower Brule Tribe is located in the southern part of South Dakota in a
very rural part of the state. There are few job opportunities for the tribal
members. Most tribal members cannot qualify for loans to purchase a home
due to a lack of a steady income. Many of those that do have a good income
do not have a good credit rating. The requirement of having to compete for
economic development funds each year makes it difficult to plan for economic
development on the reservation to provide jobs. The tribal chairman is Mr.
Michael Jandreau. He has been in tribal government for about 25 years and
has been the chairman for the majority of that time.



                                     3
                                                               Hex-DiJmp COil-ve:-sion
OGLALA SIOUX TRIBE

The Oglala Sioux Tribe is located in the poorest county in the nation and is in
dire need of economic development. The reservation was recently declared an
Empowerment Zone by the Department of Agriculture. The Oglala Sioux
Reservation is located in the southwest corner of SD and is the largest tribe in
the Northern Plains region. They manage over 1600 units of HUD subsidized
housing. The TDHE has been innovative in obtaining other sources of
funding for housing. Oglala is the site for the Shared Visions Initiative in
August, 1999. The Tribal President is Harold Dean Salway. He is serving
his second non'::'consecutive term as President.


ROSEBUD SIOUX

The Rosebud Sioux Tribe is located in central South Dakota and is in dire
need for additional housing. The tribe recently declared a state of emergency
on the reservation due to deplorable housing conditions. The tribe currently
manages over 1200 units of HUD subsidized housing. The housing emergency
is a direct result of a chronic and serious housing shortage that has effected the
24,000 people on the reservation. The lack of housing has resulted in severe
overcrowding and contributes to illnesses among the tribal membership. The
Tribal President is Norman G. Wilson. Who is serving his second term as
President.

The Rosebud Sioux Tribe needs help in addressing this housing crisis. The
tribe is requesting assistance to continue the support of the Department of
Defense in requiring and transporting excess federal property as part of the
Walking Shield Program. They also request the support of the Bureau of
Indian Affairs, Indian Health Service, HUD in addressing the housing
shortage.


CROW CREEK SIOUX

The Crow Creek Sioux Tribe
 is located in the second poorest county in the US. The tribe needs economic
development. The tribe has recently received a settlement from the Federal
Government on the "taking land" which is a settlement for the land lost

                                        4
                                                           /lax-Dump COflve:siOi1 .

when a series of dams along the Missouri River inundated the tribe's most
fertile land. The TDHE is in the process of acquiring 25 3-bedroom units
called "Governor's units" which are built by the SD prison inmates and sold
for $37,000 each to Indian tribes. Smaller units are also available for elderly
and handicapped. The tribal chairman is Harold "Curley" Miller. He is
serving his first term as Chairperson after serving one term as a councilman.

CHEYENNE RIVER SIOUX

The Cheyenne River Sioux Indian Reservation was established in March 1889.
 The reservation is located in the north central portion of South Dakota and
the is size is about 2,806,914 acres (similar to Connecticut). Approximately
12,423 Tribal enrolled members live on or adjacent to the reservation. Tribal
headquarters are located in Eagle Butte, approximately 95 miles northwest of
Pierre, the state capital. Unemployment on the reservation ranges from 60 to
80 percent, depending on seasonal employment. Major employers are
governmental agencies located on the reservation, i.e. Cheyenne River Sioux
Tribe, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Indian Health Service, Cheyenne-Eagle
School System, and South Dakota Social Services. The Tribal Chairman is
Gregg Bourland. In 1990, Mr. Bourland was first elected to 2 four-year terms
as Chairman and is now in his ninth year as Chairman. Chairman Bourland
also served on Hillary Clinton's panel on health care reform.


SISSETON-WAHPETON SIOUX TRIBES

Sisseton-Wahpeton Sioux has concerns with the lack of housing and the
Federal Unemployment Tax Act(FUTA). Mr. Andrew Grey, Tribal
Chairperson recently testified in front of Congress with concerns about the
lack of housing on Indian Reservations and he questioned Congress about the
applicability of Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) to Indian Tribes.

      The estimated average per capita income of Tribal members is $7,884.
The primary sources of income are from leasing agriculture land, tribal
gaming operations, Dakota Western (plastic bag manufacturing company
owned by the Tribe), and schools and government (Federal and Tribal
agencies). The unemployment rate is approximately 18 percent.



                                      5
YANKTON SIOUX                                          Hex-DiJmp COllVersion


       The Yankton Sioux Tribal Chairperson is Mr. Steven Cournoyer, who
has been in tribal politics for over ten years. Yankton Sioux Reservation is
located in Charles Mix County in the southeastern part of South Dakota,
about 90 miles southwest of Sioux Falls. Yankton Sioux Housing Authority has
filed a fair housing complaint against Charles Mix County. The complaint
stems from the County's refusal to enter into a cooperation agreement.

      Marty Indian School and the Federal Government Agencies, Bureau of
Indian Affairs and Indian Health Service, are large employers of tribal
members. The unemployment rate is 38 percent.


                          NORTH DAKOTA

FORT BERTHOLD

       The Fort Berthold Reservation, located about 75 miles west of Minot in
the west central part of North Dakota, is home to the Three Affiliated Tribes
of the Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara. Mr. Tex Hall is the Tribal Chairman
since the latest election in November 1998.

The tribes need assistance and guidance in the areas of economic development
and education. Construction of the Garrison Dam in the 1950s created Lake
Sakakawea and displaced over 80 percent of all Fort Berthold families. The
Three Affiliated Tribes fought for and recently won millions of dollars in
recovery funds, some of which will be distributed soon to the 6 political
subdivisions of the reservation, primarily for economic development and
education purposes. The unemployment rate is 13 percent.


FORT TOTTEN

The Spirit Lake Sioux Tribe is located on the south and east side of Spirit
Lake. The lake has been rising since 1993 and has inundated much of the
Tribal land. This flooding has severely effected transportation, agriculture
and tourism. The tribe has spent a great deal of its time fighting the rising

                                     6
                                                           Hex-Dump COiive,sioil 

lake. FEMA and HUD have been good partners in the process. Gov.
Schaeffer. of ND has declared a disaster in the area around Spirit Lake
(formerly Devil's Lake). A tribal election was held May 4, 1999. We have
not been informed of the results. The former Tribal Chairperson, Myra
Pearson, chose not to run for re-election.


STANDING ROCK SIOUX TRIBE

       The reservation is located in both ND and SD and therefore is forced to
deal with two state governments. The reservation received disaster funds due
to the blizzard of 1997. The tribal chairperson has served as chairman of the
tribe for a number of years.

      The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe is having great difficulty obtaining a
Cooperation Agreement with the city of McLaughlin, SD. The citizens of the
city circulated a petition asking that the issue of whether to grant a
cooperation agreement be put on the ballot. The citizens then voted down the
agreement.

TURTLE MOUNTAIN BAND OF CHIPPEWA INDIANS

Turtle Mountain Tribe has a high unemployment rate (45%), due to a lack of
economic development. The Turtle Mountain Tribe is the largest employer
on the reservation. Tribal members are employed ata tribally owned
manufacturing plant and tribally owned Uniband. The Turtle Mountain
Tribe is located in the North Central part of North Dakota near the Canadian
border. This Tribe is noted for having the largest housing authority
(approximately 1,600 homes) in the region with the smallest land base
(approximately 140,100 acres). The Tribe also has a service area, Trenton
Indian Service Area, located in Northwest North Dakota and 3 counties in
Northeast Montana. The Tribal Chairperson is Richard LaFramboise who,
before missing a term, was also the previous Tribal Chairperson.


TRENTON INDIAN SERVICE AREA

The Trenton Indian Service Area is a sub-entity of the Turtle Mountain Tribe.
 They receive their funding from the Turtle Mountain Tribe. The Trenton

                                      7
                                                     Hex-Dump COfiversion .

Service Area was established by tribal members living in Northwest North
Dakota and Northeast Montana to control their own service area. This area
is approximately 6,200 square miles. The unemployment rate is 43%.




                                    8


