RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-MAY-1999 23:44:51.00

SUBJECT:   First Draft of Crime Bill Handout

TO: Broderick Johnson ( CN=Broderick Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Eric R. Anderson ( CN=Eric R. Anderson/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Irene Bueno ( CN=Irene Bueno/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Caroline R. Fredrickson ( CN=Caroline R. Fredrickson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ]
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Peterson ( CN=Michelle Peterson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: James Boden ( CN=James Boden/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
BR/EK/et.al. :

Some crime pleasure reading ... here's the first draft of our hand-out for
Wednesday event.  Thoughts? Reactions?

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D27]ARMS23112444P.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:


     FF575043BC060000010A020100000002050000002E740000000200001845F991837CBAFCAA7D4E
     2E1C9AA17A392D074F3EA82204C7D6605AF8458E780D976E724261753441DE6672B2458CB09F2B
     665813B02815740E8D1A226CEEBOD7E27AC1DEC47D4D59D2A6C8D430CA537EE28BDBFDODED735C
                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


                 The 21st Century Law Enforcement and Public Safety Act
                                     May 12,1999

Today, President Clinton will announce that the Administration will reach its goal of helping
communities fund the hiring and redeployment of 100,000 more police officers. Additionally,
he will propose new legislation -- The 21st Century Law Enforcement and Public Safety Act--
that builds on the successful 1994 Crime Act, which has helped to drive down crime rates for
more than six years in a row. This new legislation will renew the Justice Department's
Community Oriented Policing Services program (COPS), and include new provisions to reduce
juvenile and drug crime, protect all crime victims, and combat international crime and terrorism.

      Helping fund 100,000 more police. President Clinton will announce the availability of
       more than $95 million for 526 communities to hire approximately 1,500 new police
       officers. With these new grants, the COPS office will have provided _ cities with
       $ _ billion to help hire and redeploy more than 100,000 police officers across the
       country -- fulfilling the President's 1992 pledge.

      Building on what works. The President will also propose new legislation -- The 21 st
       Law Enforcement and Public Safety Act -- that builds on the successful programs enacted
       as part of the 1994 Crime Act. The President's new legislation will:

       (1) Keep our commitment to law enforcement by renewing the COPS program and
       providing funds to hire and redeploy between 30,000 and 50,000 more police, giving
       police the high-tech tools they need to do their job, and hiring more local prosecutors to
       target local crime problems.

       (2) Punish and prevent youth crime and violence by giving prosecutors new tools to
       punish the most violent juveniles and curb gang witness intimidation; promoting swift
       and certain punishments for all juvenile offenders; and working to prevent at-risk youth
       from committing serious crimes in the first place.

       (3) Break the cycle of drugs and crime by expanding drug courts and helping states and
       localities implement "zero tolerance" drug supervision programs that drug test, treat, and
       punish all drug offenders; and by enacting tough new money laundering provisions that
       help staunch the flow of illegal drug profits.

       (4) Protect all crime victims by enhancing penalties for child abusers who kill and adults
       who commit violent crimes in the presence of a child; providing new authorities for
       federal law enforcement to protect older Americans from illegal telemarketing, nursing
       home neglect and abuse, retirement rip-offs, and health care fraud; and by keeping up the
       fight against domestic violence.

       (5) Combat international crime and terrorism by prohibiting certain possession and
       unsafe handling of biological agents and toxins, and making it more difficult for them to
       fall into the hands of terrorists.
                                                      Hex-Dilmp Conversion

           KEEPING OUR COMMITMENT TO LAW ENFORCEMENT

   Renewing the COPS program. The President's 21 st Century Law Enforcement and Public
    Safety Act extends the COPS program and proposes spending $1.3 billion annually to help
    communities continue to hire, redeploy, lind retain police officers. It will also give law
    enforcement officers access to the latest crime-fighting technologies, and target funds to
    engage the entire community in the fight against crime. Specifically, the bill will provide:

           - $600 million for more police on the street. These funds would be used primarily
           to hire and redeploy between 30,000 and 50,000 more law enforcement officers over
           five years, with an effort to target new police officers to crime "hot spots." A portion
           of the funds would also be used to help economically-distressed communities absorb
           the long-term costs of their new police hires, and for programs to train, educate, and
           recruit police officers -- including efforts to train police officers in ethics and
           integrity, and to promote minority recruitment.

           - $350 million for crime-fighting technologies. These funds would be used to help
           state and local enforcement agencies tap into new technologies that will allow them to
           communicate more effectively, solve more crimes, and conduct comprehensive crime
           analysis. For instance, these funds could be used to: utilize computers and wireless
           communications to send data and images seamlessly from a police department in one
           jurisdiction to a patrol car in the next; improve the state of the nation's overburdened
           and underfunded crime labs, and to make high-end technologies -- such as DNA
           analysis -- more widely available; and expand the use of crime mapping and other
           technologies that improve law enforcement's ability to analyze, predict and respond to
           local crime trends and problems.

           - $200 million for community prosecutors and neighborhood district attorneys.
           As police and community residents have joined forces to fight crime on a proactive
           basis, communities also have turned to local prosecutors to playa more active role in
           community crime-fighting efforts. These funds will help communities hire more
           prosecutors to target neighborhood crime problems.

           - $150 million for community-wide crime prevention. The President's new
           legislation specifically provides funds to engage the entire community in preventing
           and fighting crime. These funds could be used to: work with local school officials in
           adopting community-wide plans to prevent school violence; involve faith-based
           organizations in juvenile crime prevention efforts; and establish citizens' police
           academies that teach neighborhood residents problem-solving skills.

   Supporting Law Enforcement. The President's new crime legislation wiIl also make it
    a federal crime for criminals to use a bulIet-proof vest during the commission of a crime,
    extend federal grants to help police departments purchase bulIet-proofvests for their
    police officers, and allow a portion of COPS funds to be used to help current police
    officers pay for a college education or graduate school.
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion 

       PUNISHING AND PREVENTING YOUTH CRIME AND VIOLENCE

   Cracking down on gangs and violent youth. The 21st Century Law Enforcement and
    Public Safety Act incorporates key provisions of the Anti-Gang and Youth Violence
    Strategy announced by the President in 1997. It provides new tools to help federal
    prosecutors go after gang criminals and serious, violent youth. Specifically, the bill will:

           -- Give prosecutors the discretion to decide whether to try the most serious
           violent juveniles as adults, allowing them to target older and more serious
           offenders that may not be adequately punished in the juvenile justice system;

           -- Expand law enforcement access to juvenile records, requiring that juvenile
           records involving gun offenses or other adult-type felonies be sent to the FBI and
           made available to all law enforcement in the same manner as adult records;

           -- Make it easier to prosecute gang members who attempt to intimidate or
           retaliate against witnesses; and

           -- Authorize judges to hold gang members without bail pending trial if there
           is probable cause to believe they have been involved in criminal activity.

   Provide certain punishment for juvenile offenders. The President's legislation also
    authorizes new funds for states and localities to ensure swift and certain punishment
    whenever juvenile offenders violate the law -- sending the message that there are clear
    and certain consequences for breaking the rules. These grants could be used to fund::

           - Graduated sanctions that hold youthful offenders accountable for every
           offense, and that escalate in intensity for repeat offenses;

           - Teen courts, or peer juries to promote zero tolerance policies for misdemeanor
           offenses such as truancy, vandalism, underage alcohol and tobacco use; and

           - Restitution or victim mediation, which require young offenders and their
           family members to meet face-to-face with the victims of their crimes and agree
           upon appropriate reparations -- including restitution or community service.

   Prevent serious juvenile crime in the first place. The President's bill authorizes a $95
    million for comprehensive, community-based prevention programs that target at-risk
    youth. These funds could be used to promote mentoring, gang intervention, truancy
    reduction, and other such programs.
                                                       Hex-Dump Coove:sioil .

                BREAKING THE CYCLE OF DRUGS AND CRIME

   Enforcing "zero tolerance" drug supervision. In 1997, more than three-quarters of the
    nation's prisoners reported past drug use, and one in six committed their crimes so they
    could purchase drugs. The 21 st Century Law Enforcement and Public Safety Act
    addresses this problem by establishing a new $100 million initiative to help states and
    localities systematically test, treat, and sanction drug-involved probationers, prisoners,
    and parolees. His bill also reauthorizes the successful drug court initiative established in
    the 1994 Crime Act, and extends funding to provide intensive, long-term drug treatment
    to state prisoners with serious drug problems.

   Enhancing drug penalties and enforcement. The President's bill contains targeted
    drug penalty increases, for using kids to sell drugs and selling drugs on or near school
    property. It increases penalties for amphetamine trafficking, which is used to
    manufacture methamphetamine, and grants the Attorney General emergency authority to
    temporarily reschedule certain controlled substances, such as ___'

   Helping states fight drugs and crime. The President's bill extends funding for the
    Violent Offender IncarcerationiTruth-in-Sentencing (VOVTIS) prison grant program, and
    gives states the added flexibility to free up additional prison beds by using up to 25
    percent of already appropriated funds to implement graduated sanctions programs for
    non-violent offenders. Graduated sanction programs hold offenders accountable for
    every offense they commit and escalate in intensity with repeat offenses. The bill also
    reauthorizes the Byrne block grant program, which funds statewide anti-drug plans and
    multi-jurisdictional drug enforcement task forces.

   Cracking down on drug money laundering. Our money laundering laws have not
    been updated since they were first enacted in 1986. Since that time, money laundering
    has become a global problem -- involving international financial institutions and the
    smuggling of currency across borders. To take on international money laundering and
    dru~ crime, the President's bill will:


           -- Help stop the flow of cash drug proceeds by making it a federal crime to
           smuggle "bulk cash" (more than $10,000 in currency) out ofthe United States,
           and by cracking down on money transmitters who knowingly accept criminal
           proceeds from abroad or who fail to report large cash transactions;

           -- Hold foreign banks that violate our laws accountable by allowing federal
           courts to exercise jurisdiction over them;

           -- Thwart black market transactions by requiring persons who use drug
           proceeds to prove they didn't know the money came from unlawful activity; and

           -- Seize more illegal drug profits by doing more to confiscate the assets of
           criminals and encouraging more cooperation from foreign governments.
                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion .

                        PROTECTING ALL CRIME VICTIMS

   Establishing a new safety net for seniors. Although falling violent and property
    crime rates mean our nation's seniors are safer, they are equally threatened today
    by telemarketing scams, retirement rip-offs, and abuse and neglect at the hands of
    the very people entrusted to care for them. To help protect seniors from these
    crimes and punish the criminals who prey on elderly Americans, the President's bill
    will:

            - Shut down fraudulent telemarketers by granting the Attorney General new
            authority to block and tenninate telephone service to illegal telemarketers;

            - Protect nursing home residents from abuse and neglect by giving federal
            prosecutors new tools to halt and punish nursing home operators who repeatedly
            abuse and neglect the residents in their care;

            - Fight health care fraud and abuse by making it easier for the Justice
            Department to prosecute and punish illegal kickback schemes -- and harder for
            criminals to stick Medicare with 'the bills by declaring bankruptcy;

            - Safeguard retirement and pension plans by making it a federal crime to
            defraud employee pension benefit or retirement funds and increasing penalties for
            retirement plan managers who take bribes.

   Protecting children exposed to violence. Each year millions of adolescents are
    victims of violent crime and millions more witness or experience serious violence or
    abuse -- many of whom go on to commit violent crimes themselves. The President's
    bill will make it easier for federal prosecutors to charge child abusers who kill with
    felony murder, and provide tougher penalties for adults who commit violent crimes
    in front of children.

   Continuing the fight against domestic violence. The historic Violence Against
    Women Act (VAWA) helped to strengthen law enforcement's response to violent crime
    committed against women. It helped promoted comprehensive law enforcement
    strategies, encouraged pro-arrest polices for domestic violence crimes, and provided
    emergency shelter to women and children fleeing abusive situations. The President's bill
    extends these successful program and also:

            - Targets the illegal trafficking of women and children by giving federal
            prosecutors new tools to bring trafficking cases, and increasing penalties for
            persons who transport women and children to the United States and coerce them
            to work in sweatshops and other forced labor.

            - Protects battered immigrant women and children by enabling them to file
            their own petitions for lawful status, without having to rely on abusive spouses.
                                                           Hex-Dump Corrve:sioil -

          COMBATING TERRORISM AND INTERNATIONAL CRIME

   Keeping biological weapons out of the hands of terrorists. Biological weapons pose
    a serious threat to the United States, particularly in the hands of terrorists or disaffected
    groups. The President's bill will help keep dangerous biological agents and toxins out of
    the wrong hands by:

           - Barring unauthorized possession and transfer of harmful biological agents;

           - Holding accountable persons who knowingly disregard public health and
           safety when handling deadly toxins;

           - Making it a crime to perpetrate a hoax involving biological agents; and

           - Prohibiting violent felons and fugitives from possessing dangerous
           biologicals agents.

   Implementing the President's International Crime Control Strategy. The
    President's bill includes key provisions from The International Crime Control Act he
    introduce last year, including measures to:

           - Create a new federal criminal penalty for port-running, an evasion tactic
           employed by contraband smugglers to pass through ports without stopping --
           putting law enforcement and civilians at great risk;

           - Strengthen our ability to intercept drug smuggling vessels by making it a
           criminal offense for failing to "heave to" a vessel at the direction of a Coast Guard
           or other federal law enforcement official seeking to board that vessel;

           - Protect Americans abroad by strengthening our authority to investigate and
           prosecute organized crime groups who commit crimes against Americans abroad;

           - Respond to emerging international crime problems by enhancing
           enforcement tools to combat international arms trafficking, and requiring
           additional "end-use" verification of certain precursor chemicals used to
           manufacture illegal drugs; and

           - Deny safe haven for international fugitives by excluding drug traffickers, their
           immediate family members, and others who attempt to enter the United States to
           avoid prosecution in another country.
     J):RMS Email System                                                         Page 1 of 2


