  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME:12-MAY-1999 10:40:21.00

  SUBJECT:   revised

  TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ:UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  Revised Draft 5/12/99 10:30am
  Tamagni

  PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
  REMARKS FOR 21ST CENTURY CRIME BILL EVENT
  THE ROSE GARDEN
  May 12, 1999

          Acknowledgments: AG Reno; Senators Leahy, Biden, Specter;
  Representatives Conyers and Stupak; Mayor Rendell Officer Jonathan Hall;
  representatives of police forces and law enforcement organizations. Dep.
  AG Holder; Assoc. AG Fisher, Treasury Undersecretary for Enforcement Jim
  Johnson, and COPS Office Director Joe Brann.

          Good afternoon and welcome to the White House. Five years ago
  this summer, after a remarkable bipartisan effort in Congress -- and with
  the support of many of the people here with us today -- I signed into law
  a Crime Bill that was the first of its kind.  A comprehensive crime bill
  that funded local solutions to local problems and embraced the promising
  practice of community policing. A bill that took on the gun lobby --
  banning assault weapons and requiring waiting periods for handgun
  purchases -- and demanded tougher punishments for the toughest criminals.

          Above all, it was a crime bill that brought our laws back in line
  with our oldest values -- requiring all of us to take responsibility, at
  every level of government, in every community in America, to prevent crime
  and protect our families.

          Today, we know our strategy is working. Thanks to the efforts of
  law enforcement and local residents, our success has been nothing short of
  remarkable. The murder rate is down to its lowest level in 30 years.
  Violent crime has dropped by 20% in the last six years alone. And in many
  smaller ways -- reducing crimes like vandalism and littering that
  undermine our quality of life -- we are beginning to repair our social
  fabric and restore civility to our everyday lives.

          There are many reasons for our success. One of the biggest
  factors has been the Brady Bill, which has stopped over 250,000 illegal
  handgun sales to felons and fugitives. The assault weapons ban has
  helped.   So have tougher penalties and the waning of the devastating crack
  epidemic.

          But police chiefs, politicians, and people on the street will all
  tell you that the most important factor in our progress has been community
  policing.   Where police officers used to cruise anonymously through the
  streets, community police officers walk the beat.  They         become
  involved in the lives of the people they protect -- and involve those
  people in the fight against crime.



          community policing has worked miracles in places like Boston,
  Chicago, and San Diego, where violent crime was out of control and law
  abiding citizens mistrusted police as much as they feared drug gangs.
  Now, in those cities and communities allover the country, residents work
  together with police, forming neighborhood watches, banding together
  against drug dealers, and building the connections that are the core of
  community life and the heart of civil society.

          When I signed the Crime Bill,  I pledged to help communities all
  over America fund 100,000 community police officers by the year 2000
  and today, we are fulfilling that pledge.

          Since 1994, our COPS program has funded 99,000 new police officers
  -- and over half are already on the beat. Today, I am pleased to announce
  the latest COPS grants -- over $96 million to more than 500 communities
  bringing us to over 100,000 community police officers funded, ahead of
  schedule and under budget.

          The results are in: More police and fewer guns equals less
  crime. By funding 100,000 community police, we have made the thin blue
  line thicker, and America is safer as a result.

          But you and I know that our job is far from finished.  Last week,
  I sent new legislation to Congress that will close the loopholes in our
  gun laws, raise the age of handgun ownership from 18 to 21, and hold
  adults liable for recklessly keeping guns and ammunition within the reach
  of children.

          Today, I will send to Congress a new Crime Bill for the 21st
  Century. This bill builds on the successes of the 1994 Crime Bill -- and
  focuses new efforts in areas that will be increasingly important in the
  years to come.

          First, and most important, my bill will expand the remarkably
  successful COPS program, helping communities hire up to 50,000 more police
  officers -- especially those communities hardest hit by crime.  It will
  also help them to hire local prosecutors who work much as community police
  officers do -- in the neighborhoods where they make the biggest
  difference.   My bill will also give police the 21st Century tools they
  need to fight criminals who are increasingly using technology to commit
  crimes and avoid capture.

          And my bill will provide grants to help communities engage
  schools, faith-based groups, and citizens themselves in restoring peace to
  our neighborhoods.  School districts can use these grants to prevent the
  tragedies that have shaken communities from Jonesboro to Littleton.

           Second, this will crack down on youth gangs and violent young
  people, with tougher penalties for gang members who intimidate witnesses,
  anti-truancy programs and other initiatives to prevent youth crime.

         Third, my bill will help break the cycle of crime and drugs.
 Three out of four people in our criminal justice system have drug
 problems.  If we can get at their drug problem, we can cut the crime rate
 dramatically. My crime bill says to says to prisoners:   If you stay on
 drugs, you have to stay behind bars. And to those on parole:   If you want
 to keep your freedom, you must stay free of drugs.

         Fourth, my crime bill will do more to protect our most vulnerable


  citizens. It will punish retirement rip-off artists, nursing home
  operators who abuse and neglect their residents, and telemarketers who
  prey on older Americans.  It will toughen penalties for people who commit
  violent crimes in the presence of children, anq reauthorize the Violence
  Against Women Act.

           Finally, my crime bill will strengthen our efforts to combat
  international crime and terrorism.   The threat of biological weapons and
  other weapons of mass destruction is real and increasing in an age of new
  technologies and open borders. My bill will make it a federal crime to
  possess the agents used in such weapons without a legitimate, peaceful
  purpose.

          This is the kind of comprehensive approach that has brought the
  crime rate down for six years in a row -- and this is the kind of tough,
  smart approach we need in the 21st Century.  I am pleased that so many
  Democratic members of Congress are committed to move this agenda forward
  this year -- and I look forward to working with members of both parties to
  protect our families and make our communities safe.

          Now, as you all know, this is Police Week, the time of year we
  pay tribute to the courage and commitment of our nationD,s law enforcement
  officers -- and the time of year we mourn the loss of those who gave
  their lives in the line of duty.   In 1998, 61 police officers made th'at
  ultimate sacrifice - 13% fewer than last year.  But even one death is too
  many.  That is why we must renew our pledge to honor the lives of those
  fallen officers. To protect our nationD,s police officers, we must give
  them the tools to protect themselves -- and my 21st Century Crime Bill
  will do exactly that. We cannot allow their sacrifice to have been in
  vain.

          And now, I would like to introduce Officer Jonathan Hall from the
  Wilmington, Delaware Police Department.  Officer Hall was a 5th grade
  teacher when he decided to become a police officer, but he still finds
  time to be a mentor to at-risk young people, and he takes every chance he
  can to talk to children about how they can protect themselves from crime.
  Ladies and gentleman, a community police officer for the 21st Century --
  Officer Jonathan Hall.

           [Following the program, the President will return to the podium to
  conclude]

          I hope that what we have heard today sends a loud message to every
  corner of America: We will work together to do whatever it takes to fig~t
  crime and keep our families safe. Thank you all for coming.
~
                                                                          Page 1 of 2


