         RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

         CREATOR: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:13-MAY-1999 20:11:19.00

         SUBJECT:   EPICC memo

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Jennifer M. Luray ( CN=Jennifer M. Luray/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO ] )
     READ:UNKNOWN

;    TO: Daniel N. Mendelson ( CN=Daniel N. Mendelson/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP       OMB ] )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     For your comment      -~    please call with questions.

     cj

     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D28]ARMS21350674U.136 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF575043A8220000010A000100000000FBFF050032007801000006000800000042000000070028
     0000004AOOOOOOOFOOAC000000720000000C005A0000001E01000018007C0078000000436F7572




                                                                          Automated Records Management SYstem
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Con-we:sion ·




                                               May 11,1999




     MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

     .FROM:         ?

     SUBJECT:       Impending Introduction of Contraceptive Coverage Legislation



     Within the next two weeks, the Equity in Prescription Insurance and Contraceptive Coverage Act
     (EPICC) is expected to be introduced. The legislation would require health plans to .cover
     prescription contraceptive coverage and is generally consistent with the measure you signed into
     law last year extending this coverage to all plans participating in the Federal Employees Health
     Benefits Plan (FEHBP). This memorandum provides background information on this issue and
     seeks guidance from you as to whether you want to explicitly endorse the bill when it is introduced.

     BACKGROUND

     Current Coverage Status. While well over 80 percent of private insurance plans cover
     prescription drugs in general, only about one-third cover the costs of oral contraceptives (the most
     commonly used birth control method). HMOs provide slightly better oral contraceptive coverage
     but only 39 percent reportedly cover all five leading methods. According to the Kaiser Family
     Foundation, three out of every four women say that cost is an important factor when choosing
     between a birth control method that is covered and one that is not. Moreover, women of
     childbearing age spend 68 percent more in out-of-pocket health care costs then men do, although
     there is no specific breakout as to what percentage is for contraception.

     EPICC Legislation. EPICC was first introduced in the last Congress by Senators Reid and Snowe
     and Representatives Lowey and Greenwood. When it became clear that this legislation could not
     be passed last year, EPICC's sponsors' focused their attention on working on encouraging the
     Congress to extend these protections to FEHBP plans. After a lengthy fight over "conscience
     clause" language, Congresswoman Lowey -- with the help of the Administration -- secured passage
     of the FEHBP provision in the Omnibus Appropriations measure you signed into law last Fall.
     Leading women's groups and pro-choice community hailed this as a major victory.
                                                                      Hell-Dump Conversion

Choice groups and the same group of supportive Members are now turning their attention to
winning contraceptive coverage for those in all private plans. The new legislation requires
insurance plans, which provide a prescription drug benefit, to cover all FDA-approved prescription
contraceptive methods. Similarly, health plans which cover outpatient medical services would also
be required to provide outpatient contraceptive services (such as exams and fittings).

The pro-choice community believes that the EPICC bill represents a legislative vehicle that
provides them with an all too rare opportunity to proactively promote a positive agenda. Better
contraceptive coverage means fewer unintended pregnancies, which means fewer abortions. For
this reason, EPICC is now a top legislative priority for many of the leading women's organizations.
 In addition to Federal legislation, over 30 bills have been introduced in 19 states in the last two
years, with Maryland recently becoming the first state to enact a contraceptive coverage law.

Mandates and Potential Impact on Cost/Coverage. There clearly are strong political and policy
reasons to endorse EPICC. However, we generally have avoided endorsing bills that legislate
insurance coverage requirements -- particularly when they are initially introduced. We have taken
this position for two reasons: (I) To avoid the criticism by the business and some within the policy
community that such "rifle shot" requirements increase premiums and, in tum, potentially
contribute to the increasing problem of the uninsured and (2) To avoid increasing the pressure on .
you and the rest of the Administration to support other insurance requirements.

As you know, you are already supporting the Patients' Bill of Rights legislation (which, although is
mostly made up of process and not coverage requirements, is projected by CBO to increase
premiums by about 4 percent). In addition, you have been asked to support legislation to provide
for mental health parity, chemical and substance abuse parity, and to endorse a I percent premium
assessment on private plans to help finance the cost of training physicians in teaching hospitals and
academic health centers. Although the EPICC bill is projected to add only I percent to average
private sector premiums, the accumulation of these policy initiatives could make us vulnerable to
criticisms that we are insensitive to the insurance affordability issue.

Conscience Clause Issue. On notable shortcoming of the current EPICC bill is that it does not
include a "conscience clause" for those plans that have religious objections to providing
contraceptive coverage. Although the bill's sponsors and many within the pro choice community
recognize that this issue will have to be addressed before any bill reaches your desk, they oppose
including any "conscience clause" language at the time of introduction. They are taking this
position for two main reasons. First, they rightly point out that access to coverage of FDA
approved contraceptives is a substantively different issue than coverage of abortions. Second, they
are uncomfortable with almost any conscience clause legislation because they believe it could leave
too many women without access to contraceptives and they do not want to hastily draft a position
that - before any negotiation takes place - weakens their hand politically and substantively.

Although we understand the advocates' views on the conscience clause issue, we disagree with
their assumptions and conclusions. We believe it is important to signal an explicit commitment up
front that such a provision will be necessary and is advisable. To do otherwise, weakens the
advocates' hand because it unnecessarily places them on the defensive on an issue they will lose
under any credible scenario. It makes the bill supporters vulnerable to the "double-standard"
"




                                                                             Hex·DiJmp Conversion .

    charge; they are willing to support conscience clause language when it applies to the Congress and
    federal health plans, but unwilling to do so when it applies to health plans in the private sector.
    We question this strategy and believe it will take away the possibility of a "clean" win on this
    otherwise fairly appealing issue. Notwithstanding our views on this matter, the pro-choice
    community and Senator Snow have rejected our advice.


    OPTIONS

    The following represents what we believe are the most viable options for your consideration:

    (1) Issue statement of support for the new legislation, but do it in a manner that highlights
    in a quiet and subtle manner - our support for a conscience clause. Under this scenario, you
    would release a statement at the time of introduction that points out you supported "similar"
    legislation last year and hope that the Congress can come together again on this high priority issue.
    Such a statement would imply your support for a conscience clause (since last year's bill had one),
    but would not offend the pro-choice community at the time of introduction.


    (2) Not endorse this legislation, but work behind the scenes to get legislation passed with an
    appropriate conscience clause. Under this approach, you would take no fonnal position at the
    time of introduction, but advise the pro-choice community that we will provide technical and
    strategic support to pass this bill on Capitol Hill. Such an approach 'will allow you to avoid
    criticism of being insensitive to insurance mandate cost concerns (before it becomes clear the bill
    has a chance of moving) and also allow us to develop a workable conscience clause compromise
    with the Congress and the groups.

    Agency and White House Positions on These Options. DPC and the Women's Office supports
    option one. Although strongly believing that the pro-choice community is making a significant
    strategic error by not including a conscience clause provision in the bill at the time of introduction,
    these offices believe it is not worth losing out an opportunity to positively respond to the women's
    community request for your support on their number one policy priority. The Treasury Department
    believes option two is a much preferable alternative because it does not get us on the record on
    another insurance mandate until and unless it is necessary and advisable to do so. HHS believes
    the decision on whether to choose option one or two depends on whether you believe you are going
    to endorse other insurance coverage requirement bills in the near future (like mental health parity);
    if you are, they would advise against endorsing EPICC because the cumulative impact of doing so
    will undennine our credibility on the cost/coverage issue.


