RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-MAY-1999 20:45:13.00

SUBJECT:   Outstanding Issue on EEOC Federal Sector Rule

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

ce: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
As you know, the EEOC Federal Sector rule, which would make the EEO
process for federal employees fairer and more efficient, is in its final
stages.  Sally Katzen held a meeting on Tuesday with the agencies where
she was able to resolve most of the outstanding issues.   Treasury did
raise its objection to the rule's proposal which would permit attorney's
fees at the pre-complaint stage rather than only after a formal complaint
is filed with the agency (which is the current rule).   Attached is a memo
which sets forth Treasury's objections and EEOC's arguments in favor of
permitting attorney's fees at the pre-complaint stage.    Sally wanted to
have a meeting with Josh Gotbaum, Chuck Ruff, Maria Echaveste, and you in
order to get your views on whether attorney's fees should be available at
the pre-complaint phase.  Sally has set up a meeting on Friday, May 21 at
2 p.m. in Chuck's office in order to discuss this issue.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D47)ARMS27937225L.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750438AOB0000010A0201000000020500000069340000000200008D854087D5757F1991CD09
9FC8DAA079BBBBOF3BEB9lC4EC70BA4D8581C1COA7F9AE22A36CE0488C76AA81C17FB03FB2EOAO
                                              Hex-Dump Conversion ·

                          PRE-COMPLAINT ATTORNEYS FEES
                          FOR EEOC FEDERAL SECTOR RULE

As you know, the EEOC Federal Sector Rule, which will make the EEO process for federal
sector employees fairer and more efficient, is almost completed. On Tuesday, May 18, Sally
Katzen held a meeting with the relevant agencies and was able to resolve almost all of the
outstanding issues. However, Treasury has raised an objection to permitting attorney's fees at
the pre-complaint process. Under the current rule, attorney's fees are not available for work
done at the pre-complaint stage of complaint processing, but are available once an employee files
a formal complaint with the agency.

Sally has scheduled a meeting for Friday, May 21 at 2 p.m. in Chuck Ruff's office to get your
views on whether attorney's fees should be available at the pre-complaint stage.

Below are Treasury's arguments against attorney's fees at the pre-complaint process and EEOC's
arguments in favor of permitting fees.

Treasury's Arguments Against Pre-Complaint Fees

·      The allowance of pre-complaint attorneys fees will have the effect of increasing the
       backlog of cases and slowing down the process. Treasury makes three points to support
       this claim:

       ·      Early resolution of disputes is more likely to occur in the absence of an attorney.
              This is because the pre-complaint process, which usually includes ADR, is a
              non-adversarial process. The introduction of an attorney turns a non-adversarial
              process into an adversarial one. Treasury has no data to support this argument,
              however.

       ·       Potential disputes over the amount of attorney's fees in the pre-complaint process
               will be yet another obstacle to the early resolution of complaints.

       ·       The NPR initiative, which is just getting underway, will be looking for ways to
               decrease the backlog. They will seek to identify the causes of the backlog and try
               to craft solutions. According to Treasury, given that NPR has not started its work
               with agencies, it would be inappropriate to take regulatory action.

EEOC's Arguments in Favor of Permitting Fees at the Pre-Complaint Stage

       The pre-complaint process, while informal, is mandatory. It is unfair to disallow fees for
       work done during a part of the EEO process in which a complainant must participate.

       In response to agency arguments that introducing attorneys into the process at an early
       stage will impede settlements of cases, EEOC believes that:
                                               Hex-Dump COil version

       Access to counsel for federal employees is important because it will help them
       better understand their rights and more effectively assess and structure settlement
       options. Attorney representation is not something to be avoided.

       There is no data suggesting that early attorney representation thwarts settlements.
       EEOC's experience suggests that attorney involvement can make settlements
       more likely since complaining parties will have both a more accurate view of the
       merits of their claims and more confidence that the settlement process will serve
       their interests.

EEOC has an extensive mediation program as part of its private-sector charge processing
program. While there is not the same distinction between pre- and post-complaint stages
in the private sector, mediation typically takes place early in the process. Attorneys are
welcome on behalf of both charging parties and respondents. EEOC's experience is that
representation can be a very positive factor in achieving settlements in these cases.

There are no similar limitations on the availability offees in other proceedings involving
federal employees. As EEOC pointed out in the preamble to the NPRM, OPM's Back
Pay Act regulations provide for the payment of fees in cases resolved during the informal
stage of the grievance process. In addition, MSPB's regulations do not contain
restrictions on attorney's fees.

There is no data on the extent of attorney representation at the counseling phase. EEOC
believes that representation will be relatively rare since it is not economically attractive
for attorneys to take on these cases on a contingent fee basis because, except in a highly
unusual case, not nearly enougb money is involved. If complaining parties hire attorneys
and pay them on an hourly basis, it is likely that fees will be extremely low since most
people cannot afford - and do not choose to pay - fees in this fashion.

In response to arguments that substantial sums will be involved in satisfying the
voracious demands of attorneys, we would note that attorneys fees awarded
government-wide in the administrative EEO process are low. In FY 97, the most recent
year for which EEOC has figures, only $ 4.838 million was paid in fees and costs in
connection with all EEO claims at the agency, A~, and EEOC appellate stages. Clearly,
most of these fees are for work done at the hearing and appellate levels. Even with an
aggressive attorney, it is hard to see how a substantial amount of fees could be incurred at
the pre-complaint stage unless the case is unusually complicated. In such a case, EEOC
argues that representation would be particularly appropriate. Furthermore, if
complainants are demanding exorbitant fees to settle at the pre-complaint stage, agencies
are free to simply say no.

Public comments in support of the proposal for pre-complaint fees included submissions
by: the Washington Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights and Urban Affairs; Federally
Employed Women; National Employment Lawyers Association; Metropolitan
Washington Employment Lawyers Association; and several private law firms.
                                        Hex-Dump COfive::.ioil

These comments focused on the arguments that fairness requires the payment of
fees since the pre-complaint process is mandatory as well as that early attorney
intervention can often expedite the early resolution of charges~ As a sole
practitioner from Texas pointed out, "My experience is that attorney
representation in the early stages of the process leads to more timely settlements."
 A law firm with an extensive practice on behalf of federal employees further
explained: "In addition to the legal imperative to pay such fees, there are sound
policy reasons to make the change proposed by the Commission. The
Commission should encourage, not discourage, Federal employees to seek the
advice of counsel before deciding whether or not to file a complaint of
discrimination, in preparing such a complaint, and in the ADR process. Attorneys
often provide a 'reality check' for employees and often enhance the early and fair
resolution of complaints."


