RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-MAY-1999 12:47:57.00

SUBJECT:   Katzen/Ruff/Maria Meeting on Attorney's fees in federal sector rule -- Pos

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura ErrunettlOU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This meeting has been postponed until next week.     .' OMB is working on a
compromise position
---------------------- Forwarded by Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP on OS/21/99
12:46 PM ---------------------------




Mary L. Smith
OS/21/99 10:51:09 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP, Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
cc:      Laura Emmett/WHO/EOP, Thomas L. Freedman/OPD/EOP
Subject:         Katzen/Ruff/Maria Meeting on Attorney's fees in federal
sector rule




sally K. is having a meeting with Chuck Ruff, Josh and Maria today at 2
p.m. in Chuck's office to discuss whether federal employees should be able
to receive attorney's fees during the mandatory pre-complaint process when
they initiate an EEO claim against their agency, as proposed by EEOC's new
rule. Treasury objects to fees being available at this stage of the
process even though they are available after a formal complaint has been
filed.  OMB's staff position is that fees should be available.  Ellen
Vargyas (EEOC) has told me that she thinks that she will lose a couple of
the Commissioner's votes if the availability of fees is not left in the
rule.  If you aren't coming to the meeting, what position would you be
inclined to take? EEOC prefers fees being available because this process
is at the most 90 days and if an employee wanted a lawyer (although they
don't think many will), the lawyer could provide a "reality check" and
help facilitate an early settlement.    Treasury thinks that lawyers will
slow down the process.  FYI--the amount of fees government-wide for the
rest of the administrative process was only about $5 million in FY7.
Attached is a memo which sets forth the pros and cons.  Let know what you
think.  Thanks, Mary




==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D62)ARMS23775535T.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043340E0000010A02010000000205000000C941000000020000486196502E3AB323E4E94E
B70B75E86FB16DC82FE79947D2C2520F93BA595854824FC5AD5F24CFD3591299CCA29B8B236802
BDAADD43E7605A6F14A6F84286EC2BE95EAC995A908CFA6391ACD1209048D7F7B218BB3EA5493E
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                          PRE-COMPLAINT ATTORNEYS FEES
                          FOR EEOC FEDERAL SECTOR RULE

As you know, the EEOC Federal Sector Rule, which will make the EEO process for federal
sector employees fairer and more efficient, is almost completed. On Tuesday, May 18, Sally
Katzen held a meeting with the relevant agencies and was able to resolve almost all of the
outstanding issues. However, Treasury and Commerce (and several other agencies) raised an
objection to permitting attorney's fees at the pre-complaint process. Under the current rule,
attorney's fees are not available for work done at the pre-complaint stage of complaint
processing, but are available once an employee files a formal complaint with the agency.

Sally has scheduled a meeting for Friday, May 21 at 2 p.m. in Chuck Ruffs office to get your
views on whether attorney's fees should be available at the pre-complaint stage.

Below are the agency's arguments against attorney's fees at the pre-complaint process and
EEOC's arguments in favor of permitting fees.

Arguments Against Pre-Complaint Fees

The agencies argue that allowing EEOC to award attorneys fees for pre-complaint activities will
lead to a significant increase in the incidence of attorney presence at the pre-complaint stage,
which will in tum have the effect of increasing the backlog of cases and slowing down the
process. There are several significant points that support this:

       EEOC does not dispute that the effect of the provision will be to increase the presence of
       attorneys at the pre-complaint stage. The fact that the plaintiffs bar has taken a strong
       position in favor of this change is further evidence that there will be an increased
       attorney presence pre-complaint.

       Early resolution of disputes is more likely to occur in the absence of an attorney. This is
       because the current pre-complaint process is both informal and non-adversarial. The
       introduction of an attorney formalizes and makes more adversarial the process and thus
       provides a disincentive for the agency to settle.        .

       (i)     Counseling and ADR have proven to be extremely effective "informal" dispute
               resolution mechanisms at the pre-complaint stage. The introduction of an
               attorney would "formalize" the pre-complaint process, requiring for example, the
               agency to bring their own attorneys into the process. The result would be to
               reduces the effectiveness of these "informal" mechanisms.

       (ii)   Two benefits of the current informal pre-complaint resolution process are its
              speed and low cost. Involving attorneys with their added scheduling problems,
              duty to formalize and forcefully advocate for their clients (on both sides) negates
              this benefit.
                                Automated Records Management System
                                Hex-Dump Conversion
       (iii)   The presence of attorneys will likely inhibit an open and objective discussion of
               the parties' concerns, and become a vehicle in which attorneys attempt to gain free
               discovery.

       Under the current system, agencies have the option to settle with non-monetary solutions
       (e.g., placing the employee in a different environment). When attorneys are in the
       process at the pre-complaint stage, then all settlements would have to contain a monetary
       element in order to appropriately compensate the attorney.

       Agencies currently settle many meritless cases simply because the costs are low and they
       want to minimize disruption in the workplace, even if unlawful discrimination is not
       involved. Providing for attorneys fees in the informal process will raise the costs of
       these settlements and thus send more meritless cases to the Commission.

       Potential disputes over the amount of attorney's fees in the pre-complaint process will
       complicate settlement negotiations with yet another issue for resolution.

       The NPR initiative, which is just getting underway, will be looking for ways to decrease
       the backlog. They will seek to identify the causes of the backlog and try to craft solutions.
        According to Treasury, given that NPR has not started its work with agencies, it would
       be inappropriate to take regulatory action.

Arguments in Favor of Permitting Fees at the Pre-Complaint Stage

       The pre-complaint process, while informal, is mandatory. It is unfair to disallow fees for
       work done during a part of the EEO process in which a complainant must participate.

       In response to agency arguments that introducing attorneys into the process at an early
       stage will impede settlements of cases, EEOC believes that:

               Access to counsel for federal employees is important because it will help them
               better understand their rights and more effectively assess and structure settlement
               options. Attorney representation is not something to be avoided.

               There is no data suggesting that early attorney representation thwarts settlements.
               EEOC's experience suggests that attorney involvement can make settlements
               more likely since complaining parties will have both a more accurate view of the
               merits of their claims and more confidence that the settlement process will serve
               their interests.

      EEOC has an extensive mediation program as part of its private-sector charge processing
      program. While there is not the same distinction between pre- and post-complaint stages
      in the private sector, mediation typically takes place early in the process. Attorneys are
      welcome on behalf of both charging parties and respondents. EEOC's experience is that
                                  Automated Records Management System

    representatIOn can b e a very pOSItive factor III ach"levlllg settIements III th ese cases.
                .                Hex:-Dumn Conversion                         .

    There are no similar limitations on the availability of fees in other proceedings involving
    federal employees. As EEOC pointed out in the preamble to the NPRM, OPM's Back
    Pay Act regulations provide for the payment of fees in cases resolved during the informal
    stage of the grievance process. In addition, MSPB's regulations do not contain
    restrictions on attorney's fees.

    There is no data on the extent of attorney representation at the counseling phase. EEOC
    believes that representation will be relatively rare since it is not economically attractive
    for attorneys to take on these cases on a contingent fee basis because, except in a highly
    unusual case, not nearly enough money is involved. If complaining parties hire attorneys
    and pay them on an hourly basis, it is likely that fees will be extremely low since most
    people cannot afford - and do not choose to pay - fees in this fashion.

    In response to arguments that substantial sums will be involved in satisfying the
    voracious demands of attorneys, EEOC notes that attorneys fees awarded
    government-wide in the administrative EEO process are low. In FY 97, the most recent
    year for which EEOC has figures, only $ 4.838 million was paid in fees and costs in
    connection with all EEO claims at the agency, Al, and EEOC appellate stages. Clearly,
    most of these fees are for work done at the hearing and appellate levels. Even with an
    aggressive attorney, it is hard to see how a substantial amount of fees could be incurred at
    the pre-complaint stage unless the case is unusually complicated. In such a case, EEOC
    argues that representation would be particularly appropriate. Furthermore, if
    complainants are demanding exorbitant fees to settle at the pre-complaint stage, agencies
    are free to simply say no.

    Public comments in support of the proposal for pre-complaint fees included submissions
    by: the Washington Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights and Urban Affairs; Federally
    Employed Women; National Employment Lawyers Association; Metropolitan
    Washington Employment Lawyers Association; and several private law firms.

            These comments focused on the arguments that fairness requires the payment of
            fees since the pre-complaint process is mandatory as well as that early attorney
            intervention can often expedite the early resolution of charges. As a sole
            practitioner from Texas pointed out, "My experience is that attorney
            representation in the early stages of the process leads to more timely settlements."
             A law firm with an extensive practice on behalf of federal employees further
            explained: "In addition to the legal imperative to pay such fees, there are sound
            policy reasons to make the change proposed by the Commission. The
            Commission should encourage, not discourage, Federal employees to seek the
            advice of counsel before deciding whether or not to file a complaint of
            discrimination, in preparing such a complaint, and in the ADR process. Attorneys
            often provide a 'reality check' for employees and often enhance the early and fair
            resolution of complaints."


