RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:31-MAY-1999 12:42:17.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D75]ARMS266484853.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
                                          Q&A

                                          June 1, 1999

Q. What do you plan to do if this study concludes that these media industries do market
   violent materials rated for adults to children?

A. A determination that particular sectors within these industries are marketing violent material
   rated for adults to children will help these industries better enforce their self-regulatory
   systems by providing them with information to deter such marketing practices in the future. It
   does not make sense for the industry to spend the time and effort needed to rate these games,
   movies and records and then tum around and push them on kids. If the report concludes that
   some members of these industries are doing precisely that, these industries may want to adopt
   stronger protections against these marketing practices and the media may want to screen ads
   for these products more carefully before they accept them. In addition, this information will
   serve as a useful tool for parents by helping them better understand, and thereby better
   monitor, how their children are being influenced by violent media. The First Amendment's
   restrictions on the government's power to regulate the content of these media makes it even
   more important that we fully understand the media's influence, particularly on children.

Q. How much money is this study going to cost? How long will it take?

A. We estimate that the study will take 12 to 18 months to complete. Although the exact level of
   resources required will depend in large part on the amount of information obtained, our
   current estimate is that the entire study could cost up to $1 million dollars, including the
   salaries of the staff conducting the study. [Elena, this is FTC's estimate - DoJ's money is in
   addition to the FTC's staff. I don't know if you want to be more vague about this since it
   seems a bit high.]

Q. Senator Boxer introduced an amendment to study the marketing practices of the gun
   industry to determine whether they target children. Why aren't you studying that
   problem?

A. This study is examining the voluntary ratings systems, which are self-regulating regimes that
   these entertainment industries police and enforce themselves. The study will essentially
   determine if these media industries are flouting their self-regulatory systems by advertising to
   underage audiences. To that end, it will study the marketing strategies for violent material,
   examining where these ads are placed and who the intended audiences for the ads are.
   Specifically studying ads for guns is outside the purview of this study. Nevertheless, the
   President agrees with Senator Boxer that this is a problem that should be addressed. [Elena,
   Bruce wanted to make the point that the gun industry is a relatively small industry in
   comparison, but I'm having a difficult time coming up with the rationale for not studying
   them based on that.]


                               Automated Records Management System
                               Hex-Dump Conversion
   influence on children?

A. The V-chip, which will be in all new television sets as of July I st, allows parents to block
   violent and other adult-oriented material on their television sets, thereby alleviating the need
   to study advertisements for these kinds of programs. In addition, unlike all other media, the
   television networks use the public airwaves, and are therefore already subject to extensive
   regulation by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Indeed, the level of violence
   that appears on television is regulated by the prohibition against indecency enforced by the
   FCC.

Q. How can you really address the glamorization of violence by Hollywood when you are
   so dependent upon them for campaign contributions?

A. Since before the Administration began, the President, the First Lady, the Vice President and
    Mrs. Gore have stated their concern that the media's glamorization of violence can have a
    tremendous negative influence on our children.

Q. Will you have the power to subpoena documents from these companies as part of this
   study?

A. The Federal Trade Commission has the power under Section 6b of its authorizing statute to
   issue compulsory process requiring companies to provide information relevant to studies it
   conducts about their business practices. This compulsory process is called an "order to file a
   special report" and can be issued only by a majority vote of the Commissioners themselves.
   This power would enable the FTC to compel the production of information related to the
   marketing strategies of these industries. The FTC Act provides such information with
   significant confidentiality protections, most significantly prohibiting the release of
   confidential commercial or financial information collect under such orders.

Q. Senators Brownback, Lieberman and Hatch introduced an amendment to the juvenile
   crime bill two weeks ago that authorized a similar study. What's new here?

A. Today, we are acting on a good idea, and Senators Brownback, Lieberman and Hatch are to
    be commended for their leadership in this area. The President's announcement today, which
    includes full funding for the study, enables it to commence immediately, rather than upon
    enactment of the juvenile crime bill, while the Senators' amendment simply grants
    supplemental authority to conduct this study, but does not provide the required funds to
    ensure that it would take place.




                              Automated Records Management System
                              Hex-Dump Conversion
   of sexually explicit as well as violent material? Why are you just studying violent
   material?

A. Ifin the course of this study, the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission
   find that certain entertainment industry members are targeting children to attract them to
   other material that has been rated as inappropriate for them, including material of a sexual
   nature, they will report those findings as well. There is no excuse for marketing to children
   any material that has been rated for adults only.

Q. Didn't the President just issue a challenge a few weeks ago on enforcing the ratings
   systems at the point of sale? Isn't your challenge to retailers just a rehash?

A. No. The President has challenged theater and video store owners to enforce more strictly the
   rating systems on the movies they show, rent and sell. Today, the President is challenging
   the nation's retailers to enforce the ratings systems of all media rated for adults, including
   video games and music. The Interactive Digital Software Association has begun working
   with retailers to develop a voluntary system that would essentially 'card' potential game
   buyers. When any adult-rated title is scanned into a cash register, the system would alert the
   retailer to ask for identification. We applaud these efforts and challenge retailers and others
   in the entertainment industry to take the appropriate steps to keep these adult-rated materials
   out of the hands of children.

Q. On what authority is the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission,
   conducting this study?

A. Under Section 6 of its authorizing statute, the Federal Trade Commission has the power to
   conduct studies and prepare reports about matters in or affecting commerce.(15 U.S.C. Sec.
   46) Studying the marketing of video games, recordings and motion pictures fits squarely
   within that authority. The Justice Department's National Institute for Juvenile Justice and
   Delinquency Prevention, which will also participate in the study, has the specific authority to
   prepare studies related to media violence. (42 U.S.C. 5653, Sec. 243 (a) (7) (B»




                             Automated Records ~eJIlent System
                             Hex-Dump Conversion


