RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: l-JUN-1999 12:02:33.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The Press office asked    for some q&a on the Unz initiative and our stance
on bilingual education    in response to an article in the WP.  The WP
article addresses Unz'    new campaign reform proposal, but includes a
one-sentence reference    to last year's bilingual education initiative.

Q.         What is the PresidentO,s view of bilingual education?

A.      The President believes it is critical for all students to get
the help they need to learn English.

The President is a strong supporter of the federal Bilingual Education
program, which provides local communities with the funds they need to
provide extra help to limited English-proficent (LEP) students to learn
English and meet the same challenging academic standards as all other
children, while leaving the decision about how best to provide that help
to each local school system. The President's proposal to reauthorize the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act would hold shools accountable for
the achievement of LEP students in all subjects, help ensure that all
teachers are well-trained to teach LEP students, and support school
districts struggling to serve rapidly growing numbers of LEP students.

Q:      Why did the administration oppose the Unz initiative to end
bilingual education in Cal~fornia?

A:      The Unz inititiave called for an end to programs that provide
the help LEP students need to succeed, instead limiting these students to
a one-year English-immersion program, after which they must be placed in
regular classes. We oppose the use of a one-size-fits-all approach that
will leave many children behind as they struggle to achieve high standards
without the support they need, and limits the ability of local schools and
teachers to use approaches that will work.

Although this particular proposal was a state ballot initiative, it was
important for the President to address the issue because it has become one
of national significance as more and more communities struggle to cope
with the needs of LEP students.

.' .
