RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Neera Tanden ( CN=Neera Tanden/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]   )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 31-MAY-1999 11:25:29.00

SUBJECT:   q & a

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here's the q & a, with FTC's and DoJ's edits.  FTC suggested an additional
q on our evidence, anecdotal or otherwise, that this is a problem. We
only have anecdotal evidence (which is good bc otherwise why are we doing
this study), but I wasn't sure you wanted to get into naming names
specifically -- just let me know and I can work on it.

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D36]ARMS27097485P.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000001500000000000000001000001600000001000000FEFFFFFF000000001400
OOOOFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
                                         Q&A

                                          June 1, 1999

Q. What do you plan to do if this study concludes that these media industries do market violent
   materials rated for adults to children?

A. A determination that particular sectors within these industries are marketing violent material
   rated for adults to children will help these industries better enforce their self-regulatory
   systems by providing them with information to deter such marketing practices in the future. It
   does not make sense for the industry to spend the time and effort needed to rate these games,
   movies and records and then tum around and push them on kids. If the report concludes that
   some members of these industries are doing precisely that, these industries may want to adopt
   stronger protections against these marketing practices and the media may want to screen ads
   for these products more carefully before they accept them. In addition, this information will
   serve as a useful tool for parents by helping them better understand, and thereby better
   monitor, how their children are being influenced by violent media. The First Amendment's
   restrictions on the government's power to regulate the content ofthese media makes it even
   more important that we fully understand the media's influence, particularly on children.

Q. How much money is this study going to cost? How long will it take?

A. We estimate that the study will take 12 to 18 months to complete. Although the exact level of
   resources required will depend in large part on the amount of information obtained, our
   current estimate is that the entire study could cost up to $1 million dollars, including the
   salaries of the staff conducting the study. [Elena, this is FTC's estimate - Dol's money is in
   addition to the FTC's staff. I don't know if you want to be more vague about this since it
   seems a bit high.]

Q. Senator Boxer introduced an amendment to study the marketing practices of the gun industry
   to determine whether they target children. Why aren't you studying that problem?

A. This study is examining the voluntary ratings systems, which are self-regulating regimes that
   these entertainment industries police and enforce themselves. The study will essentially
   determine if these media industries are flouting their self-regulatory systems by advertising to
   underage audiences. To that end, it will study the marketing strategies for violent material,
   examining where these ads are placed and who the intended audiences for the ads are.
   Specifically studying ads for guns is outside the purview of this study. Nevertheless, the
   President agrees with Senator Boxer that this is a problem that should be addressed. [Elena,
   Bruce wanted to make the point that the gun industry is a relatively small industry in
   comparison, but I'm having a difficult time coming up with the rationale for not studying
   them based on that.]




                               Automated Records Management System
                               Hex-Dump Conversion
     on children?

A. The V -chip, which will be in all new television sets as of July I S\ allows parents to block
   violent and other adult-oriented material on their television sets, thereby alleviating the need
   to study advertisements for these kinds of programs. In addition, unlike all other media, the
   television networks use the public airwaves, and are therefore already subject to extensive
   regulation by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Indeed, the level of violence
   that appears on television is regulated by the prohibition against indecency enforced by the
   FCC.

Q. How can you really address the glamorization of violence by Hollywood when you are so
     dependent upon them for campaign contributions?

A. Since before the Administration began, the President, the First Lady, the Vice President and
   Mrs. Gore have stated their concern that the media's glamorization of violence can have a
   tremendous negative influence on our children.

Q. Will you have the power to subpoena documents from these companies as part of this study?

A. The Federal Trade Commission has the power under Section 6b of its authorizing statute to
   issue compulsory process requiring companies to provide information relevant to studies it
   conducts about their business practices. This compulsory process is called an "order to file a
   special report" and can be issued only by a majority vote of the Commissioners themselves.
   This power would enable the FTC to compel the production of information related to the
   marketing strategies of these industries. The FTC Act provides such information with
   significant confidentiality protections, most significantly prohibiting the release of
   confidential commercial or financial information collect under such orders.

Q. Senators Brownback, Lieberman and Hatch introduced an amendment to the juvenile crime
   bill two weeks ago that authorized a similar study. What's new here?

A. Today, we are acting on a good idea, and Senators Brownback, Lieberman and Hatch are to
   be commended for their leadership in this area. The President's announcement today, which
   includes full funding for the study, enables it to commence immediately, rather than upon
   enactment ofthe juvenile crime bill, while the Senators' amendment simply grants
   supplemental authority to conduct this study, but does not provide the required funds to
   ensure that it would take place.

Q. The Brownback amendment would authorize an FTC and DoJ study of the marketing of
   sexually explicit as well as violent material? Why are you just studying violent material?

A.   Ifin the course ofthis study, the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission
     find that certain entertainment industry members are targeting children to attract them to

                                 Automated Records Management System
                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

        other material that has been rated as inappropriate for them, including material of a sexual
        nature, they will report those findings as well. There is no excuse for marketing to children
        any material that has been rated for adults only.

     Q. On what authority is the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission conducting
        this study?

     A. Under Section 6 of its authorizing statute, the Federal Trade Commission has the power to
        conduct studies and prepare reports about matters in or affecting commerce.(l5 U.S.C. Sec.
        46) Studying the marketing of video games, recordings and motion pictures fits squarely
        within that authority. The Justice Department's National Institute for Juvenile Justice and
        Delinquency Prevention, which will also participate in the study, has the specific authority to
        prepare studies related to media violence. (42 U.S.C. 5653, Sec. 243 (a) (7) (B))




                                  Automated Records Management System
                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


