RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (TRP NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bjlepard ( Bjlepard <Bjlepard@aol.com> [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-MAY-1998 19:48:22.00

SUBJECT:    Re :

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I. What We Need to Get



A. Lookback Penalties



The most important (and most difficult) concession we need to secure in

these

discussions is to strengthen the lookback penalties by increasing the cap

and

adding a company-by-company component.     Along with liability, this is the

number-one concern for Conrad, Waxman, and many public health advocates.

But

Hollings and the industry will vehemently resist any increase in penalties

as

a backdoor way to drive up the price of a bill they think costs too much

already.    McCain might have given us these changes in committee, but

Hollings

said no.



           In its current form, the McCain bill includes industrywide

penalties of up to

$3.6 billion, the precise equivalent of a 20% miss.     Instead of a company-

specific penalty, the McCain bill includes a provision that could

theoretically deny liability protection to a company that missed the

targets


by more than 20% -- but in its current form the provision is meaningless.



         In an earlier memo, we described three options on how to meet our

concerns:

1) raise the cap to $4-5 billion, and add a company-specific penalty of

$500

per youth smoker; 2) raise the cap to $4-5 billion, and add a

company-specific

penalty of $20 million per percentage point (the virtual equivalent of $500

per youth smoker).; or 3) raise the cap to $5 billion, with companies paying

the first $4 billion on the basis of adult market share and the last $1

billion on the basis of youth market share.   These are the options you

described to McCain in your office.   We offered to explain these options in

more detail to John Raidt, but he has yet to take us up on it.



         We now think we have an even better idea that stacks these

approaches in a

way that might sound more attractive to the public health community but

also

fits more neatly into the current McCain bill.   Here's how it would work:

The

first 20% would be paid industrywide, as in McCain.   Once that level was

reached, any company that missed by more than 20% would be assessed an

uncapped company-specific penalty of $500 for each youth smoker beyond the

20%

miss.   under this scheme, there is no cap on penalties - just an

industrywide

tier for the first 20% and a company-specific tier beyond 20%.      But because

the company-specific component is reasonable, and doesn't kick in until

20% ,


there's no need for a cap because it won't put anybody out of business.

Treasury estimates that even if youth smoking didn't decline at all, and

companies had to pay for a 60% miss in year 10, Philip Morris would pay a

company-specific penalty of less than $500 million.



             Waxman will never be satisfied with these amounts, and whatever we

get will

suffer by comparison to the Meehan-Hansen bill, with over $1.00 a pack in

company-specific penalties.       But being able to say we have penalties that

are

uncapped with a company-specific component will go a long way with the

rest of

the public health crowd.       Moreover, it only requires one change in the

McCain

bill:        replacing the current unworkable company-specific provision linking

a

20% miss to liability protection with our company-specific idea.       We might

be

able to convince Hollings that such a trade isn't so bad from the

industry's

standpoint.        (The public health community doesn't seem to care about the

current provision, but industry analysts were somewhat alarmed by it.)



             Recommended starting position:   In order to end up with the plan

we outlined,

we may have to stake out an opening bargaining position that is somewhat

stronger:        for example, raising the industry cap to $5 billion, and adding

an

uncapped company-specific penalty of $500 for every youth smoker (not just

the
,.

     ones above a 20% miss) .    (We could start at $750, although that is more

     than

     we discussed with McCain.)    Another idea we could raise to frighten

     Hollings

     (and eventually relent on) is the prospect of seeking to strengthen the

     link

     between a 20% miss and loss of liability protection.




     II. What We Can Give



     A.     Volume Adjustment



                The most valuable concession we can make in these discussions is

     to allow the

     annual payments to be adjusted for volume in the first five years (the

     current

     volume adjustment doesn't begin until after year 6).     This change would

     give

     the industry the certainly of knowing that the annual payments won't

     increase

     cigarette prices by more than $1.10 a pack, even if volume plunges.     It

     could

     also reduce available revenue in the 5-year budget window by $5-10 billion.

     But it is a concession we almost certainly have to make in order to keep

     Joint

     Tax from scoring the McCain bill as an increase of $2 a pack.     (Joint Tax

     is

     currently assuming higher retail markups and other factors that will keep
(0




     the

     price around $1.50 even with a volume adjustment.)



             In the first five years, the McCain bill provides for fixed

     payments by

     tobacco manufacturers of $93 billion (plus a $10 billion voluntary upfront

     payment).    We estimate that these payment levels will reduce consumption by

     23% and·result in an effective real price increase of $1.10 per pack by

     2003.

     Beginning in 2005, the McCain bill would adjust these payments as

     consumption

     rises or falls, thereby keeping the per pack cost constant.



             The industry and Wall Street were quick to criticize this approach

     as a death

     spiral, because the companies would still have to pay $93 billion over 5

     years

     even though they expect consumption to drop nearly twice as fast as we

     projected.    Our $1.10 is based on consumption at 17.7 billion packs in

     2003.

     If consumption fell to 13 million packs, as many analysts predict, that

     would

     rise to $1.50.    The industry also argues that at those prices, black market

     sales would significantly reduce legal consumption, driving the price of

     the

     settlement per pack higher still.



             The major drawback of a volume adjustment is that instead of.

     locking in $65

     billion over 5 years, we'll end up with somewhat less.    Joint Tax is


likely to

assume a larger drop in consumption than Treasury, so with fewer packs

sold,

$1.10 a pack will bring in less money.       (We've asked OMB and Treasury to

prepare a memo on where they think Joint Tax will come out.)



We propose a volume adjustment that begins in year 2, and would be based on

the difference in the prior year between actual volume and the estimated

level.       The June 20th settlement was volume adjusted from the outset, which

made the 25-year sticker price ($368.5 billion) sound bigger than it really

was ($303 billion after volume adjustments, by our estimate).      We have the

opposite goal - to come as close to $516 billion as we can.


