RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Irene Bueno ( CN=Irene Bueno/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1999 08:54:23.00

SUBJECT:   H2A farmworkers/Legalization Issue - Guidance on Next Steps

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This is un update on H2A farmworker/legalization issue and to get your
guidance on next steps.

HEARING - A hearing was held last month in the Senate Judiciary Committee
members. While there was some criticism of the current H2A program - too
cumbersome, too many requirements, etc. , there seemed to be less
enthusiam by Committee members to consider legislation that creates a new
guestworker program.  Howver, there seemed to be interest in establishing
a new legalization program for farmworkers who are in the US already but
here illegally.                                 ,.

LEGALIZATION LEGISLATION- Senator Feinstein is working on legalization
legislation that would would require workers to work for a certain period
of time, eliminate some of the housing and transportation requirements
under the H2A program, and to be paid at a rate above prevailing wage but
lower than the wage required under the current H2A program but it would
not establish a new guestworker program.   We have opposed establishing a
new legalization program that was part of the guestworker legislation last
year and I assume that we would continue to oppose such legislaiton,
however, I plan to convene the appropriate people to make sure that this
where we want on legalization legislation. I think it is important that
we know our position so we can continue our efforts to oppose guestworker
legislation - if it looks like the bill considered last year , to support
the current H2A program with some improvements as proposed in the DOL reg
and our budget proposal for a AgNet Program.  please advise if you have
any concerns with this approach.

H2A ACCOMPLISHMENT DOCUMENT - We have the developed an H2A accomplishment
that describes the current H2A program, why it works, what changes we are
making to simplify the program, and the Administration's budget proposal
to create an Ag Net program that helps hook up growers with farmworkers.
(See Attached) .

AGNET - While I think there is support for the AGNet proposal, there is
concern on the Hill that the workers listed on AgNet have not been
verified as legal workers. We are working with DOL and INS to develop a
proposal that we could offer to strengthen this part of the AgNet
program.  I will keep you apprised of these efforts.

STRATEGY - DOL has met with some key Democrats that voted for the
guestworker proposal last year to educate them about this issue and they
are having some success.   WH Leg and I plan to follow up these meetings


with the staff and provide them information on the current H2A program
using our H2A accomplishments document.    I have some discussions with
some of the advocacy groups on this issue and they have urged the
Administration to go out early and oppose legislation. However, I think
it is difficult to oppose anything that has not yet been introduced but we
can oppose what was introduced last year.    A representative from the
growers group sent me a letter with some information about their efforts
to find commont ground- but have not heard from them otherwise.   At one
point, OMB heard from them that there was DOL circulating a letter
recommending a veto threat of any guestworker legislation but we confirmed
that that was not the case b/c no legislation has been introduced.

CONGRESSIONAL HISPANIC CAUCUS (CHC) - Last week, the CHC sent a letter to
the President urging the Administraiton to oppose guestworker legislation
and to request a meeting.   I will discuss with Janet about her advice as
to how to proceed but I recommend we convene a meeting with them soon to
discuss this matter.

COVERDELL - I understand that Coverdell is still not pleased with the
current state of affairs and continues to threaten to hold up Labor
nominees when they get to the floor.  However, Jeffords has indicated that
he will not hold up Committee consideration of the nominees b/c of
Coverdell. WH Leg Affairs will continue to monitor this situation but at
this point, they do not recommend that we do anything with regard to this
threat at this time.

please let me know if you have questions,   comments, concern, etc.   Thanks.

==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D56]ARMS29640806N.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750431C120000010A020100000002050000002E3A0000000200002A7BB9C993C853F32F194D
E4FC89BDB9E6200AOF30AD14AB726264B96BFB3F77CF453CF99FIE3DA94DCB19FD521EC6079D83
A6812ADE6FF47034AC7A4972951053AC8F2FFC46657C828D7595C9E24FDF9DD3180AEE2B95D4EB
                                            May 27,1999

Fann workers are among the poorest and most vulnerable in our society. Average annual earnings
offann worker families are only about $6,500 and farm workers are employed on average only about
26 weeks per year.

The H-2A "guest worker" program admits temporary nonimmigrant agricultural workers to provide
fanners with an adequate supply oflaborers during the peak periods in the growing season, if there is
an inadequate supply of domestic workers. There is no cap on the number ofH-2A visas granted
annually. Currently, there are 1.6 million hand-harvest farm workers in the U.S. of which it is
estimated that approximately 600,000 are undocumented, 1 million are legal (citizens or authorized
resident labor), and 35,000 are in the H-2A program.

Employer Obligations

Under the current program, in order to hire H-2A workers, an employer must demonstrate to
the Department of Labor (DOL) that:

          (a) there are not sufficient U.S. workers able, willing, qualified and available to perform
          the services; and,

          (b) there will be no adverse effect on the wages and working conditions of
          similarly-employed U.S. workers.

To meet these criteria, employers are required to:

     y'     engage in positive recruitment efforts;
     y'     pay workers the higher of the minimum wage, locally prevailing wage, or an
            "adverse effect wage rate" (AEWR), the average wage paid to non-managerial
            agricultural workers in the state;
     y'     provide free and safe housing to workers coming from outside the commuting area;
     y'     reimburse workers' inbound transportation if they complete half the contract,
            outbound also if they complete the contract; and,
     y'     guarantee 3/4 of the hours of the contract the grower offers; and,
     y'     hire any qualified U.S. worker who applies during the first half of the work contract.


Administration Principles on RefOrm

The H-2A program has been heavily criticized by the GAO, DOL's IG, and the Hill primarily due to
the administrative burdens placed on growers and its failure to adequately protect workers. As a
result, Congress has proposed many different bills to restructure the H-2A program.

The Administration has acknowledged problems with the program and is working administratively
(through administrative actions and the regulatory process) to reengineer and streamline the H-2A
program to ease application burdens while maintaining strong worker protections. The
Administration does not believe that legislation is necessary or appropriate at this time.
                                                                                 Automated Records Management System
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion

     ,/   with procedures that are simple and the least burdensome for growers;
     ,/   which assures an adequate labor supply for growers in a predictable and timely manner;
     ,/   that provides a clear and meaningful first preference for U.S. farm workers and that
          diminishes reliance on foreign workers;
     ,/   which avoids the transfer of costs and risks from businesses to low wage workers;
     ,/   that encourages longer periods of employment for legal U.S. workers; and,
     ,/   which assures decent wages and working conditions for domestic and foreign farm
          workers, and that normal market forces work to improve wages, benefits, and working
          conditions.

The Administration is committed to improving the H-2A program to assure growers of an adequate,
predictable labor supply while protecting U.S. farm workers who are among the poorest and most
vulnerable in our society.

FY 2000 Budget Initiative

     The President's pending Budget requests $10 million to fund America's Agricultural Labor
     Network ("AgNet") that would benefit growers and workers by having an efficient alternative
     mechanism to match workers with employment opportunities. AgNet would serve as an
     information broker through an electronic system that allows both growers to find workers and
     workers to find employment opportunities that meet their needs (e.g., location, duration, type of
     crop, etc.).

H-2A Regulatory Reform

     DOL will soon publish a final regulation that will complete an earlier proposal to:

     -reduce the length of time that employers must file an H-2A application from 60 to 45 days
     before the date when employees are needed;

     -reduce the deadline for when employer-provided housing must be available for inspection
     before the date of need; and,

     -modify the requirement that certified H-2A employers provide notice of the exact date on
     which H-2A employees have departed for the place of employment.

     INS will soon issue a final regulation that will complete an earlier proposal to delegate H-2A
     petitioning authority to DOL. This proposed change would significantly reduce the burden to
     growers when filing for H-2A workers by removing an entire step from the current process.

     DOL has also made additional administrative changes to the H-2A program such as
     modifications to the positive recruitment requirement. DOL intends to consistently meet the
     existing 20 day deadline to issue approved certifications for growers.



                                   Automated Records Management System
                                  ::JIex-Dump Conversion


