RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1999 14:27:31.00

SUBJECT:   mental health paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached are two versions of press paper for the WH conference on mental
health. One is a longer version with all announcements as well as a shorte
version (in case people don't want to read 7 pages). I don't know whether
you think we need both or not. This is missing the education one --we are
still waiting for paragraph from Mary Smith on this.  Press office is
asking for this by 5pm since we are releasing this with embargoed briefing
tomorrow.

sb


==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D15]ARMS20282416K.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
ADDRESS MENTAL ILLNESS AT THE FIRST-EVER WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE
                       ON MENTAL HEALTH



Today, at the first-ever White House Conference on Mental Health, the Clinton/Gore
Administration is unveiling a comprehensive range of initiatives to improve mental health. The
Administration's proposals are addressing a variety of key mental health issues including
improving parity, dispelling myths about mental illness, improving community responses to
encourage people with mental illnesses to get help, taking new strides in research, and
challenging Congress to pass a series of bills that will help people with mental illness. Today the
Administration is:

PARITY

Assuring that the Federal Employees Health Benefits Plan (FEHBP) -- the nation's largest
private insurer - implements full mental health and substance abuse parity. Today the
Office of Personnel Management is sending a letter to the 285 participating health plans
informing them that starting next year they will have to offer full mental health and substance
abuse parity to participate in the program. OPM will work with these plans throughout the year to
evaluate to what extent they need to make modifications to come into compliance. This step will
provide full parity for nine million beneficiaries and assure the federal government leads the way
to providing parity.

Educating Americans about current mental health parity laws. Many Americans with
mental illnesses are not aware that the Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 required health plans
that cover mental health benefits to guarantee equal lifetime and annual benefits for mental and
physical treatments. To help assure that consumers and employers are fully aware of the current
protections under the law, the Department of Labor will launch a new outreach campaign to
educate Americans about their existing parity rights. This campaign will include: (I) new public
service announcements on local radio stations and newsletter and newspaper columns nationwide
to promote awareness; (2) an outreach campaign to inform consumers they can call the
Department's toll free number (1-800-789-2647) to understand these protections; and
(3) new efforts to work with consumer advocates to assure awareness about the law.




                                                                  Automated Records Management System
                                                                  HeX-Dump Conversion

Implementing new strategies to the mental health needs of crime victims. Communities that
are victims of terrorism or mass violence have enhanced needs for mental health services
following these types of emergencies. To assure that part of any comprehensive response to
these crises includes a strong mental health component, the Administration is announcing a new
interagency partnership between the Department of Justice's Office for Victims of Crime and the
Center for Mental Health Services within the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMSHA). Part of this effort includes appointing someone within the
Emergency Disaster Relief Branch ofSAMHSA to work with the Office for Victims of Violence
to assure that there is a strategy in place to address the mental health needs of victims of federal
crime. This new partnership will assure that the response to these crises include mental health
training, technical assistance, and consultation services to communities for assisting victims of
crime.

  Implementing a new comprehensive approach to address combat stress in the military.
  Combat stress reactions are common, as those in combat are in foreign environments and many
 times under extreme conditions. At least 30 percent of those who have spent time in war zones
  experience post traumatic stress disorder. The importance of addressing combat stress reduction
  is timely given the deployments around the world. Today the President directed the Department
  of Defense to report back within 180 days on an implementation plan for a comprehensive
  combat stress program throughout the military (leadership, morale, and unit cohesion are key
  factors in primary prevention). DOD will also hold a conference this fall to develop strategies
  and educate military leaders and medical personnel about the need to enhance current practices to
. assure that prevention strategies are strengthened.

Reaching out to the vulnerable homeless Americans with mental illnesses. The Department
of Housing and Urban Development is launching a new initiative to encourage communities to
create safe havens-places for homeless mentally ill Americans can get treatment and care,
including a new satellite conference for communities to learn strategies and develop ways to
create these safe havens. The Administration will also launch a 2-year, $4.8 million grant
program to study the treatment, housing, education/training and support services needed by
homeless women and their children that will impact as many as 2,000 homeless mothers and
their 4,000 children, many of whom suffer from mental illnesses. Finally, the Department of
Veteran Affairs will double the number of "stand downs" events to reach out to homeless
Americans with mental illness to help them get the treatment and services they need.

Improving the mental health of Native American youth. The suicide rate for Native.
Americans between the ages of 5-24 years old is three times that of the rest of the U.S.
population in this age group. This initiative is a collaboration between the Departments of
Interior, Justice, Education, Health and Human Services and Tribes and will go to ten Native
American communities throughout the country. The proposal allocates $5 million over three
years to develop effective strategies to address the mental health needs of Native American youth
in settings such as the home, school, health care treatment centers, and the juvenile justice


                                                                        Autoroate<i Records Management System
                                                 2                       Hex-Dump Conversion
contingent on appropriations, through this coordinated grant process.

Launching a national mental health and medical/surgical care integration strategy. The
Department of Veteran's Affairs will provide mental health assessment and care to veterans
served by medical primary care teams and that medical assessment and care is available to
veterans served by mental health primary care teams. Clinicians will be trained in the issues and
methods involved in integration of mental health and medical services. V A will evaluate and
monitor quality and outcomes of integrated medical/surgical and mental health services.

 REDUCING STIGMA AND PROMOTING AWARENESS

  Announcing a new nationwide anti-stigma campaign to dispel the myths and promote
  awareness about mental illness. At a radio address with the President, Mrs. Gore announced
  that this fall she will launch a major anti-stigma campaign to dispel the myths and promote
. awareness about mental health and how to access treatment. This campaign will be chaired by
  Mrs. Gore and will include a whole range of private sector partners including the Ad Council,
  community organizations, the media and others.

Launching the expansion of the "Caring For Every Child" mental health campaign. At least
one in ten American children and adolescents may have behavioral, emotional or mental health
problems. To take steps right away to reduce stigma, the Administration will launch a five year
five million dollar campaign to help reduce stigma in targeted communities by highlighting the
special mental health needs of children. This pUblic/private campaign will assist states and
communities in developing culturally competent education programs about the mental health
needs of children, for parents, primary care providers, educators and social services workers.

Educating older Americans and their health professionals about the risks for depression.
The National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH) estimates that five million Americans over the
age of 65 suffer from some form of depression. However, many of these Americans do not
recognize their symptoms as depression and do not receive the treatment they need. NIMH and
the Administration on Aging (AoA) will launch an outreach initiative to educate the elderly and
their health care professionals that they may be at risk for or suffer from a mental illness. AoA
will work to get this information throughout the aging network, including through the AoA
website, the AoA newsletter (that goes to 600 older adult agencies), and the State Units on
Aging, that run a range of programs serving millions of older Americans including meals on
wheels and adult day care centers.




                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                3
in primary care settings. Research indicates that three-fourths of older adults who commit
suicide had visited a primary care physician within the month before their suicide and 20 percent
had visited their primary care physician on that very day. Usually older adults do not seek
services for these disorders due to the lack of awareness that their symptoms are a treatable
mental illness, rather than nonnal signs of aging. The Department of Veteran Affairs will
collaborate with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration in HHS by
providing $17 million to expand an existing SAMHSA program to test two models of primary
care service delivery for aging persons with mental health and/or substance abuse disorders in
these six sites for a total of thirteen.

IMPROVING TREATMENT FOR AMERICANS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS

Encouraging states to offer more coordinated Medicaid services for people with mental
illness. Millions of Americans with severe mental illness rely on Medicaid to pay for their
physical health and mental health care. To encourage states to make the most effective services
available to treat mental health needs, the Health Care Financing Administration (HCF A) will
advise all state Medicaid directors that: (1) Medicaid will reimburse for services provided in
Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) programs targeting people with people with the most
severe and persistent mental illness; (2) Medicaid recipients all have access to medications that "
have been approved by FDA for the treatment of serious mental illnesses; and (3) states should
educate Medicaid providers and beneficiaries about the existence of advance planning directives
for individuals who may be incapacitated in the future and unable to control their care.

Launching a pilot program to help people with mental illness get the quality treatment they
need to return to work. Of the 4.7 million Americans that receive Social Security Disability
Insurance (SSm), the Social Security Administration estimates that approximately one in"nine
(about 500,000) has an affective disorder (such as depression or a bipolar disorder). Research
suggests that many of these affective disorders cases could be effectively treated and perhaps
could return to work. The Administration will launch a new five-year, $10 million
demonstration to provide treatment for ssm beneficiaries with affective disorders. Up to 1,000
ssm beneficiaries with affective disorders will participate in this pilot, and SSA will monitor
this study to detennine if it enables these beneficiaries to return to work and detennine to the
extent this can be launched on a broader scale. This complements the Roth-Moynihan-Jeffords-
Kennedy legislation that allows people to buy into the Medicaid or Medicare program when they
return to work.

PROMOTING FAIR TREATMENT AND REDUCING DISCRIMINATION

Developing and implementing new strategies to address mental illness in the criminal
justice system. The Bureau of Justice Statistics estimates that the prevalence of mental illness in
prisons and jails is about 10 to 15 percent. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration within HHS and DOJ are hosting a conference later this summer to focus on how
all aspects of the criminal justice system can better address the needs of mentally ill offenders.
The conference will bring together mental health experts, leaders in the juvenile justice system

                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                 4                       Hex-Dump Conversion
model prevention strategies; treatment and support needs of juvenile offenders, how institutional
and community corrections can better treat those with mental illnesses. Following up on
promising strategies learned at this conference as well as other community practices that have
proven effective, DOJ will launch an outreach efforts to educate the criminal justice community
on how to better serve people with mental health needs. These efforts include a new guide that
discusses community-based strategies as well as a partnership with the National GAINS center so
communities interested in pursuing these approaches can get technical assistance and ideas about
how to implement successful strategies.

Reducing discrimination and stigma in housing. The Department of Housing and Urban
Development CHUD) will hold three training and awareness sessions led by Secretary Cuomo and
facilitated by community partners in HUD' s 81 offices to reduce stigma and discrimination in
housing and to help assure that housing facilities address the needs of consumers with mental
illness. HUD will require that all their employees and its thousands of grantees participate in one
ofthese sessions by satellite.

IMPROVING PROGRESS IN RESEARCH

Launching landmark study to determine nature of mental illness and treatment nationwide
to help guide strategies and policy for the next century. In July, the National Institute of
Mental Health (NIMH) will launch a $7.3 million major new study to collect the first data
collected in over a decade on mental illness, including the prevalence and duration of mental
illness, and the types of treatment that are most commonly used. This study of 10,000 Americans
will provide information that will help guide how the nation allocates resources and designs
policies for the 21 st century.

Developing two new clinical trials to improve mental health treatment. The National
Institute of Mental Health is announcing that this fall they will launch two new five-year clinical
trials to build on effective treatments for those affected by mental illness including: a new $36
million trial to test new antipsychotic medications with fewer side effects, and a $25 million trial
to test intervention strategies for the treatment of patients who have depression, but are resistant
to available treatments. Unlike other studies, these new effectiveness trials will be set in a wide
range of "real world" environments allowing for a stronger understanding of how interventions
translate in everyday life.

CHALLENGE FOR CONGRESS TO PASS LEGISLATION TO IMPROVE CARE AND
SERVICES FOR PEOPLE WITH ME NT AL ILLNESS.

Fund an historic increase in the mental health block grant. The Administration called on the
Congress to pass the President's FY 2000 budget proposal for a $70 million increase in the
mental health block grant. In an era of surpluses, the Administration also called on states to
expand their coverage in this area.



                                                                             Automated Reco~·~ement System
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                 5
Congress to pass a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights that assures that consumers,
including those with mental health needs, receive critical protections such as access to
specialists, the continuity of care protections, and an independent appeals process to address
grievances with their health plans.

Pass strong comprehensive privacy protections and legislation to eliminate genetic
discrimination. The President and Vice President also urged Congress to pass comprehensive
legislation to assure medical records privacy, so that information, including sensitive information
about mental illness, is protected. In addition, as researchers continue to unlock the genetic code,
which enhances the potential to expand treatment options, the Administration urged the Congress
to pass legislation that prevents employers and health care plans discriminating against
Americans based on their genetic information.

Pass Roth-Moynihan-Jeffords-Kennedy legislation to enable people with disabilities return
to work. Access to affordable health insurance is the biggest barrier preventing people with
disabilities from returning to work. Congress was encouraged to pass this legislation which
would help people with disabilities, including mental illnesses, buy into Medicare and Medicaid
so they can return to work.

Challenge Congress to hold hearings on mental health parity legislation and to review the
str.engths and weaknesses of the current law. The Administration urged the Congress to hold
hearings right away on the strengths and weaknesses of the current mental health parity law and
to determine the feasibility of congressional legislation that would expand these proposals for
private health plans.




                                                                          Automated Records M8nagement System
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                 6
     MENTAL HEALTH AT THE FIRST-EVER WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE ON
                           MENTAL HEALTH

  Today at the first-ever White House Conference on Mental Health, chaired by the President's
. Mental Health Advisor Tipper Gore, the Clinton/Gore Administration is unveiling unprecedented
  steps to improve mental health. The Administration's proposals are addressing parity, improving
  treatment, bolstering research, and improving community responses to help those with mental
  illnesses. Highlights of these initiatives include:

·    Assuring that the Federal Employees Health Benefits Plan (FEHBP) -- the nation's
     largest private insurer - implements full mental health and substance abuse parity.
     Today the Office of Personnel Management is sending a letter to the 285 participating health
     plans infonning them that starting next year they will have to offer full mental health and
     substance abuse parity to participate in the program. This step will provide full parity for nine
     million beneficiaries by next year and assure the Federal government leads the way to
     providing parity. The Department of Labor is also launching a new outreach campaign·to
     infonn Americans about their rights under the Mental Health Parity Act of 1996.

·    Helping teachers and parents identify and assist kids at risk. The Administration also
     announced it's plan to host a series of meetings this Fall in every state where teachers and
     faculty from schools could come together for training on spotting troubled youth and
     guidance on how to help them. Participating organizations include NEA, American
     Psychological Association, PTA, HHS, DOJ, and the Department of Education.

·    Improving progress in research. In July, The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
     willlau!1ch a $7.3 million landmark study to detennine the nature of mental illness and
     treatment nationwide and to help guide strategies and policy for the next century. This new
     study will get infonnation on mental illness, including the prevalence and duration of mental
     illness as well as the types of treatment that are most commonly used. NIMH also announced
     that this fall they will launch two new clinical trials, investing a total of $61 million, to build
     on effective treatments for those affected by mental illness.

·    Encouraging states to offer more coordinated Medicaid services for people with mental
     illness. Millions of Americans with severe mental illness rely on Medicaid to pay for their
     physical health and mental health care. To encourage states to make the most effective
     services available, the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) will advise all state
     Medicaid directors that: (1) Medicaid will reimburse for services provided in Assertive
     Community Treatment (ACT) programs targeting people with people with the most severe
     and persistent mental illness; (2) Medicaid recipients all have access to medications that have
     been approved by FDA for the treatment of serious mental illnesses; and (3) states should
     educate Medicaid providers and beneficiaries about the existence of advance planning
     directives for individuals who may be incapacitated in the future and unable to control their
     care.

                                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                    1
    they need to return to work. Of the 4.7 million Americans that receive Social Security
    Disability Insurance (SSDI), the Social Security Administration (SSA) estimates that
    approximately one in nine (about 500,000) has an affective disorder (such as depression or a
    bipolar disorder). Research suggests that many of these affective disorders cases could be
    effectively treated and perhaps could return to work. The Administration will launch a new
    5-year, $10 million demonstration to provide treatment for SSDI beneficiaries with affective
    disorders. This complements the Roth-Moynihan-Jeffords-Kennedy legislation that allows
    people to buy into the Medicaid or Medicare program when they return to work.

·   Educating older Americans and their health professionals about the risks for
    depression. Five million Americans over the age of 65 suffer from some form of depression,
    but many do not recognize their symptoms as depression and do not receive the treatment
    they need. NIMH and the Administration on Aging (AoA) will launch an outreach initiative
    to educate the elderly and their healthcare professionals that they may be at risk for or suffer
    from a mental illness. The Department of Veteran Affairs will also launch six new study sites
    to test two modes of primary care for aging persons with mental health and/or substance
    abuse disorders.

·   Reaching out to the vulnerable homeless Americans with mental illnesses. The
    Department of Housing and Urban Development is launching a new initiative to encourage
    communities to create safe havens-places where homeless mentally ill Americans can get
    treatment and care, including a new satellite conference for communities to learn strategies
    and develop ways to create these safe havens. The Administration will also launch a 2-year,
    $4.8 million grant program to study the treatment, housing, education/training and support
    services needed by homeless women and their children that will impact as many as 2,000
    homeless mothers and their 4,000 children, many of whom suffer from mental illnesses.
    Finally, the Department of Veteran Affairs will double the number of "stand downs" events
    to reach out to homeless Americans with mental illness to help them get the treatment and
    services they need.

·   Implementing new strategies to the mental health needs of crime victims. To assure that
    part of any comprehensive response to community crises,such as acts of terrorism or mass
    violence, includes a strong mental health component, the Administration is announcing a new
    interagency partnership between the Department of Justice's Office for Victims of Crime and
    the Center for Mental Health Services within the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
    Services Administration (SAMSHA). This also includes appointing someone within the
    Emergency Disaster Relief Branch of SAMHSA to work with the Office for Victims of
    Violence to assure that there is a strategy in place to address the mental health needs of
    victims of federal crime.




                                                                           Automated Records Management System
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                 2


    ·   Developing and implementing new strategies to address mental illness in the criminal
        justice system. SAMHSA and DOl are hosting a conference later this summer to focus on
        how all aspects of the criminal justice system can better address the needs of mentally ill
        offenders and prevention model strategies. Following this conference, DOl will launch an
        outreach efforts to educate the criminal justice community on how to better serve people with
        mental health needs, which includes a new partnership with the National GAINS center so
        that communities interested in pursuing these approaches can get technical assistance and
        ideas about how to implement successful strategies.

    The Administration Also Challenged Congress to Pass Legislation to Improve Care and
    Services for People with Mental Illness. The Administration urged Congress to:
        »  Fund the historic $70 million increase in the mental health grant and to call on the states
           to also renew their commitment to providing mental health proposals.
        »  Pass a strong enforceable patients' bill of rights which assures that people with mental
           health needs obtain critical protections such as the access to specialists and the continuity
           of such care protections.
        »  Pass strong comprehensive privacy and legislation to eliminate genetic discrimination.
        »  Pass the Roth-Moynihan-Jeffords-Kennedy legislation, which would enable people with
           disabilities to return to work by accessing affordable health insurance.
        »  Hold hearings on the current mental health parity legislation immediately and to review
           the strengths and weaknesses of the current law.




                                                                               Automated Records Management System
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conver.;ion ,
                                                     3


