RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: James A. Brown ( BROWN_JA)      (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME:20-NOV-1995 14:45:55.75

SUBJECT:   dra~t   s440 signing statement for your approval

TO: Elena Kagan                                              (WHO)
READ:20-NOV-1995 14:59:56.08

TO: Michael D. Deich                             DEICH M     (OPD)
READ:20-NOV-1995 15:48:12.37

TEXT:

==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:20-NOV-1995 14:24:00.00

ATT BODYPART TYPE:H

ATT CREATOR: James A. Brown

ATT SUBJECT: Draft Signing Statement For S440 for approval

ATT TO: Robert E. Litan                             LITAN R     )

ATT TO: Robert G. Damus                             DAMUS - R

ATT TO: Charles E. Kieffer                          KIEFFER C

ATT CC: Lydia Muniz                                 MUNIZ L

ATT CC: Karin L. Kizer                              KIZER K

ATT CC: Kenneth L. Schwartz                         SCHWARTZ K

ATT CC: David E. Tornquist                          TORNQUIST_D

ATT CC: Daniel J. Corbett                           CORBETT D       )


ATT CC: Daniel M. Tangherlini                       TANGHERLIN D

ATT CC: Kevin F. Neyland                            NEYLAND K

ATT CC: James J. Jukes                              JUKES J     )

ATT CC: James C. Murr                               MURR J

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT COURIER
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT

        Today, I have signed into law S. 440, the ?National Highway
System Designation Act of 1995.? I am pleased that this Act
releases more than $5 billion in funding for highway projects and
advances my Administration?s continued commitment to prudent
investment in our Nation?s infrastructure.
        This Act is the culmination of several years work by all
levels of government to identify highways of national


significance -- routes that will support our Natiort?s needs for
efficient, safe, and reliable transportation.   S. 440's
designation of the National Highway System makes clear that
transportation infrastructure should be viewed as a single
system, with each mode complementing· the others. There has been
a marked increase in the number of manufacturers and shippers
that rely on several modes of transportation to deliver their·
products to consumers in the most efficient manner possible.   The
National Highway System unites these different modes by providing
access to major ports, airports, rail stations, public transit
facilities, and border crossings to Canada and Mexico.
        The National Highway System is a prime example of the
strategic investment of Federal resources, not only supporting
our Nation?s economic, national defense, and mobility needs, but
directly and significantly improving the safety of these key
national roadways. The funds released by this legislation and
used to upgrade non
o
-Interstate highways will provide significant.
safety benefits.

        S. 440 also includes an essential and common sense highway
safety measure.   Last June, I called on Congress to make "Zero
Tolerance" the law of the land and require States to adopt a Zero
Tolerance standard for drivers under the age of 21.   It is
already against the law for young people to drink.   This national
standard ·will put teeth in this prohibition by making it
effectively illegal for young people who have been drinking to
drive an automobile.
        Many States have already enacted Zero Tolerance laws.   These
laws work -- alcohol
o
-related crashes involving teenage drivers
are down as much as 20 percent in those States. When all States
have these laws, hundreds more lives will be saved and thousands
of injuries will be prevented.   I commend the Congress for
heeding my call and making Zero Tolerance the standard Nationwide
for drivers under the age of 21.
        This Act establishes innovative ways to attract new forms of
investment in transportation and gives States greater flexibility
and more options to utilize limited Federal transportation funds
effectively.  It also eliminates unnecessary Federal requirements
such as those concerning highway building material requirements
and program management.  This will enable Federal transportation
officials to focus their efforts on the most useful and cost-
effective ways of achieving important safety aims and increase
States? discretion to implement their highway programs in ways
best suited to their own circumstances.
        In approving S. 440, however, I must note that some of my
most serious concerns with this legislation have not been
remedied.  I am deeply disturbed by the repeal of both the

National Maximum Speed Limit law and the law encouraging States
to enact motorcycle helmet use laws. Without question, these
laws have saved lives. The States, now given greater authority
over issues of highway safety, must exercise this authority
responsibly.  I am, therefore, strongly committed to the
requirement in this Act for Federal and State officials to work
together to assess the costs and benefits of any change in speed
limits. And, my Administration will continue to be vigilant in


protecting the safety of those who travel on our Nation?s
highways.
        Although I am seriously disappointed by the Congress?
actions on these important safety measures, I believe that this
legislation will, on balance, benefit the Nation.   Its approval
will also release immediately more than $5 billion for the
National Highway System, thereby funding vital transportation
projects in every State.
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; END ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;;;;;,;;;;;;;;


