RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1999 20:50:52.00

SUBJECT:   Final draft of school safety training announcement

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Marsha Scott ( CN=Marsha Scott/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a longer paper on the school safety training announcement and the
Q&A you asked for.    Education, NEA , HHS, and DOJ are OK with both of
these documents.   Thanks, Mary
==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D45]ARMS23225816V.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BA040000010A02010000000205000000FF170000000200003CAIBF44FOB41414F19AFF
A48700499D8872BD477EE4D49376454D2FAE2521D79E7B24342F24EB67089851CFD3D4C6AC9EDA
01AD946C8D3129ABF564B6B78F16BBB79474ED5E03EFD5BFBFDFF6D6A20F6C98B21D93883F202E
                  for Teachers and Educational Personnel
                                   June 4,1999

Q:   What did the President announce with respect to school safety?

A:   Today the President announced a major nationwide public/private partnership with
     the National Education Association (NEA), EchoStar, and other partners to improve
     school safety. The partnership, which includes the Departments of Education,
     Justice, and Health and Human Services, will create and run a comprehensive
     program that will be available at the beginning of the new school year with the goal
     of reaching every school across the country and providing training to teachers,
     school personnel, and community members on how to improve school safety. The
     partnership will provide both lesson plans for educational and community members
     working to make schools safer and the technology for schools to receive the new
     materials.

Q:   How many training sessions will there be, and what are their topics?

A:   Beginning in October of this year, there will be at least 10 training sessions. In its
     first event in October of this year, the partnership will host a training session at
     which teachers and school personnel can learn about identifying warning signs of
     troubled kids and what resources they have to help those children. In addition to
     the first session focusing on helping troubled children, topics for future meetings
     include discussion of common sense school security measures; school mental health
     services; programs addressed to isolated and stigmatized students; safe school
     plans; assistance in creating partnerships between schools and persons in the
     community, including law enforcement and other local organizations; and outreach
     to parents and community involvement.

Q:   How will the training sessions work?

A:   The partnership plans to transmit the training to school districts that will then be
     able to distribute the material by videotape to local schools and hold hands-on
     training sessions with teachers, educational personnel, and community participants,
     including law enforcement. In order to make sure school districts have the
     technology to receive the new materials, the satellite company EchoStar, which is
     based in Littleton, Colorado, and its partner Future View, Inc., are donating
     satellite dishes to 1000 school districts and 40 hours offree time for programming.

Q:   What are the Departments of Education, Justice, and Health and Human Services
     contributing to this partnership?

A:   The Departments of Education, Justice, and Health and Human Services will
     participate in this public-private partnership by providing funding and other

                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
     any materials; providing technical assistance in developing lesson plans; making
     government experts available for training sessions; and working with NEA,
     EchoStar, and the other partners to make sure that the resources and the goals of
     this initiative are coordinated in order to facilitate outreach to schools.

Q:   How does this fit in with other efforts the Administration has made in the area of
     school safety?

A:   This proposal builds on other efforts the President has made in the area of school safety.
     The Administration's revamped Safe and Drug-Free Schools proposal contains a number
     of new initiatives to help keep our schools safer, more disciplined, and drug-free. The
     safe schools proposal will require counseling for students who bring guns and bombs
     to school, promote programs that educate students on the risks associated with
     firearms, provide more school counselors to help deal with troubled youth, and
     inform parents when guns are brought to school. This proposal also promotes more
     orderly and disciplined classrooms by allowing more education funds to be spent on
     alternative schools for disruptive youth, and character education to help instill
     common sense values in our young people.

     This proposal also provides more effective prevention programs for the reduction of
     drugs and violence in schools, more accountability for results, and better targeting
     to those schools that need the most assistance. Under the revamped program,
     school districts will be expected to develop plans that: require schools to adopt
     comprehensive school safety plans, use proven anti-drug and violence prevention
     programs, establish security procedures for schools, and give parents an annual school
     report of incidents of drug use and violence. In addition, the Administration's safe schools
     initiative would create Project SERV--the School Emergency Response to Violence --to
     dispatch a coordinated FEMA-like response if a school tragedy should occur.

     But whole communities need to get involved with keeping our schools safe. That is
     why the Administration created a new $380 million program, the Safe Schools-Healthy
     Students initiative, to establish community-wide responses to school safety. Our initiative
     will give communities funds to provide comprehensive services for our young people,
     such as mental health services, school resource officers, mentoring, and after school
     programs.

     Youth violence is a problem that government cannot solve alone. That is why the
     Administration called for the creation of a national campaign to reduce youth violence.
     This campaign will work at the grass-roots level with all sectors of our society - the
     media, education groups, parents, religious leaders, and young people - to focus on this
     problem, find what is working, and spread it to new communities.




                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
                      for Teachers and Educational Personnel

       Today, the President will announce a major nationwide public/private partnership
with the National Education Association (NEA), EchoStar, and other partners to improve
school safety. The partnership, which includes the Departments of Education, Justice, and
Health and Human Services, will create and run a comprehensive program that will be
available at the beginning of the new school year with the goal of reaching every school
across the country and providing training to teachers, school personnel, and community
members on how to improve school safety. The partnership will provide both lesson plans
for educational and community members working to make schools safer and the
technology for schools to receive the new materials.

        The President will highlight that the goal of the campaign is to get tea,chers and
school personnel the school safety training they need for the coming school year. In its
first event in October of this year, the partnership will host a training session at which
teachers and school personnel can learn about identifying warning signs of troubled kids
and what resources they have to help those children. The training sessions will be
transmitted with donated satellites and through other means.

       In order to make sure school districts have the technology to receive the new
materials, the satellite company EchoStar, which is based in Littleton, Colorado, and its
partner Future View, Inc., are donating satellite dishes to 1000 school districts and 40
hours of free time for programming. President Clinton will challenge other members of
the business community, including cable companies, public television stations, and other
media outlets, to donate resources so that every school district will be able to receive the
materials.

        The Departments of Education, Justice, and Health and Human Services will
participate in this public-private partnership by providing funding and other resources to
develop at least three training sessions; assisting in the distribution of any materials;
providing technical assistance in developing lesson plans; making government experts
available for training sessions; and working with NEA,EchoStar, and the other partners to
make sure that the resources and the goals of this initiative are coordinated in order to
facilitate outreach to schools.

       In creating the curriculum for the training sessions, the NEA has launched this
program with members of the Learning First Alliance, including the American Federation
of Teachers, the National Association of State Boards of Education, the National Parent
Teachers Association, along with other national education organizations as well as the
Fraternal Order of Police and the American Psychological Association. The Harvard
School of Public Health will also participate. The partnership plans to transmit the training
to school districts that will then be able to distribute the material by videotape to local
schools and hold hands-on training sessions with teachers, educational personnel, and

                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

        In addition to the first session focusing on helping troubled children, topics for
future meetings include discussion of common sense school security measures; school
mental health services; programs addressed to isolated and stigmatized students; safe
school plans; assistance in creating partnerships between schools and persons in the
community, including law enforcement and other local organizations; and outreach to
parents and community involvement.




                             Automated ~~rds Management System
                             Hex-Dump cpnversion


