RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Karin Kullman ( CN=Karin Kullman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1999 17:27:34.00

SUBJECT:   draft briefing paper

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is the draft briefing paper for the disability event tomorrow.  I
have included Bruce, Chris (Jeffords-Kennedy), and Cynthia (OPM EO) in the
list for briefing participants. Let me know if you think we should not
have all three in there.

thanks!==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D51)ARMS25513716K.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCFIIEOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000001B00000000000000001000001C00000001000000FEFFFFFF000000001AOO
                            Hex-Dump Conversion



                                         June 3, 1999

PRESIDENT'S COMMITTEE ON EMPLOYMENT OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
                 PRESIDENT'S AWARD CEREMONY

                     DATE:                         June 4, 1999
                     LOCATION:                     East Room
                     BRIEFING TIME:                2:00pm - 2:30pm
                     EVENT TIME:                   2:40pm-3:15pm
                     FROM:                         Bruce Reed, Mary Beth Cahill


I.    PURPOSE

      To present the President's Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities
      (PCEPD) President's Award; to call on Congress to pass the Jeffords-Kennedy legislation
      by the July anniversary of the American with Disabilities Act; and to announce an
      executive order to eliminate the stricter standards applied to federal hiring practices for
      adults with psychiatric disabilities.

II.   BACKGROUND

      Established in 1947 by President Harry Truman, the President's Committee on
      Employment of People with Disabilities is a small federal agency based in Washington,
      DC, that reports to the President on progress and problems related to disability
      employment issues. Under the leadership of Chairman Tony Coelho, some 300 members
      cO)11municate, coordinate and promote public and private efforts to enhance the
      employment of individuals with disabilities. The Committee provides information,
      training and technical assistance to America's business leaders, organized labor,
      rehabilitation and service providers, advocacy organizations, families and individuals
      with disabilities. Among the Committee's services are the Job Accommodation Network,
      the Business Leadership Network, High School/High Tech, Project EMPLOY and the
      Workforce Recruitment Program for College Students with Disabilities, which during the
      past year placed 300 people with disabilities in private and public sector jobs.

      The President's Award is America's highest honor for achievement in furthering the
      employment and empowerment of people with disabilities. An annual recipient is
      selected from a national slate of nominees. Honorees have demonstrated outstanding
      achievements in the world of work and made significant contributions to increase public
      awareness about Americans with disabilities in the workforce. Since 1947, the award has
      been presented only six times at the White House, three of those times by you.

    Joyce Bender is the president of Bender Consulting Services (BCS), which actively
    recruits and hires people with disabilities who have expertise in information technologies.
    BCS contracts these employees as consultants to client companies throughout the
    Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Wilmington, Delaware, areas. In 1985, Ms. Bender
    sustained a life-threatening epileptic attack that caused an intracranial hemorrhage
    requiring brain surgery. She returned to work with a seizure disorder, a 40 percent
    hearing loss in one ear and a renewed respect for the attitudinal obstacles faced by
    individuals with disabilities. Employment of people with disabilities has become her
    life's work.

    James H. Click, Jr. founded the non-profit LINKAGES program in Tucson, Arizona, as
    a one-stop shop for employers who want to hire people with disabilities. A LINKAGES
    liaison works with local rehabilitation agencies to identify qualified candidates for every
    position. Since 1998, some 80 employers have hired more than 170 people with
    disabilities through the program. As president of the Jim Click Automotive Team, Mr.
    Click is also a LINKAGES employer. Approximately 35 individuals with disabilities are
    working in his car dealership franchises throughout Arizona and California. His dream is
    to take LINKAGES throughout the country.

    Laura Hershey is a grass roots leader who has tirelessly advocated for reform in the
    Social Security system, housing, transportation and other areas affecting the livelihood of
    Americans with disabilities. She is best known for mobilizing the PASS Participants
    Rights Campaign to fight for the rights of adults with severe disabilities to pursue
    employment and maintain their eligibility for Medicaid coverage. Ms. Hershey has
    served as interim executive director of the Denver Disability Center for Independent
    Living and is a former director of the Denver Commission for People with Disabilities.
    She consults and writes frequently on disability issues.

    Today you will also:

    Announce the Signing of an Executive Order Expanding Hiring Opportunities for
    People with Psychiatric Disabilities. In January, Tipper Gore announced that the Office
    of Personnel Management (OPM) would explore measures to eliminate the stricter
    standards applied to federal hiring practices for people with psychiatric disabilities.
    Today, you will sign an executive order modernizing these twenty two year-old rules
    which:

·   Ensure that individuals with psychiatric disabilities are given the same hiring
    opportunities as persons with severe physical disabilities or mental retardation. The civil
    service rules will be changed to ensure that people with psychiatric disabilities will be
    covered by the same kind of appointing authority as used for individuals with other
    disabilities.

                                                                   Automated Records Management System
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
     civil service status after two years of successful service. This authority will allow adults
     with psychiatric disabilities the same opportunity for conversion into the competitive civil
     service as employees with other disabilities.

     This action was recommended by Tipper Gore and the President's Task Force on
     Employment of Adults with Disabilities under the leadership, Labor Secretary Alexis
     Herman, chair, and Tony Coelho, vice-chair, as well as by OPM Director Janice R.
     Lachance, who chairs the Task Force's Committee on the Federal Government as a
     Model Employer.

      Challenge Congress to Pass the Historic, Bipartisan Work Incentives Improvement
      Act. This historic new legislation, which has received overwhelming bipartisan support in
      both the House and Senate under the leadership of Senators Roth, Moynihan, Jeffords,
      and Kennedy and Representatives Lazio, Waxman, Dingell, and Bliley, removes
      significant barriers to work for people with disabilities by improving access to health care
      through Medicaid; extending Medicare coverage for people with disabilities who return to
      work; and creating a new Medicaid buy-in demonstration to help people with a specific
      physical or mental impairment that is expected to lead to a severe disability without
    . medical assistance. One of the biggest barriers to entering the workplace for individuals
      with disabilities is that, under current law, people with disabilities often become
      ineligible for Medicaid or Medicare if they work, forcing them to choose between health
      care coverage and employment. Today you will challenged the Congress to pass this
      legislation by July 26, the 9th anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act.




                          Automated Records Managemef{tSystem
                          Hex·Dump COl\version

       Briefing Participants:
       Bruce Reed'
       Chris Jennings
       Cynthia Rice
       Mary Beth Cahill
       Janet Murguia
       Jonathan Young
       June Shih

       Stage Participants:
       Joyce Bender
       James H. Click, Jr.
       Laura Hershey

       Program Participants:
       Secretary Alexis Herman
       Jill Rickgauer
               Jill Rickgauer is currently employed as a switchboard receptionist for a large
               automotive dealer in Tuscon, Arizona, the Jim Click Automotive Group. Soon
               after becoming blind in 1991, Ms. Rickgauer lost her job as a career planner for
               college students due to downsizing. With assistance from the Arizona Vocational
               Rehalitation Department, Mrs. Rickgauer learned to navigate daily living as a
               blind person and use assistive technology. Despite her solid resume and new
               skills, however, shefaced extensive discrimination from employers, who offered
               many interviews but no jobs. Ms. Rickgauer identified and successfully obtained
               her current position through Jim Click's LlNKAGES program.

II.    PRESS PLAN

       Open Press.

III.   SEQUENCE OF EVENTS

                  YOU will greet the award winners and their families in the Blue Room.
                  YOU will be announced, accompanied by Secretary Alexis Herman, Joyce
                  Bender, James Click, Laura Hershey, and Jill Rickgauer, into the East Room.
                  Secretary Herman will make remarks and introduce Jill Rickgauer.
                  Jill Rickgauer will make remarks and introduce YOU.
                  YOU will make remarks, present the President's Awards, and depart.



                                Automated Records Management S'".:!r'''
                                Hex-Dump Conversion

      To be provided by speechwriting.




                                  Automated Records Management SYstem
                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


