RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-JUN-1999 19:23:10.00

SUBJECT:   chicago 'speech

TO: Maria Echaveste ( CN=Maria Echaveste/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO ] )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Melissa G. Green ( CN=Melissa G. Green/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO]     )
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sidney Blumenthal ( CN=Sidney Blumenthal/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO]       )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lael Brainard ( CN=Lael Brainard/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: John Podesta ( CN=John Podesta/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Dawn L. Smalls ( CN=Dawn L. Smalls/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

Joshua S. Gottheimer ( CN=Joshua S. Gottheimer/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here is a first cut -- with some obvious holes -- at a University of
Chicago speech.

If at all possible, please get me any comments tonight, including late
tonight.  I will be out tomorrow for medical reasons, and, all things
being equal, I hope to get a draft in to the President for his phone and
office time tomorrow.  (This is about 22 minutes long, so the overall
document will need to be cut somewhat    but I am not worried about that
yet. )

==================== ATTACHMENT      1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 0,0: 00: 00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D43]ARMS28610346M.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

DOCF11EOA1B11AE1000000000000000000000000000000003E000300FEFF090006000000000000
0000000000010000002800000000000000001000002900000001000000FEFFFFFF000000002700
Michael Waldman

                       PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
              "PUTTING A HUMAN FACE ON THE GLOBAL ECONOMY"
                         ADDRESS TO THE GRADUATES
                           UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
                             CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
                                June 12, 1999 .

       [more University of Chicago stuff- a description offirst seeing the school from a Saul
Bellow or Philip Roth novel or memoir?]

        It is an honor to join you at this great university, in the heart of our nation, at the height of
our strength and prosperity in the world.

        Let me address myself, first, to the graduates here today: You have chosen the life of the
mind, a path of academic rigor. I know that there has been much discussion on this campus in
recent weeks about the undergraduate program and the core curriculum -- but never lose sight of
the common value you all share in abundance: an extraordinary ethic of discipline, intensity and
an insistence on the primacy of thought.

       You leave here, ready as few others, to reap the rewards of this golden moment for
America. You are prepared to take your place as full citizens of this nation. Moreover, you leave
here prepared to be "citizens ofthe world."

       I want to talk to you about the extraordinary opportunities that await you - and the
profound responsibilities that come with them. For far more than we sometimes realize, this has
been a period of rapid, accelerating change. [a few thoughts re the jobs they will have] It is a
world that demands fresh thought and constant questioning -- an appreciation of our most
profound values and hallowed traditions, and a relentless search for new ways to apply them to
new times. The most illustrious son of Illinois, President Lincoln, said, "as our case is new, we
must think anew, and act anew. We must disenthrall ourselves."

         For half a century our policies, our politics, and our purpose were shaped by the
struggle for freedom against Communism. I believe that over the next half century, our
greatest single challenge will be to wage that struggle for freedom on a new stage - to honor
our values and advance our interests in the now-emerging global economy. Before us are
undreamed of opportunities for abundance and fulflliment. We have the chance to lift
literally billions of our fellow men and women into a thriving global middle class. Yet the
idea-driven, dynamic, often disruptive international marketplace poses stiff new.
challenges, threatens new instability, risks new inequalities. An international economy that
fails to benefit ordinary citizens everywhere will neither win nor deserve their support.
We must put a human face on the global economy.

                                                                              Automated Records Management System
                                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                   1
and the minds of the faculty and graduates of the University of Chicago. Your generation
will playa central role in this new drama. And I want to talk to you to today about how we
can do it.

        It was ten years ago this week that Solidarity came to power in Poland, sparking a chain
reaction as powerful in its way as the as the one caused by Enrico Fermi under Stagg Field. [first
nuclear fission was at University of Chicago during WWJl] The end of the Cold War let loose a
torrent of economic and technological change that has woven the world together into a new,
dynamic and dramatically different global economy. The freedom tide that swept away Soviet
Communism has swept away old economic verities as well.

         A technological revolution, which is familiar to you all, has transformed our lives. There
is more computer power in the PCs and laptops in the dorm rooms of [dorm] than there were in
all the computers in America [20] years go. For years, economists wondered why the spread of
new technology wasn't spurring productivity. They've stopped wondering. In the last quarter
alone, productivity rose 4%. [ck] The digital revolution is responsible for the "death of distance,"
making it possible for people to work together across oceans as if they were working together
across the hall.

         America has led and shaped the global marketplace, from founding the World Trade
Organization to creating the Internet to inventing the most dynamic new industries, from biotech
to DVDs to aerospace. We benefit hugely, of course, from the goods and services we export,
from the high wage jobs that are created. We benefit, as well, from imports. They are a driving
force behind our competitive strength, forcing our firms to innovate, and helping us to grow
rapidly with little inflation. The strengths prized by the new economy - innovation, teamwork,
flexibility, drive - are qualities at the core of the American character. These characteristics are
expressed in our popular culture, even in our sports. Michael Jordan is an icon on the dorm walls
of Beijing University not just because of his fast break but because his style represents the
American style, and the world is drawn to that style because it is the right one for the new
economy.

        By balancing the budget, nearly doubling investment in education and training, by forging
nearly [300] trade agreements to open foreign markets to our goods and services, we have created
the conditions to bring this new economy into being. Rather than resisting economic change, or
telling our people they are on their own, we have chosen to equip people to master change.
Today, as you know, the American economy is the strongest in a generation - perhaps the
strongest it has ever been.

         But the economic storms that have rattled our windows since 1997 sharply remind us that
the new economy poses new challenges. For nearly two years, the world has experienced the
first financial crisis of the information age. We saw that the very interconnectedness of nations.
could turn a crisis in one continent into a calamity in another, virtually overnight. We saw runs
not on banks but on entire countries. In Asia, some 30 million people who had worked their way


                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                 2                        HeX-Dump Conversion
record prosperity, 250,000 manufacturing workers lost their jobs.

        As I said last year, this was the most serious economic challenge since World War II. For
a year and a half, the United States mobilized the major nations of the world to stabilize the
global financial system and restore growth. Today, we can look back at those efforts with some
satisfaction, and continued caution. The world economy has pulled back from the brink. Growth
and hope have begun to return to every comer of the globe.

         But a near-miss on the freeway shouldn't just make us drive faster. We must see this
crisis for what it is: an urgent imperative to understand the new realities of the international
economy, and to act on them. We see more clearly than ever that our task as Americans -- and
your mission as future leaders -- must be to shape and steer these currents of change. For all its
glamour, the global economy cannot be an end in itself. [The new global community cannot
survive as a tale of two cities - one with hundreds of McDonalds, thousands of cellphones, and
CNN on every television - the other mired in poverty and resentful of the world passing it by.]

       This is our task, but it is not new to our time. Throughout our history, America's mission
has been to widen the circle of opportunity and deepen the meaning of freedom in each new era.

         A century ago, the new Industrial Age offered brilliant prospects but also brutal new
challenges to our traditional notions of opportunity and individual liberty. Then, most economic
life in America was conducted at the local level. Most regulation of business and social
legislation was done in city halls or state capitals, if done at all. But the rise of great national
corporations, the shift to industrial mass production, and the birth of a truly national economy
made that old approach obsolete. It took many decades - and several depressions and wars - but
eventually our nation realized that a national economy demanded decisive action from a strong
national government. In the Progressive Era and then the New Deal, we built the institutions to
strengthen that national economy. To temper the cycles of boom and bust, we created the
Federal Reserve and imposed strong bank regulation, deposit insurance, unemployment insurance
and a host of other measures. To stretch a safety net under working people, so they could share
in America's bounty, we created Social Security and Medicare and guaranteed the right to
collective bargaining. The farsighted generations of a half-century ago built a platform for
prosperity on which we stand to this day.

        Now, our task is nothing less than this: to find a way to advance these same values and
protect these. same interests in the international economy

        Just as your scholars taught the world about the power and logic of the market, they teach
us as well about the enduring importance of strong social norms - the vital institutions and
values, rooted in families and communities and religious institutions, that give meaning to our
lives. You are teaching us that effective laws and mutual responsibility are not opposed to
thriving markets - they are the basis of thriving markets.



                                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                 3                        Hex-Dump Conversion
new economy with the need for security and predictability that undergirds civilized life. We
must make the same effort we have made here at home - to marry the power of the market with
the principles of social equality - in a world where commerce is global and capital is mobile.

        I believe the humane global system we seek should be guided by four great principles -
principles drawn from our successful experiment in self-government over the past century.

          First, we must make certain that the new global economy lifts the lives of working
people.

       Our labor and environmental laws are monuments to social justice in this century. But
more than that, they are vital economic safeguards as well. By establishing strong national
standards - a floor - we set in motion competition based on price and productivity, rather than
exploitation and predatory practices.

        We risk similar competitive pressures in the international economy as well - and we
would benefit from the same high standards. The evidence is strong that rising trade lifts
standards ofliving, and that wealthier nations are better able to protect their environment. But as
markets move more quickly, and as capital is able to flow into and out of nations in an electronic
instant, there will be greater pressure for nations to compete by slashing protections for their
people. We must make certain that vigorous competition among nations never becomes a race to
the bottom in labor or environmental standards. We should level up, not level down.

          Let me mention three specific ways I propose to do that.

        We should work to lift labor standards everywhere in the world. Last year, the nations of
the world, through the International Labor Organization, put forward a new set of universal
principles to lift labor standards worldwide: the right to organize a union ... a minimum wage ...
an end to racial and gender discrimination ... an end to forced labor ... an end to abusive child
labor. These rights are human rights. There is no country in the world so poor that it cannot
guarantee them. Next week, I will be the first American president to address the International
Labor Organization in Geneva. I will ask them to work toward these principles. And I am
asking the Congress to fully fund the effort to lift labor standards worldwide.

        And if we seek trade that honors our values, then our trade agreements must be allowed to
advance those same values. When it comes to trade, labor and environmental concerns should no
longer be 'second class' issues. I am seeking renewal of the authority, granted to presidents of
both parties for [x] years, to negotiate new trade agreements and submit them to Congress for
approval. I will ask the Congress to allow the President to negotiate to protect labor and the
environment in trade agreements. For years, Presidents have used trade talks to protect
intellectual property; they should be able to use trade talks to protect the rights of workers and
the dignity of work.



                                                                        Automated Records Management System
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                  4
American civilization when the activists of Hull House, early in this century, led the fight to ban
child labor - and then went on to found the School of Social Work here at Chicago. But in too
many communities around the world, tens of millions of children work in abusive conditions that
shock the conscience. [e.g. on child labor TK] My administration has led the struggle to ban
abusive child labor. Within days, I am confident we will conclude a worldwide agreement to ban
the most abusive forms of child labor. If we do so, I will ask the Congress to ratify it this year.

        And I am determined that the national government do everything it can to this end. The
biggest single purchaser of clothing in the United States is ... the United States government.
Today I am directing that the national government move forward to stop purchasing any products
made with forced child labor. And I ask state and local governments - and private businesses -
to take the same voluntary step. The purchasing power of the American people, deployed in a
way that honors our values, can be a decisive force in the lives of hundreds of thousands of
children.                             '

         The second significant lesson we must learn from the American experience is that growth
that is broadly shared is better sustained. From the depth of the Great Depression came the
insight that sustaining a strong middle class - with its mass purchasing power - was not just
morally right, but economically necessary. Now we must be concerned not only with how fast
the global economy is growing, but how widely shared is the growth.

       [debt relief]

       The third lesson we should learn is that we can - and must - find ways to temper the wild
swings of economic boom and bust, as we have done in our own economy.

        Even today, the free flow of capital is the surest route to prosperity for the greatest
number. Even today, after all the economic shocks, citizens of Korea or Thailand are far more
affluent than a decade ago. But the world has shown itself too prone to speculation and crowd
psychology, as impatient capital first rushes in and then just as suddenly rushes out of emerging
markets.

        A global economy prone to bouts of economic collapse simply is not sustainable. For
half a century, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have helped to stabilize the
markets and spur growth. Now we need a financial architecture as modem as the markets they
serve. Ifinancial architecture proposals]

      The fourth lesson is as old as our republic. Simply, institutions that are democratically
accountable are more effective than those that are not. [STUFF FROM WTO SPEECH ON
ACCOUNTABLE INSTITUTIONS]

       Conclusion: challenge to graduates, vision offuture, etc.



                                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                 5                     Hex-Dump Conversion

                 Now, in this new era, I say to you frankly that Americans today have not found all the
        answers. Indeed, we have not even fully grasped all the questions. We sense that many of the
        first political choices in new century will be driven by how we handle the challenge of the global
        economy. But we do not know how. Traditional political alliances are scrambled. This is
        always how it is in a time offlux. President Kennedy said, "As every past generation has had to
        disenthrall itselffrom an inheritance of truisms and stereotypes, so in our own time we must
        move on from the reassuring repetition of stale phrases to a new, difficult, but essential
        confrontation with reality. "




                                                                                Automated Records Management System
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                                        6


