RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:11-JUN-1999 15:28:02.00

SUBJECT:   fyi

TO: David Halperin ( CN=David Halperin/OU=NSC/O=EOP@EOP [ NSC 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 6/11/99 2:45pm
Michael Waldman

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
"PUTTING A HUMAN FACE ON THE GLOBAL ECONOMY"
ADDRESS TO THE GRADUATES
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
June 12, 1999

It is an honor to join you at this great university, in the heart of our
nation, at the height of our strength and prosperity in the world.

To the graduates: You have spent four tough but rewarding years in this
crucible of intellectual ferment 0) and you will carry the discipline and
insight you have gained wherever you go and whatever you do. The debate
on this campus in recent weeks about the undergraduate program merely
underscores the value you place on free, serious, disciplined thought 0)
and your faith that ideas, pursued without regard to convenience or
convention, will lead us ever upward.

You have learned the most important lessons of all: to see clearly and
think originally, to navigate the swiftly flowing currents of new
information without losing hold of the traditions and values of a
civilized society. Your depth and discipline of mind have made you ready,
as few others are, to be leaders in the new global community now taking
shape.

[You will be called upon to be leaders in a world that still needs
American leadership.



Our success in Kosovo was a victory for the principles of equality and
liberty tpat our nation reveres.  It was a victory for the vision of a
world in which no people is persecuted because of their ethnicity or
religious faith.  And it was a victory for a the tide of democracy that
continues to rise across the globe.

Now we must consolidate that victory and build the peace. Today, Serb
forces continue their rapid withdrawal from Kosovo.  American and allied
forces are coming together, preparing to enter and begin the work of
building peace. And the Kosovar civilians will soon return home, to live
with their neighbors in safety and self-government. The whole of Europe
has the chance to emerge from its bloodiest century undivided, democratic
    ,0




and at peace for the first time in history.   With our allies and
partners, including Russia, we can make this happen for the new century.

This was a test for American leadership 0) a new kind of challenge, in a
world still torn by ancient hatreds. ] [this section will need to be
updated, and cleared by the NSC]

        And you will be called upon to help fashion American leadership in
many ways.

with diplomas in hand, you enter a new economy, in a new world 0) an
economy in which wealth derives not only from the ore in the ground or the
might of our factories but from the power of our minds 0) in which
flexibility and teamwork are the watchword of success 0) .in which nations
are linked through luminous ties of commerce and communications. It is a
world in which a half million airline passengers, [100 million] e-mails
messages, and $1.5 trillion dollars cross national borders every single
day. A world transformed: digital, democratic, interactive, a world in
which every individual will have the power to pUblish, to communicate, to
learn through a lifetime.

You leave here, ready to prosper in this new world.  But you must also
prepare to take your place as full citizens of this nation.   Today I
speak of the extraordinary opportunities that await you 0) and the profound
responsibilities that come with them.

        The qualities prized by the new economy are at the core of the
American character. That is no accident. America fought to create this
new economy. America leads it. America prospers in it. Today our economy
is the strongest in our nation's history.

        But the very economic forces that make this a time of hope also
carry the portent of instability, risk, and division 0) here at home, and
around the world.

The very speed with which capital surges into promising markets enables it
to rush outward just as quickly 0) often in a panic, often because of crowd
psychology, often because of an unrelated event half a world away.

The very intensity of competition 0) the very pace with which new products,
new companies, even new industries, can rise and fall 0) creates deep new
insecurity in a time of plenty.

        The very velocity of technological change and openness to the
world that has helped us create tens of millions of new jobs exposes other
jobs to sudden risk.

        We revere the vision of free markets and free societies that
undergirds this new economy. Well before it was conventional wisdom
everywhere, here on this campus you proclaimed that freedom is indivisible
0) that free economies would lead to free societies.  We are proud that
American leadership has helped spread this vision across the globe.  But
just as your scholars taught the world about the power and logic of the
market, they have taught us as well about the enduring importance of
strong social norms 0) the vital institutions and values, rooted in
families and communities and religious institutions, that give meaning to
our lives. You are teaching us that effective laws and mutual
responsibility are not opposed to thriving markets 0) they are the basis of
thriving markets.

'l,
              Here, then, is the challenge you face, and all Americans face:
      Whether we will seize the full potential of this new time,'or simply let
      its often uncontrollable forces overwhelm us.

              A century ago, the emerging Industrial Age offered brilliant
      prospects but posed brutal new challenges to our traditional notions of
      opportunity and individual liberty.   Through the Progressive Era and the
      New Deal, Americans 0) with led by the faculty and graduates of this
      university 0) struggled to seize the potential of industrialization.
      Through the hard experience of depression and war, we determined that a
      national economy demanded decisive action from a strong national
      government 0) to keep markets honest and free, to temper the cycles of boom
      and bust, to stretch a safety net beneath our families, to give workers
      the right to organize and a stake in our bounty. The farsighted
      generations of a half-century ago built a platform for prosperity on which
      we stand to this day.

      Now, our task is nothing less than this: to find a way to advance these
      same values and protect these same interests in the international
      economy.  President Lincoln told us, "As our case is new, we must think
      anew. We must disenthrall ourselves."   I say to you today: We can neither
      resist economic change 0) nor simply tell our people to fend for
      themselves.  We must find a third way. We must build a global economy
      with a human face.

                In this cause, we face three great challenges.

                The first challenge is to forge a trading system that honors our
      values.

              Make no mistake: open trade dramatically benefits the United
      States. Our cutting edge industries, from software to aerospace to
      biotech to movies, lead the world. Our surging exports create millions of
      new jobs. We benefit from imports as well: they drive competition, force
      our firms to innovate, help us grow with practically no inflation. We
      cannot bask in our prosperity while belittling the free trade that helped
      create it.

      But we must acknowledge the reality that free trade can bring disruption
      and dislocation.   We cannot simply tell families and communities: sorry,
      but economic theory says it's all for the best. We must recognize that
      working people in this country and every country will resist a system that
      they believe does not take their interests into account. That is not only
      a political dilemma, but an economic dilemma as well.

              I believe we must forge a new consensus for trade. One that
      recognizes the urgent need to continue opening markets. And one that
      recognizes that we cannot simply ignore the concerns of working people,
      here or elsewhere.

              I believe that the answer is to lift the lives of people
      everywhere 0) that increasingly, our prosperity depends upon the prosperity
      of others; that the greatest hope for the American middle class is the
      creation of a global middle class. A strong economy in a foreign land is
      not a threat to American jobs; it is a market for American products; it is
      an economy that will pay its own workers higher wages; it is an economy
      that will respect the environment.

              I believe that those who support free trade have an equal duty to
      support funding for education, for job training, so that all our people

\
    can reap the rewards of economic change.

    I believe that labor and environmental concerns cannot be shunted to the
    sidelines of trade policy. As ties of trade grow tighter, trade talks
    have gone beyond traditional issues of tariffs and quotas.  I continue to
    ask Congress for the authority to negotiate new trade agreements to open
    foreign markets to our goods and services.  Presidents have used trade
    talks to protect interests from intellectual property rights to food
    safety; Congress should give me the ability to use trade talks, when
    effective and appropriate, to protect the environment and the rights of
    workers and the dignity of work as well.

    But the effort to honor our values extends well beyond trade agreements
    among nations.

            I believe that we can lift the lives of working people by seeking
    high labor standards everywhere in the world.   Next week I will go to
    Geneva to meet with the international body that is promoting these
    universal rights. We should say clearly:   There is no economy on earth so
    in need of a competitive advantage that it cannot guarantee the right to
    organize, the right to a minimum wage, an end to forced labor.

            I believe that forced child labor is an abomination, anywhere and
    everywhere. Yet in too many communities around the world, tens of
    millions of children work in conditions that shock the conscience.  Last
    year we increased by tenfold our effort to stop child labor worldwide.
    Today we go further:  with my authority as President, today I am directing
    the federal government to stop buying products made with forced child
    labor.  Taxpayer dollars should not be used to purchase a single shirt, or
    brick, or foot of carpet that is the bitter fruit of forced child labor 0)
    and from now on, government contractors will have to certify that this is
    so. Next week, I [will sign] an agreement banning coercive child labor
    everywhere in the world 0) and when I return to the United States, I will
    ask the Congress to ratify it.  In the first days of the 20th Century, we
    moved to end forced child labor here in America In the first days of the
    21st Century, we can move to end forced child labor everywhere in the
    world.

            As we work to seize the possibilities of the international
    economy, our second great challenge is this: We must build a financial
    system that tames the savage cycles of boom and bust, just as we did here
    in America.

            Over the past year and half, we saw the worst financial crisis in
    half a century. Due to strong efforts led by the United States, the world
    has pulled back from the brink.  But this near miss should not lull us
    into complacency.

    Even today, the free flow of capital is the surest route to prosperity for
    the greatest number. Even today, after all the economic shocks, citizens
    of Korea or Thailand are far better off than they were a decade ago.  But
    the world has shown itself too prone to speculation and crowd psychology,
    as impatient capital first rushes in and then just as suddenly rushes out
    of emerging markets.

            A global economy prone to bouts of euphoria and collapse cannot be
    sustained. A half a century ago, after the devastation of World War II,
    we created the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to stabilize
    markets and spur growth.  Now, at a time of 24 hour markets stretching
    across 26 time zones, we need a financial architecture as modern as the

..   ,   h'

     markets it serves. We have been working over past year to begin to write
     new rules. Our watchwords must be openness and honest accounting; strong
     regulation of financial institutions and the flow of capital. And we must
     ensure that all countries, creditor nations and debtor nations, are part
     of the dialogue.

             Our third great challenge is both humanitarian and economic: to
     spread the benefits of global growth as widely as possible.

     In our nation, we have learned that growth that is broadly shared is
     better sustained. We determined that sustaining a strong middle class OJ
     with its mass purchasing power OJ was not just morally right, but
     economically necessary.

     The global community cannot survive as a tale of two cities, one modern
     and integrated, a cellphone in every hand and a McDonalds on every corner,
     the other mired in poverty and increasingly resentful of the world passing
     it by.

     The answer is to widen the circle of prosperity.   Even the poorest nations
     would benefit more from expanded trade and reduced tariffs than from
     foreign assistance alone.   [from Australian Trade study)   But we must
     recognize that crushing debt keeps dozens of nations and millions of
     people from joining the economic mainstream.    As the millennium
     approaches, with a rising awareness of the moral obligations of
     leadership, we must take steps to help lift the debt burden of the poorest
     countries. Beginning in 1996, America led a comprehensive effort to lift
     that burden.   Today, Treasury Secretary Rubin meets with his counterparts
     from the other leading economies.   We are now close to forging an
     agreement to take a bold new step OJ to more than triple debt relief for
     the worldO,s poorest nations, and to target those savings to education,
     health, child survival fighting poverty.     We must act prudently -- to
     ensure that savings are well used, to ensure that countries can attract
     investment, to ensure that countries that perform best are helped most OJ
     but we must act.  I pledge personally to work to find the resources to do
     our part and contribute to an expanded trust fund for debt relief.

     A trading system that honors our values. A financial system that is
     stable and strong. A new effort to widen the circle of prosperity. This
     is an expansive vision and an ambitious agenda.  It will not be completed
     this year or the next. Like the Cold War of this century, it will test
     the skills and challenge the imaginations of leaders for generations to
     come.   But we can do what could never have been imagined by previous
     generations. If we act, wisely and boldly, we can lift billions of people
     into a global middle class. A rising tide of global prosperity can make
     it possible to cure disease, to avoid war, to end hatreds.

     As the wealthiest and strongest nation, America has a responsibility to
     shape that world. That responsibility is your responsibility. As the
     most promising members of the rising generation, your skills, your
     creativity, your knowledge, will be your tools.   But more important by far
     is the spirit with which you greet this endeavor.   Idealism is not a
     phase, left behind at the college gates.  It is a way of life.   If you
     carry with you the dreams and drive that took you here, and that make your
     parents so proud,  you will fulfill the finest traditions of this
     university and this nation.

             For today, be proud of what you have done.   Congratulations, and
     good luck.


