      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Melissa N. Benton ( CN=Melissa N. Benton/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:24-APR-1998 15:13:11.00

      SUBJECT:   LABOR Testimony on HR2871 A bill to amend the Occupational Safety and Heal

      TO: lrm ( lrm @ ostp.eop.gov @ inet        UNKNOWN 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: US@2=TELEMAIL@3=GOV+GSA2@7=GSALEGISLATION@6=GSA2@mrx@lngtwy ( 1=US@2=TELEMAIL@3=
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: clrm ( clrm @ doc.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: cIa ( cIa @ sba.gov     @   inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: oshrc ( oshrc @ oshrc.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Robert G. Damus ( CN=Robert G. Damus/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Sarah S. Lee ( CN=Sarah S. Lee/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      TO: John Kamensky ( CN=John Kamensky/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP     [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: David J. Haun ( CN=David J. Haun/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP     [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Richard J. Turman ( CN=Richard J. Turman/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Kevin P. Cichetti ( CN=Kevin P. Cichetti/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Daniel J. Chenok ( CN=Daniel J. Chenok/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Derek A. Chapin ( CN=Derek A. Chapin/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Larry R. Matlack ( CN=Larry R. Matlack/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: CARNEVALE_J@A1@CD@LNGTWY       CARNEVALE J@A1@CD@LNGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1 ) (DON)
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: ola ( ola @ opm.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: jwedekind ( jwedekind @ nlrb.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )


 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: US@2=TELEMAIL@5=JMD@7=Deborah@6=Clifton@mrx@lngtwy ( 1=US@2=TELEMAIL@5=JMD@7=Deb
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: lrm ( lrm @ os.dhhs.gov @ inet   [ UNKNOWN 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Sanders D. Korenman ( CN=Sanders D. Korenman/OU=CEA/O=EOP@EOP [ CEA 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: William P. Marshall   ( CN=william P. Marshall/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Kate P. Donovan ( CN=Kate P. Donovan/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: John E. Thompson ( CN=John E. Thompson/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Barry T. Clendenin ( CN=Barry T. Clendenin/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Patricia S. Haney ( CN=Patricia S. Haney/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: John F. Morrall III ( CN=John F. Morrall III/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Lori Schack ( CN=Lori Schack/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Barry White ( CN=Barry White/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 ce: James C. Murr ( CN=James C. Murr/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP   [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Janet R. Forsgren ( CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Melissa N. Benton/OMB/EOP on 04/24/98
 03:06 PM ---------------------------
 Total Pages: ____


 LRM ID: MNB151
 EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
 OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
 Washington, D.C. 20503-0001

 Friday, April 24, 1998


 LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

 TO:                     Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution below

 FROM:           Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for Legislative
 Reference
 OMB CONTACT:    Melissa N. Benton
                                 PHONE: (202) 395-7887 FAX: (202) 395-6148
 SUBJECT:        LABOR Testimony on HR2871 A bill to amend the Occupational
 Safety and Health Act of 1970 to provide for the establishment of advisory
 panels for the Secretary of Labor.

 DEADLINE:               2 p.m.    Monday, April 27, 1998

 In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
 agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
 program of the President.  Please advise us if this item will affect
 direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
 of Title.XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

 COMMENTS: To follow is draft Labor testimony to be delivered the morning
 of Wednesday, April 29th before the Workforce Protections Subcommittee of
 House Education and the Workforce.   The testimony addresses H.R. 2871, as
 well as five other OSHA reform bills pending before the Committee (H.R.
 2869, H.R. 2661, H.R. 2873, H.R. 2879, and H.R. 3519)

 The deadline is firm.

DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:
94-0ccupational Safety & Health Rev Comm - William J. Gainer - (202)
606-5380
107-Small Business Administration - Mary Kristine Swedin - (202) 205-6700
61-JUSTICE - Andrew Fois - (202) 514-2141
52-HHS - Sondra S. Wallace - (202) 690-7760
25-COMMERCE - Michael A. Levitt - (202) 482-3151
80-National Labor Relations Board - Jeff Wedekind - (202) 273-2910
117 and 340-TRANSPORTATION - Tom Herlihy - (202) 366-4687
51-General Services Administration - William R. Ratchford - (202) 501-0563
92-0ffice of Personnel Management - Harry Wolf - (202) 606-1424
95-0ffice of Science and Technology Policy - Jeff Smith - (202) 456-6047
89-0ffice of National Drug Control Policy - John Carnevale - (202) 395-6736

EOP:
Barry White
Larry R. Matlack
Lori Schack
Derek A. Chapin
John F. Morrall III
Daniel J. Chenok
Patricia S. Haney
Kevin P. Cichetti
Barry T. Clendenin
Richard J. Turman
Emil E. Parker
David J. Haun
John E. Thompson
John Kamensky
OMB LA


 Kate P. Donovan
 Sarah S. Lee
 Elena Kagan
 Karen Tramontano
 William P. Marshall
 Robert G. Damus
 Sanders D. Korenman
 Janet R. Forsgren
 James C. Murr
 LRM ID: MNB151 SUBJECT:    LABOR Testimony on HR2871 A bill to amend the
 Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 to provide for the
 establishment of advisory panels for the Secretary of Labor.



 RESPONSE TO
 LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
 MEMORANDUM

 If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
 comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
 response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call; please
 call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst's line) to leave a
 message with a legislative assistant.

 You may also respond by:,
          (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
 connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
          (2) sending us a memo or letter
 Please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


 TO:              Melissa N. Benton Phone:   395-7887   Fax:  395-6148
                  Office of Management and Budget
                  Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant): 395-7362

 FROM:                                                     (Date)

                                                           (Name)

                                                           (Agency)

                                                           (Telephone)


 The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
 the above-captioned subject:

                Concur

         _______ No   Obje~tion


         _______ No Comment

                See proposed edits on pages

                Other:

                FAX RETURN of _____ pages, attached to this response sheet



 STATEMENT OF   ASSISTANT SECRETARY CHARLES JEFFRESS
 OCCUPATIONAL   SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
 BEFORE THE
 COMMITTEE ON   EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
 SUBCOMMITTEE   ON WORKFORCE PROTECTIONS

 UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 APRIL 29, 1998



 Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:

         Thank you for inviting me to testify about several proposals to
 amend the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.   I appreciate the
 opportunity to express the views of the Occupational Safety and Health
 Administration on H.R. 2869, 2661, 2871, 2873, 2879 and 3519. Mr.
 Chairman, although we have known each other for many years and I
 previously testified before you as head of North Carolina OSHA, this is my
 first appearance before your subcommittee since my confirmation as OSHAD,s
 Assistant Secretary.   I have appreciated your overtures to me and your
 willingness to discuss OSHAD,s concerns about various OSHA reform
 proposals.   I was glad to return those overtures and to join you in
 supporting the passage of two earlier bills, H.R. 2864 'and 2877.
         OSHAD,s core mission is to ensure a safe and healthy workplace for
 every working man and woman in the Nation. We are making progress; the
 Bureau of Labor Statistics announced last December that the rate of worker
 injuries and illnesses was at 7.4 per 100 workers, the lowest point in the
 history of the BLS occupational injury and illness survey.   But more must
 be done to protect our NationD,s workers.   The Nation still suffers
 approximately 7,000 fatalities per year from safety hazards and 50-60,000
 fatalities from occupational disease. At the same time, we seek methods
 that avoid placing unnecessary burdens on employers.   Through reinvention,
 OSHA is developing new strategies that leverage the agencyD,s limited
 resources and, in many cases, re-shape how OSHA interacts with employers
 and workers to promote safe and healthy work environments.

 The New OSHA
         OSHA is changing the way it does business.  It has been three
 years since President Clinton announced'the D&New OSHAD8 initiative.
 Since then, we have developed a broad range of partnership programs that
 promote cooperative efforts between employers, workers and government. We
 are making enforcement programs smarter and fairer by spending more time
 at the most hazardous workplaces and less time at safer ones. We are
 treating responsible employers differently than neglectful ones.   OSHA is
 simplifying standards by rewriting them in plain language, using
 performance-based approaches wherever possible.   WeD,re focusing less on
 individual, technical violations, and more on systematic approaches that
 allow workers and employers to find and fix hazards on an ongoing basis.
 And finally, weD,re measuring results, where possible, not by numbers of
 citations or penalties, but by real improvements in the lives of working
 people, such as reduced injury and illness rates.
         I would like to express my appreciation to you, Mr. Chairman, and
 to the rest of the Committee for your cooperative spirit during my short
 tenure with OSHA.  I was pleased that we could reach compromises on H.R.
 2864 and 2877, OSHA reform bills that you recently passed in the House.
 However, while I appreciate your interest in working together on
 OSHA-related legislation, I regret that we are unlikely to find common


 ground on the proposals on the subcommitteeD,s agenda today.  In OSHAD,s
 view, the bills to be discussed today are either unnecessary or would
 undermine OSHAD,s ability to protect workers.

 H.R. 2869 -- Excluding Employer Audits from Discovery
         H.R. 2869 would create an evidentiary privilege for employer self-audit
 documents.   This extremely broad privilege would vastly complicate OSHA
 enforcement.   It would force the agency to arrive at conclusions about
 workplace hazards and accidents without critical information from safety
 professionals and consultants with firsthand knowledge.   In many cases,
 particularly in fatality and catastrophe investigations, self-audit
 records and reports are the most reliable, and often the only means of
 establishing the facts.   Under such circumstances, OSHA needs the ability
 to gather all the information it can to explain why these accidents
 happened and to help prevent them from happening again.
         The fact that the bill contains an exception for "safety and
 health assessments prescribed under section 6(b) (7)" of the OSH Act does
 little to ameliorate the billD,s harmful effects on enforcement of OSHA
 requirements. That section of the Act specifically addresses only a
 limited class of requirements dealing with medical surveillance and
 exposure monitoring, so the bill would leave the vast majority of
 workplace health and safety assessments required by OSHA rules off-limits
 to scrutiny by OSHA, the Review Commission and the courts. Furthermore,
 many of OSHAD,s audit requirements are expressed in general,
 performance-oriented terms, making it difficult if not impossible to
 discern the line between mandatory and voluntary audit activity,
 especially in workplaces administered by conscientious employers.
 Finally, OSHA is required to demonstrate employer knowledge of a cited
 hazard, and is required, in proposing penalties, to ascertain the extent
 of an employerD,s good faith, inquiries which cannot fairly be resolved
 without access to the very records which document knowledge and good
 faith. .               .
         Contrary to the belief of many businesses, disclosure of self
 audit documents generally benefits good faith employers.    OSHA provides
 penalty reductions where employers who receive citations have acted in
 good faith to try and correct deficiencies identified in an audit.    For
 example, in a hypothetical small muffler shop the owner keeps his mufflers
 in a storage loft, but the loft does not have a railing. While conducting
 a self audit, the employer discovers that the loft poses a serious fall
 hazard to his employees. As a result, he moves the mufflers as far away
 from the ledge as possible and puts cones along the ledge. When an OSHA
 compliance officer comes to inspect this muffler shop, he immediately
 spots the fall hazard: Under ordinary circumstances, failure to install a
 guardrail would result in a $5,000 fine.   In this case, however, the
 employer would receive a credit worth $3,875.   This is because, through
 the self-audit documents, the employer can show that he acted in good
 faith and that he did do something to try to reduce the likelihood of
 injury to his employees.   If this small business has no history of serious
 violations,   the $5,000 penalty would ultimately be reduced to $75.
         The proposed evidentiary privilege would protect only bad actors
 -- employers who have identified hazards, have failed to make good faith
 efforts to correct them, and wish to hide the evidence.

 H.R. 2661 and H.R. 2781 -- Additional Scientific and Economic Peer Review
         H.R. 2661 and 2871 would both require the Secretary to create an
 advisory panel to review scientific and economic data every time OSHA
 proposes a new standard.  H.R. 2871 provides an exception where the
 standard has been promulgated through negotiated rulemaking.  This
 additional committee is unnecessary, duplicative and would create serious
 delays in our rulemaking process -- a process that many already criticize


 as taking too long.
          Today, major rules typically take as many as eight years to
 publish.   In the meantime, workers are exposed to hazards every day.
 During that time, OSHA has a variety of obligations:   engage in notice and
 comment rulemaking; conduct economic and risk analyses; assess impact on
 small businesses and, depending upon that impact, convene a small business
 panel under the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act; survey
 industries; and do extensive review of research on selected topics.    When
 OSHA issues a proposal, the agency also engages in a rigorous public
 hearing process. On standards where peer review of a part of the
 supporting material is necessary, a peer review has been done.   For
 example, the risk assessment for tuberculosis was peer reviewed.    Once the
 proposed standard is published in the Federal Register, any interested
 party can comment upon the standard itself as well as the underlying
 scientific and economic data.
          OSHAD,s public hearings allow for the fullest, most thorough
 discourse on every subject relevant to a rule.   They provide the greatest
 possible public access to the process -- scientists, economists, safety
 and health professionals, representatives of potentially affected
 industries and any other interested parties may and do participate. At
 public hearings, interested parties can submit testimony and evidence,
 cross examine OSHA experts and engage in debate with other participants.
 For example, OSHA just completed nine days of hearings last week on the
 agencyD,s proposed standard on occupational exposure to Tuberculosis.
 Scientists and economists always present new data and test each otherD,s
 theories through questioning and comment, a process from which OSHA has
 gained valuable information. The entire discussion is conducted in full
 public view, and enables participants to challenge one anotherD,s
 positions.   Public hearings are often held around the country to make it
 easier for interested parties to attend.   I invite members of this
 committee to come attend one of our hearings and observe this critical
 process in action.
          A new committee, like the ones proposed in H.R. 2661 and 2871,
 would provide selected persons an additional closed-door opportunity to
 influence rulemaking after the public process is complete.   This would
 give the committee members an unfair advantage.   In addition, the closed
 nature of the committee proceedings would prevent the public from a full
 and fair discussion on their rationale and decisions.   The billD,s failure
 to require disclosure from this committee makes its already unnecessary
 contribution suspect as well.
          The President, consistent with Executive Order 12838 and the
 National Performance Review, has asked Congress to show restraint in the
 creation of new statutory committees.   In the interest of promulgating
 rules that will best protect workers, this is an appropriate time to
 exercise that restraint.

 H.R. 2873 -- Risk Assessment and Cost-Benefit Analyses for Every Industry
         H.R. 2873 would require OSHA to conduct an individual risk assessment and
 cost-benefit analysis for each industry affected by a proposed standard.
 OSHA cannot base its health standards on cost-benefit analyses and is
 required by law to reduce significant risk to the extent feasible.
 However, OSHA agrees that comprehensive and accurate risk assessments and
 economic analyses are valuable informational tools, and devotes
 considerable effort to making these documents clear and methodologically
 sound.  For each rule, the Agency already conducts detailed risk
 assessments, develops extensive significance-of-risk analyses,
 demonstrates technological and economic feasibility,  evaluates benefits,
 and assesses impacts (including small business impacts). Cost estimates
 and feasibility analyses are commonly conducted at the industry level,
 because data on the technological and financial status of each industry


that reflect real conditions in that industry are usually publicly
available. However, it is rarely the case that industry-specific data on
risk are available; even where such data are available, they generally
cannot be used to produce statistically meaningful results. Because
industry-specific risk data are not available, it is not possible to
develop industry-specific benefits analyses.

H.R. 2879 -- Limiting Liability at Multi-Employer Worksites
        H.R. 2879 would limit the liability of certain employers, particularly
general contractors in the construction industry, at mUlti-employer
worksites. This bill would prohibit OSHA from citing an employer for a
violation if the employer has no employees exposed to the hazard and has
neither created the hazard nor assumed responsibility for ensuring that
the other employers at the worksite comply. This would create an
incentive for general contractors to give up their authority to ensure
that subcontractors comply with safety standards.   If we encourage the
employers in the best position to enhance workplace safety to reduce their
authority, workers will pay the price.
        First, let me clear up some misunderstandings about liability
under the OSH· Act.  The OSH Act holds all employers responsible for
hazards under their control regardless of which employees are exposed.
Some employers have misconstrued our policy as limiting the liability of
the subcontractor by holding the general contractor liable instead.   This
is not the case. We do hold the subcontractor liable.     Where a general
contractor has failed to exercise due diligence in meeting its
responsibility, we then hold the general contractor liable as well.   That
way, we can ensure that both the subcontractor and the general contractor
have the incentive to coordinate their efforts in keeping the workers on
the site safe.
        OSHAD,s mUlti-employer worksite policy reflects court decisions
that involved very serious accidents; workers were getting killed because
general contractors and subcontractors failed to coordinate their
responsibilities for ensuring worker safety and health.   The tragedy that
occurred at LD,Ambiance Plaza in Connecticut is a prime-example of the
origins of our rule.   In that case, 28 workers were killed when a high
rise under construction collapsed through the error of one
subcontractor.    Workers from several subcontractors were killed.
        Where one subcontractor creates a hazard for the employees of
another subcontractor, only the general contractor may be in the best
position to get the problem corrected.   Just as general contractors have
the ultimate supervisory power of all other aspects of the work, the best
way to protect all of the workers at a particular site is for the general
contractor to have overall responsibility for coordinating efforts for
worker safety and health as well.
        Under the case law, the liability of general contractors is not
absolute, but depends on the circumstances of the case.   Further limiting
the liability of the general contractor would be a step backward. None of
us wants to revisit the tragedies of the past.   In our experience, this
has proven the most effective method in reducing injuries and fatalities
at mUlti-employer worksites. The bottom line is that we need all of the
contractors to work together to make multi-employer worksites safe.     In
order to ensure the safety and health of the employees of both the general
contractor and the subcontractors we cannot limit the responsibility of
either.

H.R. 3519    Standard and Electronic MSDSD,s
        H.R. 3519 proposes to amend the OSH Act to require electronic access to
Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSD,s).  The bill would also require OSHA
to modify its Hazard Communication Standard (29 CFR 1910.1200) to require
a standard format for MSDSD,s.  These proposals are well intentioned, and


 OSHA is working along parallel lines. However, we believe that
 legislation is unnecessary and unwise at this time.
         OSHA supports allowing employers to provide their workers with
 electronic access to MSDSD,s.   In fact, OSHA has allowed such electronic
 access for some time. However, there has been confusion in some quarters
 about OSHAD,s policy regarding electronic access.   consequently, OSHA
 issued a new compliance directive clarifying the agencyD,s policy at
 approximately the same time this bill was introduced.   Since the bill and
 the modified compliance directive presumably were being drafted
 simultaneously, it is entirely possible that the billD,s authors were
 unaware of the impending clarification.   OSHA assumes that the
 clarification should address the authorsD, concerns.   In the event the
 subcommittee feels that additional action by OSHA is necessary to get the
 word out, we are prepared to work with you to increase awareness.
         The standardization of MSDSD,s is appealing.   In fact, OSHA is
 participating in international discussions on how MSDSD,s might be
 standardized. However, standardization is premature.    It is also more
 difficult than it sounds.
         MSDSD,s have a variety of users, with varying backgrounds and
 needs. While workers have access to them and have a right to know the
 information they contain, MSDSD,s are also used by physicians, nurses,
 industrial hygienists, safety engineers, toxicologists, firefighters,
 emergency responders, and others.   Because MSDSD,s serve such a broad
 function, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) developed a
 consensus standard that recognizes the diversity of the MSDS audience by
 requiring certain information that is of most use to workers to be placed
 in the beginning of the document, and stated in simple language. ANSI
 developed this "order of information" after extensive discussions with
 experts revealed that there is no real consensus on how an MSDS should be
 presented.
         There is an ongoing and extensive international effort to
 harmonize hazard communication requirements for hazard classification,
 labeling, and material safety data sheets. OSHA has participated in this
 effort for many years.   The ANSI "order of information" may be part of a
 globally harmonized system by the year 2000. Therefore, OSHA believes the
 wisest course is to wait until that system is complete before modifying
 our hazard· communication standard.  It is far better to standardize
 consistent with an internationally accepted approach, both from a worker
 protection standpoint and trade perspective.   If Congress were to mandate
 a change at this point, u.S. manufacturers would be required to change
 their MSDSD,s in the short term, and then again in a few years.   This
 would be costly for business and would have little benefit for workers.

 Protecting Workers Better
          Mr. Chairman, there are a variety of ways to strengthen the
 protection provided to workers under the OSH Act. We would, for example,
 support legislation that strengthens the whistleblower protections of the
 OSH Act.   It is fundamental that workers must feel free to inform their
 employer or the government when dangerous working conditions threaten
 their life or safety.  There is a good deal of evidence, however, that
 many employees do not feel free to complain about unsafe conditions and
 that too many employers feel they can retaliate against whistleblowers
 with impunity. The provisions in place today in section ll(c) of the Act
 are too weak and too cumbersome to discourage employer retaliation or to
 provide an effective remedy for the victims of retaliation. A recent
 report of the Inspector General of the Department of Labor found that
 D&whistleblowersD8 frequently face retaliation for exposing unsafe or
 unhealthy working conditions. A nurse at Skyline Terrace Nursing Home,
 for example, complained about the homeD,s lack of gloves, which are
 required to protect employees from bloodborne pathogens.   Four days after


 an inspection, ·she was fired in retaliation for the complaint. Another
 company, Hahner, Foreman & Harness, Inc., fired an employee for refusing
 to go up in a gondola three or four stories above the ground. The gondola
 had been malfunctioning and the employee believed it to be unsafe.   When
 the employee refused to risk his safety, his superintendent instructed him
 that if he did not go back up into the malfunctioning gondola, somebody
 else would.  He was fired for his refusal.   If you wish to strengthen the
 safety and health protection available to workers, I suggest this as a
 place to begin.
         In North Carolina in 1993, the state legislature took several
 steps that greatly strengthened whistleblower protections after the Hamlet
 fire revealed the flaws in our State Plan.   The changes included a longer
 statute of limitations, a private right of action and a provision for
 treble damages.   I believe these changes have played an important part in
 the progress North Carolina has made in reducing injury, illness and
 fatality rates over the last five years.
         In addition, the OSH Act does not effectively protect federal,
 state and local employees (maintenance workers, construction workers,
 firefighters, etc.). Consequently, with the exception of the few states
 that actively provide public sector coverage, OSHA has little ability to
 require positive change on the part of public employers. As a
 consequence, this limited authority hinders OSHAO,s success in reducing
 illness, injuries and fatalities on the job.
         There are numerous examples of on-the-job tragedies that occurred
 primarily because safety and health protections do not apply to public
 employees.  These tragedies could have been prevented by compliance with
 OSHA rules.   In addition, studies have shown that the overall cost of
 providing OSH Act coverage for these employees is small, especially
 compared with the amount of money which would be saved by reducing the
 cost of worker injuries.
         A third option for deterring action that places workers at risk is
 increasing the criminal penalty for an employer whose willful conduct
 causes the death of an employee. We would urge that these violations not
 be classified as misdemeanors, but felonies.   We believe that the
 possibility of incarceration for periods in excess of one year would serve
 as a more effective deterrent to employers who would risk the safety and
 health of their employees. The current classification for willful
 workplace safety and health violations that lead to an employeeO,s death
 are woefully inadequate to address the harm caused.   Classifying such
 crimes as felonies would more justly reflect the severity of the offense.

 Conclusion
         In conclusion, the bills before us today would take us in the
 wrong direction.  Prohibiting OSHA from gathering necessary information,
 adding redundant and burdensome layers to our rulemaking process and
 limiting employer liability is not the way to protect the working men and
 women of this country.   Again, let me reiterate my appreciation for this
 opportunity to testify before you today.  I look forward to continuing our
 dialogue in our effort to improve OSHAO,s contribution to the safety and
 health of American workers.


