RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD]       )

CREATION DATE/TIME:30-APR-1999 12:27:11.00

SUBJECT:   Final Version of the Revised Daschle Equal Pay bill

TO: Cordelia W. Reimers ( CN=Cordelia W. Reimers/OU=CEA/O=EOP @ EOP [ CEA]    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD]          )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Carl Haacke ( CN=Carl Haacke/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Sally Katzen ( CN=Sally Katzen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
. READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Daschle's staff has confirmed that they will introduce it today.
---------------------- Forwarded by Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP on 04/30/99
12:26 PM -----.---------------------



        Carmel_Martin @ daschle.senate.gov (Carmel Martin)
        04/30/99 12:22:52 PM
Record Type: Record

To: Mary L. Smith/OPD/EOP, Caroline R. Fredrickson/WHO/EOP
cc:
Subject: Final Version


 - Bai99.fin.wpd



Let me know if you would like a hard copy.




==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D69]ARMS23065653E.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504357060000010A02010000000205000000754C0000000200009DC2498949596CDA316A6C
DA9B321CDl198F7A097424DA98EA9D4B228A54CA72ECD89C7CD88BB5A011B20F2D387E2F1FC01E
F82E6C1992214FFD927FC2DFD77BD9ADE819817A8790B9B52873F9BCA92CDCC896E835CE38DCF5
31863C197541EC6760936B622924057124A6E4FCC5EB25E23EF25C1465AD778159D8821B67EDE1
E889581648BC125D49BC120EC2C4C1668734945A1D960DBF3C43BO10092EF39B04A14D39E36638

  1st Session                    Automated Records Management System
                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
  s.   74




  IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES



  Mr. Daschle (for himself, Mr. Kerry, Mr. Leahy, Ms. Mikulski, Mrs.
Murray, Mr. Reid, Mr. Wyden, Mrs. Boxer, Mr. Lautenberg, Mr. Kennedy,
Mr. Kerrey, Mr. Durbin, Ms. Landrieu, Mr. Reed, Mr. Robb, Mr.
Torricelli, Mr. Breaux, Mr. Wells tone , Mrs. Feinstein, Mr. Hollings,
Mr. Dodd, Mr. Akaka, Mr. Feingold, and Mr. yohnson) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee
on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions



  A BILL

  OTo amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to provide more
effective remedies to victims of discrimination in the payment of
wages on the basis of sex, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled,

  SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

  This Act may be cited as the "Paycheck Fairness Act".

  SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

  Congress makes the following findings:

  (1) Women have entered the workforce in record numbers.

  (2) Even in the 1990's, women earn significantly lower pay than
men for work on jobs that require equal skill, effort, and
responsibility and that are performed under similar working
conditions. These pay disparities exist in both the private and
governmental sectors. In many instances, the pay disparities can
                              Hex-Dump Conversion

only be due to continued intentional discrimination or the lingering
effects of past discrimination.

  (3) The existence of such pay disparities_

  (A) depresses the wages of working families who rely on the wages
of all members of the family to make ends meet;

  (B) prevents the optimum utilization of available labor resources;

  (C) has been spread and perpetuated, through commerce and the
channels and instrumentalities of commerce, among the workers of
the several States;

  (D) burdens commerce and the free flow of goods in commerce;

  (E) constitutes an unfair method of competition in commerce;

  (F) leads to labor disputes burdening and obstructing commerce
and the free flow of goods in commerce;

  (G) interferes with the orderly and fair marketing of goods in
commerce; and

  (H) in many instances, may deprive workers of equal protection
on the basis of sex in violation of the 5th and 14th amendments.

  (4) (A) Artificial barriers to the elimination of discrimination
in the payment of wages on the basis of sex continue to exist more
than 3 decades after the enactment of the Fair Labor Standards Act
of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) and the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(42 U.S.C. 2000a et seq.).

  (B) Elimination of such barriers would have positive effects,
including_

  (i) providing a solution to problems in the economy created by
unfair pay disparities;

  (ii) substantially reducing the number of working women earning
unfairly low wages, thereby reducing the dependence on public
assistance; and

  (iii) promoting stable families by enabling all family members
to earn a fair rate of pay;

  (iv) remedying the effects of past discrimination on the basis
of sex and ensuring that in the future workers are afforded equal
protection on the basis of sex; and
                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

  (v) ensuring equal protection pursuant to Congress' power to
enforce the 5th and 14th amendments.

   (5) With increased information about the provisions added by the
Equal Pay Act of 1963 and wage data, along with more effective
remedies, women will be better able to recognize and enforce their
rights to equal pay for work on jobs that require equal skill, effort,
and responsibility and that are performed under similar working
conditions.

  (6) Certain employers have already made great strides in
eradicating unfair pay disparities in the workplace and their
achievements should be recognized.

     SEC. 3. ENHANCED ENFORCEMENT OF EQUAL PAY REQUIREMENTS.

   (a) Required Demonstration for Affirmative Defense._Section
6 (d) (1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206 (d) (1))
is amended by striking "(iv) a differential" and all that follows
through the period and inserting the following: "(iv) a differential
based on a bona fide factor other than sex, such as education, training
or experience, except that this clause shall apply only if

     "(I) the employer demonstrates that

     "(aa) such factor

     "(AA) is job-related with respect to the position in question;
or

   "(BB) furthers a legitimate business purpose, except that this
item shall not apply where the employee demonstrates that an
alternative employment practice exists that would serve the same
business purpose without producing such differential and that the
employer has refused to adopt such alternative practice; and

  "(bb) such factor was actually applied and used reasonably in
light of the asserted justification; and

  "(II) upon the employer succeeding under subclause (I), the
employee fails to demonstrate that the differential produced by the
reliance of the employer on such factor is itself the result of
discrimination on the basis of sex by the employer.

  "An employer that is not otherwise in compliance with this
paragraph may not reduce the wages of any employee in order to achieve
such compliance. ' , .

  (b) Application of Provisions._Section 6(d) (1) of the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206(d) (1)) is amended by adding
                                       Hex·Dump Conversion

at the end the following: "The provisions of this sUbsection shall
apply to applicants for employment if such applicants, upon
employment by the employer, would be subject to any provisions of
this section.".

  (c) Elimination of Establishment Requirement ._Section 6 (d) of the
Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 206(d)) is amended_

  (1) by striking", within any establishment in which such employees
are employed,' '; and

   (2) by striking "in such establishment"                each place it appears.

  (d) Nonretaliation provision._Section 15(a) (3) of the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938 (2.9 U.S.C. 215(a) (3)) is amended

  (1) by striking "employee"   the first place it appears and
inserting "employee (or applicant for employment in the case of
an applicant described in section 6(d))' ';

   (2) by inserting "(or applicant)"           after "employee"       the second
place it appears;

  (3) by striking    or has"      each place it appears and inserting
"has' '; and

  (4) by inserting before the semicolon the following: " , has
inquired about, discussed, or otherwise disclosed the wages of the
employee or another employee, or because the employee (or applicant)
has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner
in an investigation, proceeding, hearing, or action under section
6 (d) , , .

  (e) Enhanced Penalties._Section 16(b) of the Fair Labor Standards
Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 216(b)) is amended

  (1) by inserting after the first sentence the following: "Any
employer who violates section 6 (d) shall additionally be liable for
such compensatory or punitive damages as may be appropriate, except
that the United States shall not be liable for punitive damages.";

  (2) in the sentence beginning "An action to' " by striking "either
of the preceding sentences"    and inserting "any of the preceding
sentences of this subsection' ';

  (3) in the sentence beginning "No employees shall' " by striking
"No employees' , and inserting' 'Except with respect to class actions
brought to enforce section 6(d), no employee' ';

   (4) by inserting after the sentence referred to in paragraph (3),
                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

the following: "Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal law,
any action brought to enforce section 6(d) may be maintained as a
class action as provided by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. ' , ;
and

  (5) in the sentence beginning "The court in' '_

   (A) by striking "in such action" and inserting "in any action
brought to recover the liability prescribed in any of the preceding
sentences of this subsection' '; and

  (B) by inserting before the period the following:                             including
expert fees".

  (f) Action by Secretary ._Section 16 (c) of the Fair Labor Standards
Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 216(c)) is amended

  (1) in the first sentence

  (A) by inserting "or, in the case of a violation of section 6 (d) ,
 additional compensatory or punitive damages,"   before "and the
agreement' '; and

  (B) by inserting before the period the following:                        , or such
compensatory or punitive damages, as appropriate' ';

   (2) in the second sentence, by inserting before the period the
following: "and, in the case of a violation of section 6(d),
additional compensatory or punitive damages' ';

  (3) in the third sentence, by striking "the first sentence' , and
inserting "the first or second sentence' '; and

  (4) in the last sentence

  (A) by striking "commenced in the case"                   and inserting
"commenced

  , , (1) in the case' , ;

  (B) by striking the period and inserting                         or' '; and

  (C) by adding at the end the following:

  "(2) in the case of a class action brought to enforce section
6(d), on the date on which the individual becomes a party plaintiff
to the class action".

  SEC. 4. TRAINING.
                       .       Hex-Dump Conversion

  The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the Office of
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, subject to the availability
of funds appropriated under section 9(b), shall provide training
to Commission employees and affected individuals and entities on
matters involving discrimination in the payment of wages.

  SEC. 5. RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND OUTREACH.

  The Secretary of Labor shall conduct studies and provide
information to employers, labor organizations, and the general public
concerning the means available to eliminate pay disparities between
men and women, including_

  (1) conducting and promoting research to develop the means to
correct expeditiously the conditions leading to the pay disparities;

  (2) publishing and otherwise making available to employers, labor
organizations, professional associations, educational institutions,
the media, and the

 general public the findings resulting from studies and other
materials, relating to eliminating the pay disparities;

  (3) sponsoring and assisting State and community informational
and educational programs;

  (4) providing information to employers, labor organizations,
professional associations, and other interested persons on the means
of eliminating the pay disparities;

   (5) recognizing and promoting the achievements of employers, labor
organizations, and professional associations that have worked to
eliminate the pay disparities; and

  (6) convening a national summit to discuss, and consider approaches
for rectifying, the pay disparities.

  SEC. 6. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND EMPLOYER RECOGNITION PROGRAM.

  (a) Guidelines.

   (1) In general._The Secretary of Labor shall develop guidelines
to enable employers to evaluate job categories based on objective
criteria such as educational requirements, skill requirements,
independence, working conditions, and responsibility, including
decisionmaking responsibility and de facto supervisory
responsibility.

  (2) Use._The guidelines developed under paragraph (1) shall be
designed to enable employers voluntarily to compare wages paid for
                                   Hex·Dump Conversion

different jobs to determine if the pay scales involved adequately
and fairly reflect the educational requirements, skill requirements,
independence, working conditions, and responsibility for each such
job with the goal of eliminating unfair pay disparities between
occupations traditionally dominated by men or women.

   (3) Publication._The guidelines shall be developed under paragraph
(1) and published in the Federal Register not later than 180 days
after the date of enactment of this Act.

  (b) Employer Recognition._

  (1) Purpose._It is the purpose of this subsection to emphasize
the importance of, encourage the improvement of, and recognize the
excellence of employer efforts to pay wages to women that reflect
the real value of the contributions of such women to the workplace.

  (2) In general._To carry out the purpose of this subsection, the
Secretary of Labor shall establish a program under which the Secretary
shall provide for the recognition of employers who, pursuant to a
voluntary job evaluation conducted by the employer, adjust their
wage scales (such adjustments shall not include the lowering of wages
paid to men) using the guidelines developed under subsection (a)
to ensure that women are paid fairly in comparison to men.

   (3) Technical assistance._The Secretary of Labor may provide
technical assistance to assist an employer in carrying out an
evaluation under paragraph (2).

  (c) Regulations ._The Secretary of Labor shall promulgate such rules
and regulations as may be necessary to carry out this section.

  SEC. 7. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL AWARD FOR PAY EQUITY IN THE
WORKPLACE.

  (a) In General. There is established the Robert Reich National
Award for Pay Equity in the Workplace, which shall be evidenced by
a medal bearing the inscription "Robert Reich National Award for
Pay Equity in the Workplace' '. The medal shall be of such design
and materials, and bear such additional inscriptions, as the
Secretary of Labor may prescribe.

  (b) Criteria for Qualification. To qualify to receive an award
under this section a business shall

   (1) submit a written application to the Secretary of Labor, at
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the
Secretary may require, including at a minimum information that
demonstrates that the business has made substantial effort to
eliminate pay disparities between men and women, and deserves special
                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

recognition as a consequence; and

    (2) meet such additional requirements and specifications as the
. Secretary of Labor determines to be appropriate.

   (c) Making and Presentation of Award.

   (1) Award. After receiving recommendations from the Secretary of
Labor, the President or the designated representative of the
President shall annually present the award described in subsection
(a) to businesses that meet the qualifications described in
subsection (b).

  (2) Presentation._The President or the designated representative
of the President shall present the award under this section with
such ceremonies as the President or the designated representative
of the President may determine to be appropriate.

   (d) Business. In this section, the term "business"               includes

   (1) (A) a corporation, including a nonprofit corporation;

   (B) a partnership;

   (C) a professional association;

   (D) a labor organization; and

  (E) a business entity similar to an entity described in any of
subparagraphs (A) through (D);

   (2) an entity carrying out an education referral program, a training
program, such as an apprenticeship or management training program,
or a similar program; and

  (3) an entity carrying out a joint program, formed by a combination
of any entities described in paragraph (1) or (2).

  SEC. 8. COLLECTION OF PAY INFORMATION BY THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION.

  Section 709 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-8)
is amended by adding at the end the following:

  "(f) (1) Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of
this subsection, the Commission shall

  "(A) complete a survey of the data that is currently available
to the Federal Government relating to employee pay information for
use in the enforcement of Federal laws prohibiting pay discrimination
                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
and, in consultation with other relevant Federal agencies, identify
additional data collections that will enhance the enforcement of
such laws; and

  "(B) based on the results of the survey and consultations under
subparagraph (A), issue regulations to provide for the collection
of pay information data from employers as described by the sex, race,
and national origin of employees.

  "(2) In implementing paragraph (1), the Commission shall have
as its primary consideration the most effective and efficient means
for enhancing the enforcement of Federal laws prohibiting pay
discrimination. Other factors that the Commission shall consider
include the imposition of burdens on employers, the frequency of
required reports (including which employers should be required to
prepare reports), appropriate protections for maintaining data
confidentiality, and the most effective format for the data
collection reports.' '.

  SEC. 9. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

  There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be
necessary to carry out this Act.


