RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Oscar Gonzalez ( CN=Oscar Gonzalez/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-JUN-1999 16:25:32.00

SUBJECT:   LRM OGG21 - - LABOR Testimony on OSHA's Draft Safety and Health Program Ru

TO: Janet R. Forsgren     CN=Janet R. Forsgren/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Brian S. Mason ( CN=Brian S. Mason/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Courtney B. Timberlake ( CN=Courtney B. Timberlake/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Stuart Shapiro ( CN=Stuart Shapiro/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Melissa N. Benton ( CN=Melissa N. Benton/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Broderick Johnson ( CN=Broderick Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP@EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Sarah Rosen Wartell ( CN=Sarah Rosen Wartell/OU=OPD/O=EOP@EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Steven D. Aitken ( CN=Steven D. Aitken/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cordelia W. Reimers ( CN=Cordelia W. Reimers/OU=CEA/O=EOP@EOP [ CEA 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Edward A. Brigham ( CN=Edward A. Brigham/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Daniel J. Chenok ( CN=Daniel J. Chenok/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Larry R. Matlack ( CN=Larry R. Matlack/OU=OMB/O=EOP@EOP [ OMB 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: clrm ( clrm @ doc.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: jwedekind ( jwedekind @ nlrb.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: cIa ( cIa @ sba.gov   @   inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: lrm@os.dhhs.gov ( lrm@os.dhhs.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN 1 )


READ:UNKNOWN

CC: justice.lrm (justice.lrm@ usdoj.gov    @ inet   [UNKNOWN 1   (OA)
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Following is LRM ID: OGG21.   Please read and respond to it by 3:00 p.m.,
Tomorrow, Tuesday, June 15, 1999.

NOTE TO EOP STAFF: You will not receive a hard copy of this document.
---------------------- Forwarded by Oscar Gonzalez/OMB/EOP on 06/14/99
04:18 PM ---------------------------
LRM ID: OGG21
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
washington, D.C. 20503-0001

Monday, June 14, 1999

LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL MEMORANDUM

TO:                     Legislative Liaison Officer - See Distribution
below
FROM:           Janet R. Forsgren (for) Assistant Director for
Legislative Reference
OMB CONTACT:    Oscar Gonzalez
                                PHONE: (202) 395-7754 FAX: (202) 395-6148
SUBJECT:        LABOR Testimony on OSHA's Draft Safety and Health Program
Rule

DEADLINE:               3:00 Tuesday, June 15, 1999
In accordance with OMB Circular A-19, OMB requests the views of your
agency on the above subject before advising on its relationship to the
program of the President.  Please advise us if this item will affect
direct spending or receipts for purposes of the "Pay-As-You-Go" provisions
of Title XIII of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

COMMENTS: Attached is prepared testimony to be presented before the House
Committee on Small Business by Charles Jeffress, the Assistant Secretary
of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health, on Thursday, June 17 at 10:30
am.

DISTRIBUTION LIST

AGENCIES:
61-JUSTICE - Jon P. Jennings - (202) 514-2141
SO-National Labor Relations Board - John E. Higgins Jr. - (202) 273-2910
52-HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES - Sondra S. Wallace - (202) 690-7760
25-COMMERCE - Michael A. Levitt - (202) 482-3151
107-Small Business Administration - Jane P. Merkin - (202) 205-6700

EOP:
Larry R. Matlack
Melissa N. Benton
Daniel J. Chenok
Stuart Shapiro
Edward A. Brigham
Courtney B. Timberlake
Cordelia W. Reimers
Karen Tramontano


Steven D. Aitken
Elena Kagan
Sarah Rosen Wartell
Brian S. Mason
Broderick Johnson
Janet R. Forsgren
LRM ID: OGG21    SUBJECT:         LABOR   Testimony on OSHA's Draft Safety and
Health Program Rule
RESPONSE TO
LEGISLATIVE REFERRAL
MEMORANDUM

If your response to this request for views is short (e.g., concur/no
comment), we prefer that you respond bye-mail or by faxing us this
response sheet.  If the response is short and you prefer to call, please
call the branch-wide line shown below (NOT the analyst'S line) to leave a
message with a legislative assistant.

You may also respond by:
        (1) calling the analyst/attorney's direct line (you will be
connected to voice mail if the analyst does not answer); or
        (2) sending us a memo or letter
Please include the LRM number shown above, and the subject shown below.


TO:                Oscar Gonzalez Phone:   395-7754   Fax:  395-6148
                   Office of Management and Budget
                   Branch-Wide Line (to reach legislative assistant):
395-7362

FROM:                                                            (Date)

                                                                 (Name)

                                                                 (Agency)

                                                                 (Telephone)


The following is the response of our agency to your request for views on
the above-captioned subject:

                  Concur

           _______ No Objection

           _______ No Comment

                  See proposed edits on pages

           _ _ _ Other:

                  FAX RETURN of ___ pages, attached to this response sheet

 - shptest4.wpd==================== ATTACHMENT           1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:    0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D14]ARMS26365527X.136 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am                                     Hex-Dump Con:~~%;nt System

                          STATEMENT OF CHARLES N. JEFFRESS
                            ASSIST ANT SECRETARY OF LABOR
                        FOR OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH
                                        before the
                         HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

                                         June 17, 1999


       Mr. Chainnan, Members ofthe Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify about

OSHA's effort to promulgate a rule on safety and health programs. Safety and health programs

are systematic, common sense approaches to managing workplace safety and health to provide

effective protection for workers: They are widely recognized as fruitful ways to reduce the

number of job-related injuries and illnesses and the number of job-related fatalities. And in the

words of Occidental Chemical's Vice President for Health, Safety and Responsible Care,

Stephen Kemp, safety and health programs "not only help you improve safety, but [also help] in

many other areas of your business. We finnly believe that good safety perfonnance leads to

higher productivity, better product quality and overall improved perfonnance as a company."

However, even with OSHA's growing emphasis on safety and health programs, widespread

action at the State level, and strong insurance company encouragement, many employers either

are not aware of the benefits of such programs or have not elected to establish their own

programs voluntarily.

       OSHA's interest in workplace safety and health programs has grown steadily since the

early 1980's, when the Agency first developed its Voluntary Protection Program (VPP) to

recognize companies in the private sector with outstanding records in the area of worker safety

and health. It became apparent that these worksites, which had achieved injury and illness rates

                                                1
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am                            Hex.Dump Conversion

markedly below those of other companies in their industries, were relying on safety and health

programs to produce those results. At VPP worksites, which today routinely achieve injury and

illness rates as much as 60 percent below those of other firms in their industry, safety and health

programs--and thus the protection of the safety and health of the workforce--have become

self-sustaining systems that are fully integrated into the day-to-day operations of the facility. At

these worksites, worker safety and health, instead of being relegated to the sidelines or delegated

to a single individual, is a fundamental part of the company's business, a value as central to

success as producing goods and services or making a fair profit.

       The evidence has continued to accumulate as OSHA's stakeholders from industry, labor,

State governments, small businesses, trade associations, insurance companies and safety and

health organizations have all gained experience with safety and health management systems.

OSHA has applied what it learned about safety and health programs from VPP companies and

our ·other stakeholders to smaller businesses, through the addition of the agency's Safety and

Health Achievement Recognition Program (SHARP), which is directed at high hazard businesses

with 250 or fewer employees.

       In 1989, OSHA published its voluntary Safety and Health Programs Management

Guidelines to help employers establish and maintain management systems to protect their

workers. OSHA's guidelines and others like them have helped thousands of companies adopt

systematic, ongoing approaches to safety and health, which achieve injury and illness rates

markedly below those of other companies in their industries, reduce their workers' compensation

costs, improve employee morale, and increase worksite productivity. In fact, OSHA has found


                                                 2

                                                     Automated Records Management SysterT'
                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion
     draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am

     that programs implemented by individual employers reduce total job-related injuries and illnesses

     by an average of 45 percent and lost worktime injuries and illnesses by an average of 75 percent.

     For example, Mereen-Johnson Machine Co. worked with its 95 employees in Minneapolis,

     Minnesota to implement a program and achieve a lost workday injury rate 60 percent below the

     industry average. Applied Engineering, Inc., a manufacturer of specialties materials with 74

     employees, located in Yankton, SD, reduced its lost workday injury rate from 6.0' in 1993 to 0.0

     in 1997, a success the company's president attributes to implementing a safety and health

     program.

            Today, thirty-two states have some form of safety and health program provision, though

     few are as comprehensive as OSHA's draft proposed rule. In four States that mandate

     comprehensive programs that have core elements similar to those in OSHA's draft proposal and

     that cover businesses of all sizes within the State, injury and illness rates fell by nearly 18% over

     the five years after implementation, in comparison with national rates over the same period.

     Several States have studied the effectiveness of these programs and found that average workers'

     compensation costs were reduced by as much as 20 percent per year, and that these benefits were

     even greater several years later when the program had matured. For example, Colorado

     evaluated a program that provides premium discounts to firms instituting safety and health

     programs. Over 50 percent of the more than 500 participants had fewer than 100 employees.

     Colorado's review found that in all of the five years after the program was established, lost.

     work-time injury rates declined by at least 10% per year and the costs of workers' compensation

     claims declined by at least 20% per year. The State of North Dakota determined that participants


                                                       3
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am                    Hex-Dump Conversion

in its program, which provided premium discounts to employers who implemented safety and

health programs, reduced lost work-time injury claims by 42 percent over 4 years, with

significant reductions occurring in each year of the program. The Texas Workers'

Compensation Commission implemented requirements for safety and health programs for firms

identified as "extra-hazardous." The program averaged 325 participants per year, and these

employers reduced injuries and illnesses by an average of61 percent in each year of the

program's existence.

       Experience with safety and health programs demonstrates that systematic, common sense

efforts to protect workers have a direct impact on workplace injury and illness rates and on

compliance with existing worker protections. However, more than 6 million reportable injuries

and illnesses continue to occur each year. More than 6000 job-related fatalities are reported to

BLS annually, with tens of thousands more job-related fatalities resulting from chronic

occupational illnesses. The common sense advantages provided by safety and health programs

will reduce these injuries, illnesses, fatalities and associated workers' compensation costs,

bringing a clear new benefit to the many establishments that have yet to establish such programs.



                               COMMON SENSE SOLUTIONS

       It is common sense to apply proven solutions to basic problems. Common sense has not

only led many businesses to implement safety and health programs, but has also encouraged

business associations to adopt their own model programs and recommend them to their members.

       The National Federation ofIndependent Business's (NFIB) Ohio chapter has developed a


                                                 4
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am

comprehensive document entitled Workplace Safety Program Guidelines, which explains to

NFIB members how to design and implement an effective safety program.                The guidelines

include the same elements that OSHA has identified as the keys to a successful program:

leadership by top management; responsibility and accountability by managers, supervisors and

employees; training in safety and health; identifying, reporting, investigating and controlling

hazards; and involvement of employees. According to the NFIB guidelines, "Serious accidents

or injuries can be very disruptive to any successful operation and to the lives of people involved.

An important step that an employer can take to effectively prevent these losses is the

development of an organized safety plan or accident prevention program."

       The Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturers Association (SOCMA) has also

developed SOCMA 's Model Safety and Health Program, a document intended to help member

companies, many of which are small, implement their own safety and health programs. Like the

NFIB guidelines, SOCMA's model program calls for: management commitment and employee

involvement; worksite analysis; hazard prevention and control; and safety and health training.

The manual recommends that a company tailor its safety and health program to the company's

site-specific needs and argues that "SOCMA member companies who incorporate this program

into their operations will receive benefits by:

»      reducing injuries, illnesses, accidents and property loss;
»      saving time and resources by not having to develop a program from scratch;
»      demonstrating management commitment to safety and health;
»      giving employees an alternative means to address safety and health concerns before
       calling OSHA
»      avoiding a wall-to-wall OSHA inspection;
»      assisting in conforming with the Responsible Care Employee Health and Safety Code."


                                                   5
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am

       Similar approaches are found in the safety and health programs advanced by other

professional associations, trade associations and employers. The National Fire Protection

Association, the American Society of Safety Engineers, the American Dental Association, the

National Spa & Pool Institute, the BF Goodrich Specialty Chemicals division, the American

Industrial Hygiene Association, and Argonaut Insurance Company have all developed model

safety and health programs. OSHA has borrowed directly from these associations and

employers in fashioning our draft safety and health programs rule. In fact, many companies

have already put such model programs to good use. For example, in 1994 the Ryder Company

instituted a safety and health program modeled after programs advocated by the International

Loss Control Institute, the National Safety Council, and OSHA's own 1989 Safety and Health

Program Guidelines. Between 1994 and 1998, Ryder reduced lost time cases by 50 percent, lost

workdays by 58 percent and its lost workday incidence rate by 42 percent.

       Earlier this year, the National Association of Manufacturers, in testimony before the

Senate Subcommittee on Employment, Safety and Training, echoed the sentiments of those who

proclaim the value of safety and health programs. At the hearing, Robert Cornell from Mon

Valley Petroleum in McKeesport, Pennsylvania, told the subcommittee that, "Today, we have an

effective safety program resulting in fewer injuries and reduced workers' compensation costs."

Mr. Cornell's company used a comprehensive analysis of its safety and health violations and

employee involvement proactively to address potential hazards. As a result, they reduced lost

workdays from 70 between 1992 and 1994 to zero from 1995 through          199~.      Mr. Cornell did not

testify on behalf of OSHA's proposal. However, he illustrated quite effectively the value of


                                                6
                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
instilling safety and health in the culture of his workplace.

        Although the preceding examples generally involve companies that implemented

programs voluntarily, the results for mandatory programs are equally impressive. Data from the

four States with mandates covering most employers in the State show an 18 percent decline in

injury and illness rates relative to national rates in the 5 year period after they required employers

to adopt safety and health programs. OSHA's enforcement experience, which has emphasized

safety and health programs during inspections at establishments of all sizes and in many different

industries, also points overwhelmingly to the effectiveness of the programmatic approach. The

General Accounting Office, in 1992, concurred with earlier OSHA assessments of the value of

comprehensive safety and health programs. GAO also said consideration should be given to

requiring high risk employers to have safety and health programs "because the potential number

oflives saved or injuries and illnesses averted is high." OSHA believes that every employer, not

just high risk employers, should be covered by such a requirement, but is continuing to examine

this issue.

        At its heart, a safety and health program promotes the exercise of reasonable diligence in

the workplace in order to protect workers. When Congress enacted and President Nixon signed

the bipartisan OSH Act in 1970, they imposed on employers a general duty to provide employees

with a workplace free of serious recognized hazards and a specific duty to adhere to rules

promulgated by OSHA. Because State occupational safety and health and workers'

compensation laws provided insufficient incentive to protect workers, the OSH Act, as some

courts have held, required employers to exercise reasonable diligence in complying with these


                                                  7
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am                              Hex-Dump Conversion

duties. Through its draft proposed rule, OSHA seeks to assure that employers exercise

reasonable diligence in protecting their workers.



                               THE DRAFT PROPOSED RULE

        OSHA has worked extensively with stakeholders from industry, labor, safety and health

organizations, State governments, trade associations, insurance companies and small businesses

to develop its draft proposal. The draft rule reflects the experience and suggestions of many of

these participants and would require that safety and health programs include five "core"

elements: management leadership and employee participation; hazard identification and

assessment; hazard prevention and control; training; and evaluation of the program's

effectiveness. The elements are simple and straightforward. Reduced to their basic level, the

. elements require an employer to work credibly with its employees to find workplace hazards and

fix them, and to ensure that workers, supervisors and managers can recognize a hazard when they

see it. The rule creates no new obligations for employers to control hazards that they have not

already been required to control under the General Duty Clause of the OSH Act or existing

OSHA standards .

       . The required elements in OSHA's draft mirror those included in the models produced by

the NFIB of Ohio, SOCMA, and many other associations, insurance companies and employers.

As those on the front lines have found, the elements all support each other. All five must be

present to ensure success. They are common sense.

        The Agency recognizes that many companies have already embraced the program


                                                    8
                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am

approach to managing safety and health in their workplaces. Because the draft proposed rule

only includes those elements that are essential for program effectiveness, and because the rule is

framed in broad and flexible perfonnance language, OSHA believes that existing programs that

are effective will already meet the proposal's requirements. To reassure those employers,

OSHA has incorporated a grandfather clause 'into the draft proposed rule that would allow such

programs to be "grandfathered in."



Program Elements

       Management Leadership and Employee Involvement. A safety and health program

will only work if management is fully committed to it and communicates that commitment to the

entire organization. According to Michael Seitel from Norwalt Design, a 38-employee, New

Jersey company that manufactures high-speed assembly machinery for the plastics industry, "One

of the biggest things, I think, in regard to the safety and health program that a company needs is

management commitment ... you're going to save money on your insurance and on workers not

being out due to injury."

       Employee involvement means actively engaging front-line employees, who are closest to

workplace operations and have the highest stake in preventing job-related accidents, in

developing, implementing and evaluating the safety and health program. In the words of Bill

Harvey, Senior Vice President of Alliant (fonnerly Wisconsin Power & Light), "you must build a

corporate culture that conditions employees to think of safety as their job, not someone else's

job." According to the NFIB of Ohio's guidelines, "Many times employees who are most


                                                 9
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am                         Hex-Dump Conversion
familiar with a job will be excellent sources of solutions to safety problems, just as they are for

production or quality problems." Employee involvement spreads the responsibility for safety

and health and ensures that more eyes seek and identify problems and more perspectives are used

to develop solutions.   When OSHA held stakeholder meetings on the draft proposal in 1996,

there was widespread agreement that employee participation is crucial to an effective safety and

health program.

       Hazard Identification and Assessment. Hazard identification and assessment means,

among other things, that the employer reviews workplace safety and health information, inspects

the workplace, identifies hazards, and prioritizes covered hazards for elimination or control.

Front-line employees are empowered to avert injuries and accidents by identifying and bringing

hazards to the attention of their supervisors. In essence, this element calls on employers to look

for hazards, decide how serious they are, and prioritize their control or elimination.

       Hazard Prevention and Control. Once hazards covered by OSHA standards and the

general duty clause are identified and assessed, they must be controlled. Put simply, the element

calls for a workplace to obey the law as it already exists--fix identified hazards in accordance

with the relevant OSHA standards or the general duty clause. Hazard prevention and control

provides the solutions to the safety and health problems discovered by the program's hazard

identification and assessment activities. Unless hazards are prevented, controlled or eliminated,

workers who are exposed to them will continue to be killed, hurt, or made ill.

       Information and Training. Infonnation and training ensure that both workers and

management have the information, knowledge and skills to recognize identified hazards,


                                                 10
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion·
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am

understand what controls are in place to prevent exposure, and understand their roles in

preventing or minimizing exposures. People need to know hazards when they see them, so they

can protect themselves and their co-workers.

       Program Evaluation. Program evaluation simply tells an employer to assess how well

its safety and health program works, to ensure that it protects workers. Where the employer

identifies deficiencies, they should be corrected.



                           ISSUES RAISED BY SMALL BUSINESS

       Since OSHA last testified before the Small Business Committee regarding this issue, a

Small Business Advocacy Review Panel has reviewed the draft proposed rule, as required by the

Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act. The Panel, which consisted of personnel

from OSHA, SBA's Office of Advocacy and OMB's Office of Inforrnation and Regulatory

Affairs, submitted its report to me on December 18, 1998. The panel report was based in part on

the advice and recommendations provided by18 small entity representatives (SERs).

       The version analyzed by the SBREFA panel was different from the one OSHA described

to you when last we testified before your Committee. At that hearing, members of the

Committee raised a number of questions about the rule. Since that time, OSHA has continued to

respond to suggestions made by members of this Committee, small businesses and other

stakeholders. OSHA incorporated a number of changes into the draft proposed rule the agency

ultimately provided to the SBREF A panel. For example, when OSHA testified before you two

years ago, the draft called for employers to conduct hazard assessments at a frequency


                                                 11
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am                        Hex-Dump Conversion

"appropriate to safety and health conditions at the workplace." The draft discussed by the

SBREF A panel provided that such assessments should occur at least every 2 years and when

changes in workplace conditions indicate that a new or increased hazard may be present. The

agency also added the "grandfather clause" discussed earlier in my testimony to the version of the

draft proposal provided to the SBREF A panel. The grandfather clause responded to concerns

raised by the Chairinan and various small businesses that employers who already operate

effective programs should not be required to change them.

       OSHA has been clarifying the regulatory text wherever possible. In part because of the

flexibility the rule provides, some small businesses questioned whether it incorporated sufficient

guidance to help them comply without unnecessary difficulty. Several recommendations in the

Panel's report suggested that OSHA further clarify certain portions of the rule and its

accompanying analyses. For example, the Panel suggested that OSHA should clarify in its

preamble how the Safety and Health Program rule interacts with other OSHA rules, with the

existing requirements of the General Duty Clause, and with National Labor Relations Act

(NLRA) requirements. The Panel also recommended that OSHA "solicit comment on the

possibility of providing guidance that contains all cross-references in the rule and explains such

concepts as the General Duty Clause so that small firms can understand these issues without

having to go to other sources."

       OSHA is responding to the issues raised by SERs and the Panel as it readies the proposal

for publication in the Federal Register. In some cases, we will provide additional explanations

in the preamble to the proposed rule and in the accompanying analyses. In other cases, we are


                                                12
                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am

clarifying language in the rule that some SERs thought to be too vague. For example, the draft

provided to the SBREF A panel required training to be provided "as often as necessary to ensure

that employees are adequately informed and trained." OSHA is considering a modification that

would require training when the employer "has reason to believe" that employees lack the.

knowledge or understanding they need. With regard to evaluating program effectiveness, the

Panel draft included language requiring an evaluation "as often as necessary to ensure program

effectiveness." We likely will replace this requirement with language calling for a review

"when the employer has reason to believe" that all or part of the program is ineffective. These

changes both clarify that an employer need not guess when a reevaluation or new training should

be conducted, but instead must exercise reasonable care. Issues concerning cost and coverage

also were raised. The issues raised by SERs and the Panel are important and OSHA is

considering them all carefully.

       In addition, when the final rule is published in a few years, OSHA will provide a variety

of informational and outreach materials to simplify compliance. Materials will include

checklists, model programs, decision logics and other materials to help employers determine how

to comply and when they have met their obligations under the rule. For example, the agency is

already developing a new "Expert Advisor" to provide computerized guidance to employers who

are attempting to implement or improve safety and health programs. Last year, OSHA released

its Hazard Awareness Advisor, which has received excellent reviews from small businesses and

is referenced on the Home Page of the National Federation of Independent Business. In addition

to this extensive array of informational materials, small businesses will continue to have


                                                13
                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am

available to them free consultation services through OSHA's 50 state consultation programs.

OSHA will also provide intensive training to its compliance officers to ensure that their

enforcement of the rule is consistent with OSHA's intent to provide maximum flexibility to

employers.

       Because OSHA has drafted a performance-based rule rather than a one-size-fits all

requirement, it has not specified every action a business must take to comply. Nor should it.

However, the agency is committed to providing the most instructive materials possible to help

small businesses comply with ease. As Bill Pritchard from MASCO, which has facilities

ranging in size from 5 to 2,700 employees, points out, "The program must be performance

oriented. Give companies the flexibility to allow them to develop the process which will work

for each facility. Don't specify the process, specify the key elements ... let companies decide the

way to implement the elements." Many models similar to the one OSHA is proposing already

exist and should prove invaluable as businesses develop their own programs. Clearly, the

flexibility OSHA has built into its draft proposal is preferable to a one-size-fits-all approach.

       A particular area of interest to small businesses where the rule will provide significant

flexibility is documentation. The program for small businesses, for example, need not be

written. And employers with fewer than 10 employees are exempt even from those minimal

requirements. Although some small businesses have expressed skepticism, feeling they will

need to maintain written records regardless of this exemption, that is emphatically not OSHA's

intent. Small businesses will have many ways to demonstrate their compliance. For example,

they can simply describe to a compliance officer the hazards that have been or are being


                                                 14
draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am                   Hex-Dump Conversion

identified and what has been or is being done to identify, assess and control them. They may

also demonstrate their compliance using receipts, order forms and other documents developed or

obtained in the normal course of business.

       Some small business stakeholders have questioned whether the rule should be universally

applicable. OSHA believes there is strong evidence to support such coverage. Many

stakeholders have expressed a similar point of view. For example, John Cheffer of the Travelers

Insurance Company testified in 1995 before the National Advisory Committee on Occupational

Safety and Health that, "We consider any proposed safety and health standard to be the

centerpiece from which all other rules and standards flow, in effect, the ultimate safety and health

guideline document for the nation. If that view is accepted, by its very nature it must be generic,

flexible and universally applicable." Another significant reason for applying the rule to

establishments of all sizes is the risk currently posed to employees working in small businesses ..

Although small businesses with 10 or fewer employees account for only about 15 percent of

employees, 30 percent of all work-related fatalities reported to the BLS in 1997 occurred in these

very same workplaces. By comparison, businesses with 100 or more employees accounted for

approximately 45 percent of employees, but experienced only 20 percent of all work-related

fatalities in 1997. Based on these numbers, the risk of fatalities in businesses with 10 or fewer

employees is 4 to 5 times higher than the risk in businesses with 100 or more employees.

Although most stakeholders opposed exempting small businesses from coverage, they agreed

with OSHA that every effort should be made to ease compliance burdens for small businesses.

The compliance assistance materials that OSHA is now developing will address that need.


                                                 15


    draft -- June 14, 1999 -- 11:15 am                Automated Records Management Systerrr
                                                              Hex-Dump Conversion


                                             CONCLUSION

           Safety and health programs already make a significant difference in the lives of many of

    our nation's workers and in the financial bottom line of many businesses .. But many businesses

    have yet to recognize their value. To fill this gap, OSHA is designing a rule that provides a

    general framework for employers to follow but leaves each individual employer free to add

    workplace-specific procedures and to adopt management practices that suit the characteristics of

    that particular workplace. Safety and health programs are common sense for the workplace:

    OSHA is committed to working with employers of all sizes, both during and after development

    of its rule, to ensure that the rule provides sufficient flexibility, OSHA's compliance guidance

    furnishes suitable information to meet the compliance needs of employers, and that workers are

    protected.




                                                    16
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 100 - FOLDER -004


[06/15/1999-07/29/1999]


