RECORD TYPE: FEDERAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeffrey A. Shesol ( CN=Jeffrey A. Shesol/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 17-JUL-1998 1'8:27:31.00

SUBJECT:   AFT Final

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Tramontano ( CN=Karen Tramontano/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: she sol ( shesol @ aol.com @ inet [ DEFAULT 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Final 07/17/98 6:00pm
Jeff Shesol

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS TO THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TEACHERS
NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA
July 20, 1998

        Acknowledgments: Sec. Herman; Mayor Mark Morial; Members.of Congress TK;
AFT President Sandy Feldman; Secretary-Treasurer Ed McElroy; newly elected
Executive VP Nat LaCour (also a member of WH Commission on Presidential
Scholars)

        I want to say a word about someone who is not here today, but who
is very much with us in spirit, and that is myoId friend Al Shanker.    I
know he would be proud of you on your 75th anniversary, proud that you are
continuing the lifelong fight he waged for excellence in education: for
high standards of achievement, high expectations for our children, and
high-quality teaching.  We are all grateful for the legacy he has left us,
and energized by the ideals he expressed so forcefully.


        This is a remarkable time in our nationO,s history: a time of
growth, of confidence, of prosperity.  The American economy is the
strongest in a generation. Communities are coming together, strengthened
by a common bond of values and a renewed ethic of responsibility.  In a
powerful way, this respect for law and order and for one another is making
itself felt at almost every level of our society, sending crime rates
spiraling downward and making families, again, feel more secure. Today, I
want to talk to you about the ways we can instill this ethic of
responsibility and respect in everyone of our nationO,s public schools,
and in the lives of everyone of our children.

        This is a tremendous moment of possibility for our nationO,s
children. AmericaO,s prosperity presents us with a remarkable opportunity
-- and, therefore, an obligation -- to conquer many of the challenges we
have long faced as a nation.  To meet that obligation, we must give our
children the tools they will need to succeed in new and changing times.
And by doing so, we will ensure that our own time, our age of opportunity,
is not remembered for the opportunities we missed.

        I know, as teachers, you believe in this possibility. Your
unflagging faith in it drives you every day to broaden young minds, unlock
their potential, sharpen their skills.  It is a faith that sustains you
during long days in front of the chalkboard or over the keyboard, during
long nights grading papers and crafting lesson plans.

        For more than five years, our administration has worked to be a
strong, active partner in your efforts -- making schools safer, raising
standards in the basics for students and teachers, extending the
opportunities only a quality education can bring to every child.   In an
age of information and ideas, education must be AmericaO,s first
priority. That is why we have made the greatest investment in education
in our nationO,s history. That is why weO,re working to modernize our
schools and connect e·very classroom to the Internet. And thatO, s why
weO,re working to end social promotion and reduce class size -- so
teachers can regain control and maintain discipline in their classrooms.

        If we are to expect more of our students, then we must also ask
more of our teachers.  Every effort, every reform, depends on
high-quality, highly-trained teachers. We must insist that teachers pass
competency tests before they set foot in our schools.  Those who fail
should not be licensed, and should no~ be hired. Those who make the grade
should have more support -- for example, the guidance of a master
teacher. Teachers can and must take responsibility for their own --
mentoring, counseling, and reviewing one another.  This lesson of
responsibility is not lost on the AFT.  I salute President FeldmanO,s plan
to improve teacher quality and know your efforts will make a difference.

        Just as teachers are stepping up to their responsibility, Congress
must do the same, and put progress above partisanship. That is how we
have helped more children learn to read, more teachers to be trained, and
more young people to go to college.  I am pleased that the Congress is
moving forward with my proposals to help prepare teachers for the
classroom.  It is with this same spirit of progress we must move forward
today.

        I am confident we will maintain our momentum.  But .you know and I
know that all our progress will come to naught if our schools are not safe
places, orderly places, where teachers can teach and children can learn.
We also know that in too many American schools, there is lawlessness where
there should be learning. There is chaos where there should be calm.


There is disorder where there should be discipline. Make no mistake: this
is a threat not only to your classrooms, but to the strength and vitality 0
f AmericaD,s public school system and, indeed, to the strength and
vitality of our nation.

        It is a sobering fact that, in a recent study, 81 percent of
teachers said it was the worst-behaved students who absorbed the most
attention in schools.   Not the struggling students, not the striving
students, but the worst-behaved.   It is a dismaying fact that 71 percent
of all high school students said there were too many disruptive students
in their classes -- and only 13 percent of public school students said
their classmates were D&very respectfulD8 of teachers.   You know that
teachers canD,t teach if they have to fight for respect or fear for their
safety; that students canD,t study if there is disorder in the classroom;
and that disruptive students wonD,t change if there are no clear, strict
standards for behavior.

        We will have discipline in the classroom, or we will have disorder -- and
danger.  Hard experience has taught us this lesson, taught us well.  The
problem is clear.  The stakes could not be higher and the demand for
action could not be more profound. As a nation, we must recognize that a
return to order is central to the renewal of education in America.

        There is another lesson to be learned -- as teachers, I know you
have a fondness for lessons -- in this case, itD,s from the overall
decline in violent crime.  Crime is dropping in this country because we
are getting serious about punishment, and getting serious about
prevention.  Crime is dropping because entire communities are taking
responsibility for their own streets and neighborhoods, and because the
government is giving them the support they need.  That is the idea behind
community policing -- the 100,000 police we are putting on the streets.
And when we assume responsibility, when we set tough new standards for
behavior, something remarkable happens: people behave.

        That is why our administration is serious about school safety. We
have seen, tragically and repeatedly, the damage done by troubled
adolescents with a firearm in hand and violence in mind.  So we have
worked hard to tighten school security, to strengthen prevention, and to
toughen penalties. We will continue to show zero tolerance toward guns in
schools. During the 1996-1997 school year, our policy led to the
expulsion of nearly 6,100 law-breaking students and the prevention of
countless acts of violence.  And this fall, as I am announcing today, I
will host the first-ever White House Conference on School -Safety --
bringing together not only experts and law enforcement officers, but also
families whose lives have been touched by school violence. Together, we
will continue the fight to find new solutions to this constant challenge.

        Congress, too, has an opportunity to protect AmericaD,s children
by passing the juvenile crime bill I have proposed.  It will ban violent
juveniles from buying guns for life and take other important steps.
Congress can also give communities much-needed support: I have proposed
that in our balanced budget, $95 million be allocated to the prevention of
juvenile crime.  I urge Congress to step up to its responsibility, invest
in prevention -- like the summer jobs program some are trying to eliminate
-- and stop violent outbursts before they start.

        We have learned another lesson from the drop in violent crime.
And that is: the small stuff matters.    In most schools, it is not the
sensational acts of violence but the smaller acts of aggression -- the
threats, the scuffles, the back-talk -- that take a terrible toll.   That


is why setting strict standards for behavior can and will make a
difference, as they are doing, all across America, in powerful and
inventive ways.

         Our first effort, of course, must be to get children inside the
schoolhouse doors.   Truancy, as I have said, is more than a warning sign
of trouble -- it is trouble, and a gateway to drugs, alcohol, gangs and
violence.   Kids can either sit in class, or stand on the streets. They
can either learn from teachers, or learn from thugs.   It used to be that
truancy laws were enforced, that local police knew the kids and brought
them back to the schoolrooms, but that has long ceased to be the case.
But communities are again turning their attention to truancy.   In
Milwaukee, officers can now stop students on the street during school
hours. And in Boston, where more than one quarter of public school
students were absent three weeks or more this past school year, they have
a strict new promotion policy: if you donD,t attend, you wonD,t advance.
Other cities are forming truancy task forces -- a united front of schools,
social services and community police to keep children in school and out of
trouble.

        A teacherD,s day must sometimes seem very long.  But we know that
the school day lasts a precious few hours and there is no time to waste.
So once kids are inside the schoolhouse door they must be free of fear and
free of distraction. That is one of the ideas behind school uniforms.
When I spoke of school uniforms in my 1996 State of the Union Address, it
was an old idea without much new credence.  But in the years since, I have
been heartened to see an inundation of interest.  From New York City to Hou
ston, from Dade County to Chicago, school districts are adopting school
uniform policies and making sure that kids no longer kill other kids for a
pair of sneakers or a designer jacket; making sure students are focused
not on appearances but on learning. As a result, crime is going down in
these schools, and attendance is on the rise.

        But our responsibility cannot end with the words D&class
dismissed. OS After school, children can find their way into crime and
drugs or fall prey to it.   Youth crime, it is no wonder, is at its peak
during those unsupervised hours, 3:00 to 6:00. That is why I have called
on schools to remain open -- to become community learning centers where
children are not only safe but can continue to learn and grow.   I have
proposed, in my 1999 budget, a significant expansion in grants to schools
to create before- and after-school programs. And for the later hours,
when the streets become darker and more dangerous, I have long urged that
communities follow the example of New Orleans, and put in place
community-based curfews.  ItO,s no wonder that youth crime is dropping
dramatically during curfew hours, or that cities from Denver to Chicago to
North Little Rock are adopting curfews --keeping children off the streets
and out of trouble, and giving parents a tool to impart respect and
responsibility.

        Anti-truancy efforts. School uniforms.   Character education.  Curfews.
These are not isolated initiatives.  Instead, they add up to a new
approach to restoring discipline in our schools and order in our
childrenD,s lives. Working together, learning from one another, America
can end an era of unruliness and install an ethic of responsibility in our
schools. We can make them places where students again learn not only the
three RD,s but also respect, not only the great books but also good
behavior.  ItO,s as simple as the AFTD,s slogan: D&Responsibility.
Respect. Results.DS ThatD,s a good formula for success, and a good
D&Lesson for Life.DS
   ·

        I am struck that just about every challenge we face is being met
somewhere in someway by someone. And that is the way it should be.
Today I call on every community -- parents, teachers, and local sChool
officials -- to adopt a set of standards for school discipline. The
federal government will not make decisions for you, but will help you to
make your decisions work. Government, as I have said, is not the
solution. Nor is it the problem. At its best, government is a catalyst;
a clearing house for new ideas; a partner in empowering citizens to make
the most of their lives.

        Of course, as teachers, you understand as well as anyone that
discipline begins not in the classroom, but at home. That is where the
first and most fundamental lessons for life are taught -- the difference
between right and wrong, the values of responsibility and respect.   I know
you will continue to do everything in your power to reinforce those
values, and to teach our children new lessons -- about the wonders of the
natural world, the riches of the human imagination. And by teaching our
children well, by doing what you do every day from the first bellO,s ring,
you are building a better future for your students, and for our nation.


