RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL          (TRP NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sujata Tejwani ( Sujata Tejwani              UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 19-NOV-1998 15:01:47.00

SUBJECT:               P6/(b)(6)                 [0 05]

TO: Andy_McDonald     andy_mcdonald@wellstone.senate.gov [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: BGreen ( BGreen@dnc.democrats.org [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Glen M. Weiner ( CN=Glen M. Weiner/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: danielfee ( danielfee@worldnet.att.net            [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: david sandretti ( david_sandretti@boxer.senate.gov [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: eallen ( eallen@emilyslist.org [. UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elyse_Wasch ( Elyse_Wasch@reed.senate.gov [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Hart90125 ( Hart90125@aol.com [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: hawkins ( hawkins@dccc.dnh.org [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: kak318 ( kak318@worldnet.att.net [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: karahughes98    ( karahughes98@yahoo.com [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Karen Olick ( karen_olick@boxer.senate.gov [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kauffmann ( Kauffmann@dnc.democrats.org [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO:· Kim ( Kim@dnc.democrats.org [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Matt_Kagan ( Matt_Kagan@boxer.senate.gov [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: nadeam elshami ( nadeam_elshami@boxer.senate.gov [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: perry_lange ( perry_lange@wellstone.senate.gov [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: pwetterlund ( pwetterlund@emilyslist.org [ UNKNOWN 1 )


READ: UNKNOWN

TO: SINOWAY ( SINOWAY@dnc.democrats.org [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
AP J8442 rn utut- UT-Cook-Staff, 1st Ld-Writethru,0957          11-19     9:14a



Report: Cook's former chief of staff said boss was "wacko"

EDS: RECASTS lede to remove reference to rehiring

rg1

        SALT LAKE CITY (AP)   - Congressman Merrill Cook's re-election win

was followed by a flurry of staff firings and profanity-laden

tirades, according to memos obtained by The Salt Lake Tribune.

        One memo, written by former Chief of Staff Janet Jenson,

said that Cook thought he was in the midst of a losing

campaigns, days after his double-digit win.

        Jenson warned staff that Cook's behavior put all of their jobs

in jeopardy if they did not humor the increasingly erratic

congressman, The Tribune said in a copyright story Thursday.

        "Whatever he asks you to do or say, however crazy, you should

just say 'Whatever you think is best,'"     Jenson advised staffers in

a Nov. 7 intra-office e-mail obtained by the paper. "If he asks

you to fax his underwear to the speaker's office, please just do

it. "

        In an e-mail the next day, Jenson said,   "Merrill has taken up

permanent residence in wacko land, and we are all in serious

jeopardy."

        An example of Cook's state of mind, according to Jenson's memos,

was a profanity-laden tirade two days after the Nov. 3 election

where Cook used the harshest expletives referring to his chief of

staff, telling her it was her fault they were going to lose the

re-election campaign.


       "I told him that he's already won it by double digits, and

maybe he should get some sleep or go on a vacation or something,"

according to the memo.

       Meantime, Cook's office on Wednesday confirmed the resignations

of two more staffers - Frank Vlossak in Washington and Georgia

Peterson in Salt Lake City. They come just more    tha~   a week after

Jenson's resignation and the firing of Utah District Director

Robert Jeppsen.

       Cook declined an interview, as he has since allegations of his

violent temper surfaced.

       SpokeswomanMARianne Funk said Wednesday that Cook was too

"hurt and surprised" to respond. "He's, frankly,    feeling

devastated. "

       Funk said that Cook never threatened to fire the entire staff.

Jenson, however, had been singled out for replacement before the

election because of a deteriorating relationship.

       Her e-mails, Funk said, were sent after she was asked to resign

and were a "tremendous effort to save her job by attackingCongressman

Cook's credibility in a manner that offended most

staff."

       -Funk could not explain how attacking Cook might save Jenson's

job.

       Funk also denied that Cook verbally abused staffers and used

profanity. And she rejected suggestions that her boss was too

disoriented to comprehend his election victory.

       She did say he was hurt by some of the personal aspects of the

campaign, including ads run by Democratic challenger Lily Eskelsen

poking fun at his appearance.

       Cook's third-ranking Washington employee, senior legislative

assistant Martin McGuinness, described Cook's behavior as typical


high-energy Washington politics.

        "It's cut.throat D. C., hardball, breakneck politics and

legislation. It's not bridge club," McGuinness said. But he said

there was no staff abuse or out-of-control anger.

        But two other former staffers - Jeppsen and one-time chief of

staff David Irvine - went public last week with concerns about

Cook's temper and depression.

        And some current staff members also have told The Tribune

of disturbing actions by Cook, including locking himself in the

office for hours, communicating by slipping notes under the

door.

        Funk said Cook only closed his office doors for private phone

calls or a nap during marathon workdays.

        In addition to the allegations by departing staff, a week

before the election he was banned from state GOP

headquarters for a cursing tantrum after he was left off a

get-out-the-vote phone message recorded by Sen. Bob Bennett.

        Jenson had declined comment on her Nov. 9 resignation. On

Wednesday, she acknowledged writing the e-mail memos, but said they

were intended to be private.

        "I am very sad that one or more members of the staff has made

tl1em public," Jenson said. "I do not want to damage Merrill in

any way publicly."

        The two resignations announced Wednesday were expected, she

added.

        Vlossak, a part-time legislative assistant, left to work for a

law firm. Peterson, Cook's state transportation liaison, resigned

in protest of the firings of Jenson and Jeppsen .

    . Peterson, who worked part time from her home, said she had not

witnessed any outbursts, verbal abuse or moodiness.


     "I knew there were some problems," Peterson said. "Some of

the secretaries would talk to me on occasion that they had had

experiences that were not good."

     In a phone interview wednesday from her home in

suburbanWashington, Jenson confirmed that her concerns prompted    he~


contact Gov. Mike Leavitt and the state Republican Party to seek help in

the days following the election.

     "Basically, they were very concerned, and they asked me if

there was any way the family could deal with it privately," said

Jenson, who called Cook's brother-in-law ·after the talk.

     Leavitt Chief of Staff Ted Stewart said he talked to Jenson the

day after the election and she told him of proposed staff changes

and what she said were threats to fire the entire Washington staff.

     "Like anyone else, I was taken aback," said Stewart, who

passed on the information to Leavitt, but was unaware of any

intervention by the governor.

     Stewart said he did not discuss Cook's mental health during his

conversation with Jenson.



(PROFILE

(CAT: Political;)

(SRC:AP; ST:UT;)


