RECORD TYPE: FEDERAL        (TRP NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Robert M. Shireman ( Robert M. Shireman@EOP@LNGTWY@LNGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-DEC-1997 22:22:00.00

SUBJECT:     School Construction

TO: Elena Kagan ( Elena Kagan@eop [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Message Creation Date was at        3-DEC-1997 22:22:00



This memo will be distributed by fax Thursday morning.     (Early comments

are

welcome) .




December 4, 1997




MEMORANDUM TO:        SECRETARY RILEY

       SECRETARY RUBIN

DIRECTOR RAINES

BRUCE REED



FROM:      GENE SPERLING

       BOB SHIREMAN



RE:       SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION




The attached draft memorandum lays out options for the President on school

construction.     It is based on information provided by your staff over the

past


several weeks.         Please provide any comments, edits, and recommendations to

Bob

Shireman by tomorrow (Friday) at 10 a.m.        (fax 456-2223, phone 456-2803) .



cc:    Mr.    Bowles

 Secretary Rubin

 Dr.    Yellen

 Ms.    Mathews

 Mr.    Podesta

Mr.    Klain

Mr.    Hilley

 Deputy Secretary Summers

Acting Deputy Secretary Smith

 Mr.    Lew

 Ms.    Kagan

Ms.    Winston

 Mr.    Cohen

 Mr.    Shireman




                                                                                                  /


DRAFT MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT




 You have publicly made it clear on a number of occasions      most recently

at

the signing of the Labor-HHS-Education Appropriations Bill -- that you

will

continue to fight to get Congress to address the problem of the. crumbling

school infrastructure.   There are two issues on school construction that

need

to be considered in the context of FY 1999 Budget decisions: size and

design

(spending versus tax).   This memorandum briefly describes some of the

policy

and political dynamics around the question of size, then lays out the pros

and

cons on the design issue.



Size



 The passback funds the School Construction initiative at $1.9 billion --

down

from the $5 billion that was proposed last year.   That matches a

Daschle-Gephardt proposal developed in the late summer as a last-ditch

effort

to get a down payment on the school construction issue.     The amount was

based

on the size of the offset they were able to agree on (closing a tax

loophole) .

There is no question that an initiative of that size -- to help address a


$112

billion problem (not including the need associated with increasing

enrollments)

-- would not be met warmly by supporters of a Federal investment in this

area.



 Pressures for us to re-propose a school construction initiative of· at

least $5

billion are coming from a number of quarters:



 Defining issue for Democrats.   Democrats see this as a popular initiative

that

sets them clearly apart from Republicans.   Some have argued that the

funding

should be increased above $5 billion in order to provide more help to

suburbs.



 Urban needs.    In the context of negotiations over the voluntary national

tests, School Construction came up a number of times with the Black Caucus

as

one item that would demonstrate the AdministrationD!,s commitment to the

needs

of urban schools.



 Class size.    Some have suggested that a larger school construction

initiative

could be tied to the idea of smaller class sizes.



 Obviously, the reason to keep our investment in school construction at a

lower


level has to do with competing demands in the budget process.     You should

keep

in mind that your proposal was a one-time investment that outlayed over

four

years.     If we are constrained by funds available in the five year budget

window, one way to expand our proposal would be to propose a second

investment

(or if on the tax side, a longer investment) for a total of, say, $8

billion

over 10 years.



Design



 You need to decide whether we should continue to propose our School

Construction initiative as a mandatory spending proposal or shift it to a

tax

credit.



 Spending proposal.    The bill you proposed, the Partnership to Rebuild

AmericaD!,s Schools, provided a one-time appropriation of $5 billion for

grants

to States and localities to pay for up to one-half the cost of repayment

of

school construction bonds (or an equivalent amount in cases where an

alternative financing mechanism is used).    One-half of the funding was

reserved

for the 100 largest school districts.    We estimated that the $5 billion

would

leverage $20 billion in new construction/renovation over four years.


    Pros



    The Administration bill in the House gained 116 cosponsors, including

Republicans.    A letter signed by 112 of them urges you to include the

same, $5

billion proposal in the FY 1999 Budget.



    The bill was designed to spur additional State and local effort (through

a

competitive portion of the funds) and to leverage the Federal funds.        It

is

more difficult to design a tax credit that accomplishes those goals.



    This approach is more efficient at addressing our specific goals than a

tax

credit (tax incentives associated with bonds inevitably have some

inefficiencies associated with them) .



    The bill is flexible, allowing for creative funding mechanisms such as

lease-buybacks, helping districts that are not able to float additional

bonds.



    Cons



    To propose $5 billion or more, we probably will need to rely on closing

tax

loopholes as the offset, creating a O!&tax-and-spendO!8 scenario.



    with a tax-side offset, the spending proposal and the offset ~ould have

to


move through different committees, making the plan more difficult to

achieve

legislatively -- unless there is a reconciliation bill.



 While the education groups prefer the spending program in the abstract,

they

would prefer a tax-side approach if it means more money could be dedicated

to

the purpose.



 Tax proposal.   As part of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, Congress

enacted a

tax credit proposal by Rep. Rangel that includes school renovation (but

not

construction).   The provision allows State and local governments to issue

bonds

totaling $800 million over two years.      The Federal government essentially

covers the interest on the bonds through a tax credit, providing the

schools

with an interest-free form of financing.    These bonds can be used to cover

certain costs of D!&academiesD!8 that link businesses with the schools to

develop

a curriculum that is employment-oriented (the description is not unlike

your

School-to-Work program).   The bond proceeds can be used for a variety of

expenses: rehabilitation, repairs, technology, equipment, curriculum

development, and teacher training.



 While supporters of school construction were pleased to see Congress

ratify a


proposal that included school renovation,        they do not see the Rangel plan

as a

sufficient approach for two reasons:      (1)   its narrow focus on these

school-business academies, and (2) the broad use of funds.



 This bond/tax credit design could be expanded to focus more squarely on

school

construction and renovation, and beyond the academies in the Rangel

provision.

For example, Rep. Loretta Sanchez introduced legislation in October that

would

use the bond mechanism to support school construction in overcrowded

districts.       We would not need to provide detailed specifics in the

budget.     We

could simply say that the bond/tax credit would be extended and expanded

to

assist school districts with their school construction and renovation

needs.

Then we could work with Mr. Rangel and others on the details.



 Pros



     We can more easily propose a larger initiative on the tax side.



     A tax-side initiative will be revenue-neutral, and both the program and

the

offset would be handled by the same committees in Congress.



The Senate sponsor of our School Construction legislation -- Sen.

Moseley-Braun -- is on the Finance Committee and would support the idea of


a

tax-side approach that she could push there.



     We might be able to develop a proposal that would have the strong

support of

the ranking member in the House (Mr. Rangel).



    Cons



     The bond/tax-credit approach is unusual, so we do not yet know how well

it

will work.



     The bells and whistles that we built into our school Construction

proposal --

leveraging, rewarding State investments, etc. -- would not be possible in

a

tax-side approach.



     The House sponsor of our School Construction legislation -- Rep. Lowey



prefers the spending bill that we proposed this year.



    Rep. Rangel is very committed to his design, and may not be willing to

make

the changes that we would want to steer this toward school construction

and

renovation and away from his O!&academiesO!8 approach.     There is a chance we

would have to part' ways with him, or accept something that we do not like

and
..      ,~




     does not satisfy the constituency groups.



     Views and Recommendations



      [Treasury strongly supports a spending-side strategy.   The tax credit

     approach

     is awkward and inefficient.   While Treasury is making every effort to

     implement

     the Rangel provision effectively, it is an unproven approach -- as would

     be any

     tax-side approach to subsidizing school construction.]



      [I support a tax-side approach because it would be revenue-neutral and

     might

     allow us to have an initiative that is larger than $5 billion, gaining

     back

     some of the good will that was lost when we were forced to drop our

     proposal as

     part of the budget agreement.]




                                                                                                "
                                                                                                Ii


