RECORD TYPE: FEDERAL      (TRP NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Robert M. Shireman ( Robert M. Shireman@EOP@LNGTWY@LNGTWY [ UNKNOWN]     )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-DEC-1997 17:33:00.00

SUBJECT:   Memos - tight timeline

TO: Elena Kagan      Elena Kagan@eop [ UNKNOWN]      )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Message Creation Date was at      3-DEC-1997 17:33:00



Attached are memos that are being faxed out now on both the Hispanic

Action

plan, and the College-School Early Intervention partnerships (also known

as

"mentoring" or "Fattah-plus").      They ask for comment by noon tomorrow

because

they will be going to the President by COB tomorrow.




==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
The following attachments were included with this message:

TYPE        FILE
NAME-       mentor2.wpd

TYPE        FILE
NAME        hisp3dec.wpd

==================    END ATTACHMENT    1    ==================
==================== ATTACHMENT   2 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00-

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS EXT: [ATTACH.D26]ARMSZZOOOETSW.001 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FFS7S0439D1S0000010A0201000000020S000000AF68000000020000F6E49D44ES9CSC217S24BA
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


                                 December 3, 1997


MEMORANDUM TO:              SECRETARY RILEY
                            DIRECTOR RAINES
                            BRUCE REED

FROM:                GENE SPERLING
                          BOB SHIREMAN

RE:                         MENTORING INmATIVE


The attached draft memorandum follows up on the principals meeting of October 14, and
the consultation and analysis that has gone on since that time.

A final memo will go into the President by COB tomorrow, so I need your changes and
recommendations, if any, by noon tomorrow, Thursday, December 4. Please get your
changes to Bob Shireman by fax (456-2223) or e-mail and call him (456-2803) to make
sure he has received them.


CC:   Mr. Bowles
      Secretary Rubin
      Dr. Yellen
      Ms. Mathews
      Mr. Podesta
      Mr. Klain
      Mr. Hilley
      Acting Deputy Secretary Smith
      Mr. Lew
      Ms. Kagan
      Ms. Winston
      Mr. Cohen
      Mr. Shireman
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion


MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT




RE:    COLLEGE-SCHOOL EARLY INTERVENTION INITIATIVE




        In preparation for the budget decisions that will need to be made in the next few
weeks, this memorandum is intended to provide you with a status report on the
development of a possible college-school early intervention initiative, and an opportunity
for you to provide direction to our continuing efforts. In order to move forward on the
budget, there are three issues that need to be settled: (1) the basic parameters of the
early intervention programs, (2) the issue of early notification (the "guarantee" of aid),
and, of course, (3) funding.

      With the approach described in this memo, you would be able to announce a
new 21st Century Scholars program that would:

      Provide families at high-poverty middle schools (and possibly others as well) with
       an official notification of the $20,000 or more that is available for their children to
       go to college; and,

      Through colleges and other partners, provide intensive, long-term early
       intervention and support services to 250,000 new children each year (at 2200
       high-poverty schools) -- 1.5 million children over six years.
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion
Background

        As you remember, this initiative began with your interest in the "21st Century
Scholars Act" by Rep. Chaka Fattah.     This legislation, which continues to garner
significant support, including some Republicans, would guarantee sixth graders at
high-poverty schools a maximum Pell Grant when they got to college; send a notice to
them annually from the Secretary of Education reminding them of the availability of aid;
and make them automatically eligible for the counseling, academic support, and other
services provided by TRIO programs (such as Upward Bound) in high school and
college.

         Working with OMB and Education, we analyzed the specifics of the Fattah
approach and found a number of problems: higher-than-expected costs and
inefficiencies; inequities and perverse incentives; and the difficult issue of a new
entitlement. Most important, the research on early intervention programs indicated that
in order for them to be successful, it is critical that mentoring, counseling and tutoring be
provided to students. Simply making them eligible for TRIO is not enough. As you
know, Rep. Fattah is aware of these concerns and is flexible on the design of a program.

         We felt strongly that the Administration needed a strong early intervention
initiative that goes well beyond a notification about financial aid. Research demonstrates
that programs that start early and are sustained for a number of years are effective. For
example, in the rigorously-evaluated Quantum Opportunities Program, 42 percent of the
participants attended college, compared to 16 percent in the control group. To have a
significant impact on college enrollment of disadvantaged youth, it is clear that we need a
full-fledged early intervention program.

        Our idea is to center this effort on colleges reaching out to high poverty schools.
College involvement is critical Jor a number of reasons. First, this approach creates an
ethic of responsibility: it reminds colleges that they are responsible for helping to build a
pool of disadvantaged youth -- disproportionately minorities -- who are well-prepared for
college. Second, if college is to be the goal that sixth graders see, they need to have
some connection to the institution. Third, colleges are best able to tell students -- and
the schools they attend -- what types of courses and skills they need to succeed. Indeed,
an ancillary benefit of this approach should be higher standards. l And finally, a stable,

lIn fad, in response to our consultations on this issue, we already have a proposal from colleges in the
California State University system for an early intervention program that would focus on math as the
gateway to college.
                                                                               Hex-Dump Conversion

long-term institution needs to be there to ensure the quality and staying power of a
program like this one.

        In October, principals discussed options (DPC, Education, PIR, COS, and OLA
were represented). At that meeting, there was strong support for the concept of Federal
aid to partnerships between colleges and needy schools, to provide sixth graders with
mentoring and other support that would be sustained through high school graduation.
There was also strong support for getting early information to families about the
availability of Federal financial aid for college. But there was concern about any new
entitlement to aid: first, it creates budget complications, both politically and practically;
second, it creates the impression that the current programs are not secure -- contrary to
the "universal access" message that we are sending in the wake of victories on HOPE and
Pell.

        Since the principals meeting, we have a<;celerated our consultations and research.
I have spoken with more than 200 college presidents, both individually and in groups,
and the response has been quite positive. Many of them have provided examples of
their own efforts to tap into K-12 schools to recruit and offer help early. Education is
reviewing all of the research literature, and with my staff has carried out an effort to
identify model programs with the characteristics that we discussed at the principals
meeting. Both Mike Smith and I have spoken with Eugene Lang, founder of the "I
Have a Dream" program, and he agrees that we are on the right track. Even though he
is best known for his promise of aid to Harlem sixth graders, he feels strongly that the
early and sustained support services are the most important determinant of a 'successful
program (and he agrees with the need for college involv~ment).

Basic Parameters of the College-School Partnerships

         Some of the colleges with whom we have consulted want the program to very
flexible, to incorporate a wide variety of program models. But we have pressed that
while we support flexibility, there needs to be a vision -- some common elements that
give the proposal an identity that will propel it to success both legislatively and, ultimately,
programmatically. We recommend the following core components:

       Whole Classes/Cohorts at High-Poverty Schools. Programs must start providing
       services to all of the children in a grade, class, or school. Many programs focus
       on students who have been pre-judged to have college "potential." But middle
       school is too early to rule anyone out. In addition, a whole-class approach is
                                                                    .       Hex-Dump Conversion

       more likely to involve the school (rather than just the students) in a way that will
       bring about improvements in the curriculum.

       College as a Goal.    The programs must hold out college as a primary goal.
       Special consideration would be given to partnerships that guarantee enrollment in
       a college for participating students who reach particular milestones, and/or for
       programs that guarantee additional financial aid to cover the full costs of the
       college.

       Start Early and Stay with Kids through High- School  Students should begin in the
       program not later than the seventh grade. The program must continue to
       provide services through high school graduation (or at least for six years).
       (There will be some attrition due to dropping out of school or of the program,
       moving out, or participating in another program.)

       An Intensive Element. Programs must provide intensive assistance to students at
       least during some part of the program (cost estimates assume that this happens in
       the first year). For example, this may be a residential summer component at a
       college.

       Community Involvement. Community organizations and businesses should be
       tapped to offer mentors, guarantees of additional financial aid in exchange for
       student performance, exposure to careers, and other support.

        Note on relationship to TRIO programs. Some colleges already have Federal
TRIO grants with some of the above characteristics, and/or they have other similar
programs. The largest Federal investment, Upward Bound, provides counseling and
intensive academic support to selected disadvantaged high school students who show
aptitude for college. The Talent Search program provides a one-shot program of early
information about college to middle school students. Those programs do not come
close to addressing all of the need, so there would not normally be a problem with them
duplicating some part of this new program. Applicants for the college-school
partnership funds would have to describe how their existing early intervention programs
would be coordinated with the new program. It is expected that some partnerships
would apply for the new grants to extend and expand their programs, so that Upward
Bound, for example, could essentially create a grade 4-10 feeder program, and Talent
Search could add a more intensive component with follow-up during the high school
years. Others might simply focus on high-poverty schools where the students are not
                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
being served by any current program.

Early Notification/Guarantee

        The early intervention effort would be joined with Rep. Chaka Fattah's concept of
providing children and their families with early, official notification of their eligibility for
college financial aid. Because of the combination of student loans, Pell Grants, and
HOPE Scholarships, virtually everyone is eligible for at least $20,000 of aid for four
years of college. While a legally enforceable "guarantee" to Pell Grants six years in the
future has too many problems, we can still adopt the basic concept by making a firm
statement about college aid generally. (As with Federal pensions and some military
benefits, the actual amounts would depend on the continuation of the programs.)

       This would be part of the larger information campaign on access to higher
education. While the focus would be on getting the notifications to families at the
highest-poverty schools, we would not need to be that restrictive and could reach a larger
number than the Fattah legislation proposes. It would not be unreasonable for us to
have a goal of reaching a million students with information and an official notification
(double the number that would have been reached by Fattah).

        As already noted, we would encourage partnerships to supplement Federal aid
with additional financial assistance and/or guaranteed admission to a particular college if
the student takes the right classes and works hard.

Funding

        We are discussing two possible approaches. The first would make a simple offer
to colleges in a competitive program: tell us how you would use a grant of $200,000 to
$1 million to create or expand partnerships with the characteristics outlined above. A
$300 million investment would fund 400 colleges, if the average grant size was $750,000.
  They might have partnerships with up to 2000 schools, with 226,000 students (if only
one grade level was being served at all of the schools). This would leave it up to the
college to determine whether and how to add new cohorts. In providing grants, we
would have the flexibility to take into consideration the institution's own resources, so that
Ivy League schools would be expected to take most of the costs themselves, while a
Tribally Controlled Community College would not.

       The other approach would be tied more specifically to the need for an intensive
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion


start, and the cost of adding new cohorts of students each year. It would also require a
growing local match.. A $300 million Federal investment in FY 1999 would allow us to
serve 250,000 seventh graders through competitive grants to partnerships with 2200
high-poverty schools, assuming a 20 percent local match and a $1,500 per participant
cost. These funds would provide mentoring to about half of the schools and students
that would have been provided the guarantee under Fattah (students at schools with
poverty rate of 75 percent or greater). It is five times as many as are now served by
Upward Bound.

        The average per-student cost would be significantly lower ($800) in the remaining
years, but additional cohorts -- new groups of seventh graders -- would continue to be
added each year until there is a full complement. If we assume that the local match can
be increased by 10 percent with each new cohort, until the Federal government is
covering only 30 percent of the cost, then (assuming some attrition) the funding would
reach a steady state at $619 million in FY 2004. (See line [a] on the table). Over the
six years, 1.5 million kids would be served

                    Federal Cost of Early Intervention Program (in millions of dollars)

                 FY99       FYOD        FYOl        FY02        FY03         FY04         FYOS    FY06

     a. Full      300        415         502         565         604          619
 b. Phase-in      150        339         430         534         595         632
  c. Smaller



          If we need to reduce FY 1999 appropriations requests, the best way to do so
would be to phase in the number of partnerships over two or three years, rather than
assuming that all of them would be established in the first year (line b). If the out-years
are a problem, then we would need to reduce the total number of schools/partnerships
that we are aiming for (line c).

          Add at least $30 million. The TRIO programs have a strong, organized
constituency. We are working with the association on this proposal, and so far they are
supportive. But they are concerned that our interest in this new proposal may weaken
our resolve as far as increases for the TRIO programs. Therefore, it is critical that an
increase of at least $30 million be included in the Budget for TRIO if we move forward
with the school-college mentoring partnerships.
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
       Current program authorities and the question of a State role. We are currently
assuming that this would be a new direct grant program from the Department of
Education, probably part of our proposal for reauthorization of the Higher Education
Act. Education is exploring a couple of current (unfunded) authorities to determine
whether we could use one of them for this program. The benefit of doing so is that it
makes it easier to get appropriations, because we don't have to wait for an authorization
of a new program in order to get appropriations.

        Some of the Committee leadership on the Hill and the student association are
expected to pursue a state-based model, making use of a program authorized in 1992
called the National Early Intervention and State Scholarship Program. It is funded at
$3.2 million 'now and funds some useful models. Education opposes using this
authority, however, because it would be more difficult to maintain a high-quality, highly
targeted effort.

Next Steps

       If you are comfortable with the general approach, then we will continue to draft
the descriptions that will need to be included in the Budget, if funding is to be included.
We will then continue to vet the idea, and will begin to develop a roll-out strategy.

Views and Recommendations
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion




                                      December 3, 1997


MEMORANDUM TO:               SECRETARY RILEY
                             SECRETARY SHALALA
                             SECRETARY HERMAN
                             DIRECTOR RAINES
                             BRUCE REED

FROM:                 GENE SPERLING
                           BOB SHIREMAN

RE:                          HISPANIC EDUCATION INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS


A5 you know, the President asked us to develop strategies for improving education opportunities
for Hispanic Americans, particularly to reduce the dropout rate. All of you have contributed to
this effort. The attached draft memorandum to the President lays out some of the actions we are
prepared to take, as well as a proposal for investments in the FY 1999 Budget.

The possible investments will be compared against other requests, in the context of the budget
process over the next two weeks. Please "let me know by noon tomorrow, Thursday, December 4,
if you have any suggested changes to the memo, or recommendations to add. Please focus
particularly on the investments in section I. Please contact Bob Shireman at 456-2803.


cc:     Mr. Bowles                                        Mr. Hilley
        Dr. Yellen                                        Acting Deputy Secretary Smith
        Ms. Mathews                                       Deputy Secretary Thurm
        Mr. Podesta                                       Deputy Secretary Higgins
        Ms. Murguia                                       Mr. Lew
        Ms. Echaveste                                     Ms. Kagan
        Mr. Ibarra                                        Ms. Winston
        Mr. Klain                                         Mr. Cohen
                       Hex-Dump Conversion

Mr. Shireman
Dr. Pompa
Ms. S. Brown
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion



DRAFT MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT




       This memorandum provides you with background on our efforts to improve educational
opportunities for Hispanic Americans, and a possible further investment strategy for the FY 1999
Budget. Once budget decisions are made, we will have a comprehensive package of
research-based recommendations, new investments, and administrative actions ready for an
announcement. The announcement would include:

      a report on the Hispanic dropout problem by researchers named by Secretary Riley two
       years ago (in response to a request by Sen. Bingaman). The report includes advice for
       schools, families, and all levels of government, but does not include any new data;

      investments in programs that address the needs of Hispanic and LEP children;

      a list of administrative and other actions -- including a Conference on Staying in School
        -- that Education, Labor and HHS are taking to improve Federal programs so that they
       better serve the Hispanic (and LEP) community; and,

      the Secretary of Education's plan describing how current programs and our agenda of
       research, standards and testing, teacher training, and outreach address the needs of
       Hispanic and LEP children.

         Section I of this memo describes the consultations that have taken place and the legislative
and appropriations actions' that we have already taken. Section II is a reminder of some of the
planned or possible FY 1999 investments that are generally important for minorities, but are not
explicitly part of the Hispanic plan. Section III Jays out a possibJe investment strategy for
Hispanics and LEP children and families for the FY 1999 Budget. Section IV describes the other
actions that agencies would announce as part of the Hispanic Action plan. Section V presents
the views of your advisors.
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
I. Background

         In response to your request that we look into the what we can do to address the Hispanic
dropout rate and to generally improve the educational opportunities of Hispanic Americans, we
set out to identify possible actions in three areas:

               Then-pending Administration initiatives and reauthorization proposals that could
                be improved in ways that benefit Latinos (for example, funding formulas that do
                not adequately take into consideration growth areas).

               Appropriation items in the FY98 Budget that have a disproportionate impact on
                the Latino population, so that we would be sure to take that into consideration in
                the continuing budget process.

               Additional administrative and legislative proposals that could be aimed at
                increasing Hispanic educational opportunities.

        As a foundation for our efforts, we were able to use a report and recommendations
released last year by the President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for
Hispanic Americans. We met with constituency groups, and held a series of meetings with
Hispanic Caucus members and staff, where officials from Education, Labor, HHS, and USDA
discussed their programs and some of the concerns and recommendations that have been raised.
Most recently, we have been able to review the not-yet-released report ofthe Hispanic Dropout
Project, by a group of researchers named by Secretary Riley at the suggestion of Senator
Bingaman. We have also reviewed legislation proposed by Congressman Hinojosa and Senator
Bingaman.

       These efforts yielded results this year:

               We insisted that our 35% increase for Bilingual and Immigrant Education be
                an explicit part of the Bipartisan Balanced Budget Agreement, a very exclusive
                list (only 13 items government-wide).

               The $199 million in Bilingual Education includes $25 million for training
                teachers to help limited English proficient (LEP) kids, a proposal that
                Republican appropriators fought last year. (Thank Delia for working with the
                appropriators this year to assure their support).

               We took another look at our America Reads legislation and added provisions to
                make doubly sure that States would have to make a particular effort to serve LEP
                children.
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


               Our proposal for Adult Education reauthorization -- a program that provides
                adult ESL -- includes a new formula that targets states with large numbers of
                LEP adults. (Unfortunately, no one in Congress is pushing the formula).

               We proposed and received an 11 % increase for Hispanic-Serving Institutions
                (HSIs).

               In a reversal from our position to eliminate the program a few years ago, we
                proposed and received a small increase for HEP-CAMP (migrant college
                support services and early intervention program).

               Other selected FY 1998 Appropriations that help Hispanics:

                --Job Corps -- an effective program in which 70 of the participants are minorities
                -- got $92 million increase (to $1.246 billion).     30 Job Corps Centers teach ESL.

                -- Youth Opportunity Areas: $250 million to the highest poverty areas to help
                out-of-school youth (age 16-24) become employable. (Currently six cities are
                funded. In NYC, 67 of those served are Hispanic; in Houston, 65 ; in Los
                Angeles, 50 .)

                --$1.4 billion increase in Pell Grants for low-income college students.

                --Obey's Comprehensive School Reform provides funds that will go to schools
                that need to be transformed -- first in line should be those with high dropout rates.

 II. Generic Issues

          It is important that our overall campaign for high standards and accountability remains to
  be seen as an important part of the answer for all children, particularly those who are at risk.
. For the announcement of the Hispanic Action Plan, Education has developed a document that
  describes how the key education programs work for Hispanic and LEP children.

        There are also other new initiatives that have already been announced or are being
 considered that are oriented toward needs that have been identified in our work on Hispanic
 Education, including:

        Teacher Training and Recruitment.  Your five-year, $350 million teacher training and
         recruitment proposal is aimed at improving teacher preparation particularly for
                                                                           Hex-Dump Conversion


           harder-to-serve populations, and recruiting more minority teachers.

          Education Opportunity Zones.     This new investment is aimed at spurring and rewarding
           effective reform efforts in school districts that tend to be predominantly minorities.

          College-School Early Intervention Partnerships. This is a proven response to the dropout
           problem: it takes children at high-poverty schools by the seventh grade, delivers a firm
           message about college opportunity, and then provides them with support through to high
           school graduation. We consider this a major initiative that should be announced in a
           broader context.

III. Decision: Added Investments

         For FY 1999, we recommend that you consider increasing funding in some key programs
that are' important to Latinos.


    Investment (in millions):                                          FY 1998     Increase    FY 1999

    Bilingual Education - Teacher Training                              $25          $25         $50
    TRIO College Preparation Programs                                   $530       $30-70       $560
    Hispanic-Serving Institutions [non-add; already approved]            $12        [$16J        $28

    Adult Education - Model ESL Programs                                 n/a         $20         $20

    Migrant Education Program                                           $305       $30-80       $365
    Migrant Education: HEP and CAMP                                     $9.7         $5.3        $15
    TOTAL:                                                                        $110.3-$2
                                                                                    00.3



        This package addresses five of the six highest-priority items identified by the Hispanic
Education Coalition. The only program identified by the coalition but not included above is
Title I. (If the budget process yields a substantial increase in Title I, that could be included as
well.) The program above that was not identified by the coalition is Adult
Education/English-language training for adults.

           1. Bilingual Education - Teacher Training.
                                                    This program provides current teachers with
the skills they need to address the English language deficiencies of their students. (Despite the
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


name, it does not require a bilingual program). By doubling the FY 1998 investment and
sustaining that level over five years, we could train 20,000 teachers. The need in this area is huge
-- California alone has a reported shortfall of 20,000.

       2. TRIO College Preparation Programs.    A recent evaluation of the Upward Bound
program (support for promising disadvantaged kids to go to college) showed dramatically        .
positive results for Hispanics. This is an opportunity to showcase this success. We will also be
making changes to the TRIO statute to encourage more funding to areas that are under-served,
such as the Hispanic community. Even though we may be proposing an earlier mentoring
program, it is important that we propose an increase in TRIO so that the very strong TRIO
constituency does not see the new program as a threat. $30 million is the same increase that the
programs received in FY 1998; $60 million would receive a more enthusiastic response.

       3. Hispanic-Serving Institutions.   These funds go to strengthen colleges where at least 25
percent of the student body is Hispanic and a large portion are needy. This substantial increase
is already slated, as a result of Higher Education Act reauthorization and other discussions .

       . 4. Adult Education - Model ESL Programs. The largest single source of English-as-a-
Second-Language funding comes from the Adult Education program (which also promotes adult
literacy and GED attainment). There are a plethora of approaches, and huge demand for these
programs. But there is little information about what types of programs are most effective for
different populations. This five-year $100 million investment would go toward improving the
ESL programs that we now fund through identification and dissemination of proven and
promISIng practices. It could also be used to provide more training for adult ESL instructors,
and/or to expand the use of the televised ESL series "Crossroads Cafe," if the evaluations of that
program are as positive as expected.

       5. Migrant Education Program. Because of their mobility, migrant children -- more than 80
percent of whom are Hispanic -- often do not "belong" to anyone school system or even one
State. That is why the Federal role in this area is critical. Funded at $305 million in FY 1998,
MEP is a State formula program that supports an extremely wide range of interventions
specifically tailored to the needs of the local population it serves. Services range from the
identification and recruitment of kids into schools, to all kinds of school-based interventions, to
after school programs and summer sessions.

        The 1994 reauthorization (of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act) focused MEP
on the most mobile families, and resulted in more services are now being provided in the
summer and between school sessions. Despite a narrowing of eligibility rules, the number of
participating children has been increasing since the reauthorization, in part because of
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion


partnerships between MEP and several major agribusiness partners. These partnerships have led
to improved service and coordination by local providers (education, health, public safety, library).


       Increased funding would help to address the growing population of children who are
being referred to the program, and to continue to provide a richer array of supplemental
educational services. A $60 million investment is included in the proposal to address Child
Labor issues.
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
IV. Administrative Actions and Program Improvements

       Based on our review of the Advisory Commission recommendations, other reports, and
our meetings with the constituency groups and the Caucus, the agencies have signed off on a
number of changes to, or enhancements in, current programs to better serve the Hispanic
population. They are described below:

Dropout Prevention:

      Comprehensive School Reform.     As part of this new $150 million program aimed toward
       transforming failing schools, the Education Department will identify model approaches
       that show promise in reducing high dropout rates, and that address the needs of
       limited-English proficient children. The Department's guidelines to States will encourage
       funds to go to schools that need to address a dropout problem.

      White House Conference on Staying in School.       The President and the Administration
       will participate in a conference to share solutions -- lessons from successful efforts to
       reduce dropout rates and to provide youth with alternatives to traditional high schools.

      Clearinghouse on Successful Models for Dropout Prevention. The Education Department,
       through is various research centers(and other clearinghouses), has a great deal of
       resources relating to dropout prevention. This would provide school and community
       leaders with "one-stop shopping" for ideas and information on best practices for keeping
       kids in schoo!.

General:

      Public Service Announcements in Spanish.      Univision has agreed to produce a series of
      . public service announcements on education, such as encouraging parents to read to their
       children at an early age, and telling families about college financial aid.

      ToJJ-Free Number and More Information in Spanish.      The Education Department is
       developing criteria to systematically determine what publications should be translated so
       that Spanish-speaking parents have better access to the information. In addition, the
       Department will establish a toll-free number that is answered in Spanish (or change the
       current number to prompt non-English speaking callers earlier), to ensure that there are
       no barriers to parents who want to find out how to better help their children succeed in
       schoo!.
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion


      Model High Schools: Working with the National Council of La Raza and ASPIRA, the
       Education Department's New American High Schools Initiative will focus attention on
       schools that better prepare all students for college and careers. Four of the ten schools
       initially selected have a Hispanic population of 20 percent or more. In addition, the
       Department has awarded a two-year contract to improve student preparation at six urban
       high schools and to serve as models for other high schools. Three of the six have
       substantial Hispanic stUdent participation.


Early Childhood and Parental Involvement

      Early Head Start: [Checking whether new funding in FY 1998 can be geared toward the
       needs of Hispanic community]

      Head Start: The Bipartisan Balanced Budget includes continued expansion of the
       program, toward the goal of serving one million children by 2002. The Department of
       Health and Human Services will implement an outreach plan to ensure that programs are
       reaching the Hispanic community. As a part of that effort, the Department will identify
       and disseminate a "best practices" guide for serving limited-English proficient (LEP)
       children.

      Title I/parent training: Parents who do not speak English well need extra care and support
       to gain their active participation in the schooling of their children. The Department of
       Education is compiling a set of "best practices" for implementing family literacy and
       parent involvement programs. This will include guidelines for working with LEP
       parents.

Improving teaching and learning

      America Reads. The Education Department and Scholastic, Inc., have developed and are
       distributing, posters featuring the message "Reading is PowerjLeer es Poder." The back
       of the poster provides reproducible reading activities for classroom use. Spanish language
       tutoring kits have been developed and will be distributed to Hispanic communities.
       LULAC has been an active partner in America Reads effort.

      Bilingual/Teacher Training: The Bipartisan Balanced Budget Agreement secures a 27
       percent increase for the bilingual education program. As part of that increase, the
       Education Department will dedicate $25 million to increase the number of teachers who
       are qualified to teach LEP children, and to improve teacher preparation programs so that
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

    all teachers can meet the needs of LEP students.

   Technology. To ensure'that all schools take advantage of the funding available through the
    $2 billion Technology Literacy Challenge Fund and the discounts of up to 90 percent
    (for the poorest schools) that will be available through the FCC's Universal Service Fund,
    the Education Department will conduct a series of technical assistance workshops,
    including some that are targeted to communities with large populations of Hispanic
    students. [Mention VP's leadership of outreach effort?]
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion

Migrants

      Technology. The Education Department has awarded six grants, at $15 million over five
       years, for projects that apply the use of technology to improve teaching and learning for
       migrant children.

      Coordinated eJigibility. The Education Department is exploring the possibility of waiving
       eligibility requirements for Migrant Even Start and other education programs so that
       children of participants in the Job Training Partnership Act's migrant program (section
       402), who have already been judged needy, will be automatically eligible.

Second chance and job training

      Youth Opportunity Areas: $250 million has been appropriated for FY 1999, targeted to
       the highest poverty areas in the country to help out-of-school youth (age 16-24) become
       employable.      (Currently six cities are funded. In NYC, 67 of those served are
       Hispanic; in Houston, 65 ; in Los Angeles, 50 .)

      Bilingual Contextual Learning. The Labor Department is currently evaluating the results
       of an innovative approach for training individuals for the burgeoning home health care
       field. The Department will broadly disseminate the "lessons learned" from this
       expenence.

      ESL in Job Training. The Labor Department will include guidance for providing
       services to limited-English-proficient populations in JTP A or successor programs.

CoJJege opportunity

      TRIO programs: The Education Department's reauthorization proposal will include
       measures designed to make the programs more available in areas that are now
       under-served by TRIO, including those with substantial Hispanic populations.

      Information about coJJege financial aid: The largest Spanish language newspaper in the
       country, La Opinion, is publishing and distributing a Spanish-language version of the
       Education Department's guide, "Getting Ready for College Early." The Department is
       seeking out other opportunities to better reach Latino families.

      Hispanic-Serving Institutions: The Education Department's reauthorization of the Higher
       Education Act will include the creation of a new part under Title III for Hispanic-Serving

                                                                       AutomateHd Records Management System
                                                                                 eX-Dump Conversion
           Institutions.

    Other efforts: The Education Department will release a plan that includes a number of other
    items, and improvements in data collection and research relating to Hispanic and LEP students.

    V. Views and Recommendations
