RECORD TYPE: FEDERAL     (TRP NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.      Paul J. weinstein Jr.@EOP@LNGTWY@LNGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-MAY-1998 19:25:00.00

SUBJECT:     Draft Proposal

TO: Elena Kagan ( Elena Kagan@VAXGTWY@LNGTWY@LNGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Bruce N. Reed ( Bruce N. Reed@VAXGTWY@LNGTWY@LNGTWY [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Christa Robinson ( Christa Robinson@EOP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Message Creation Date was at     7-MAY-1998 19:25:00



Draft Proposal -- Improving The Event Briefing Process:



In response to Staff Secretary's Office, and because the system has broken

down, Christa and I have developed a recommendation on how to improve the

event

briefing process.      The key is strict deadlines on all of our parts.    In

the

past, we have not made it clear to DPC staff when briefing materials are

due.

Now we will have a set of deadlines that everyone will held to.       We

propose the

following:



1.     The day before the event, DPC policy staff will provide Christa with

the

press paper for the event at 1:00 pm.       In cases where policy issues are

still

unresolved, a draft will be handed to Christa at 1:00 instead.       However,

final


paper will be sent to Christa in at 3:00, which she will cross check with

the

earlier draft paper.



2.     Christa will transform the press paper into a briefing memo and give

it to

Laura     by 3:30 pm for your review.



3.     Laura will schedule a ten to fifteen minute slot between 3:30 pm to

5:30 pm

for you to review the briefing paper.    Because you are at so many meetings

around the complex, Laura will bring ,the briefing paper to where ever you

are

in the WH complex so you can review it during that period.      Laura will

give

Christa your edits by 5:30 pm and Christa will make the changes and hand

the

memo into Staff Secretary by 6:00 pm.



This is obviously a very tight schedule.     In order for it to work, policy

issues will need to be resolved earlier rather than later.     Obviously, in

some

cases, POTUS or the Chief of Staff may be holding up a policy decision.

In

those instances we must     advise Staff Secretary's office why the issue is

held

up.     In those cases, Christa or I will tell the Staff Secretary or Press

Office

if the paper will be delayed.     However, for this system to function

effectively, delays must be the exception, not the rule.




The other issue relates to when you are not on the WH compound from 3:30

to

5:30.   In those cases, I would recommend   Bruce look at the documents.   If

Bruce is also not available, I would be happy to serve as the fail safe.

However, I will only do so if you both are comfortable with that.



Please let us know what you think of this proposal.


