RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-MAY-1997 14:06:25.00

SUBJECT:   WVA q's and a's etc.

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached are the most critical q's and a's for POTUS for your review.  I'm
working on fixing the format, but since my printer is operating at the
rate of a page every 5 minutes or so, I decided to send as is. Note that
the most critical of this set are separated from the rest by a line.

As for the briefing this afternoon, here is my plan:

1. My job is to make sure that the President understands the charts on
the tests, tht he will be talking about.  His job in the town hall is to
explain them to the aUdience, literally by walking through each one
(except for the charlotte's web passage which a 4yr old will read) and
reading the brief text on each.  In the briefing I will tell POTUS that he
will read each chart, and explain what each of them is.  I will assume if
he has questions he will ask them, but I won't go into detail unless asked.

2.My second job is to walk him through the most important questions.  In
my jUdgment, the most important is the one on IDEA and disruptive kids.
It's likely to come up, and I don't think he is really comfortable with
where we are.  Second, I will mention two on Goals 2000 and STW; there is
nothing complicated here, but these have been controversial in WVA and he
might get a question on them.  Third, I will highlight the testing
questions.  The only one I believe requires a comment from me is the one
on making kids pass the tests before they get promoted.  I want him to be
very firm on the idea of making kids pass, but I dont' want him to imply
that our tests are the best ones for that; some states have better ones
for those purposes. Finally, I will point him to the budget related
questions. (Now I know how to organize these materials)


Question for you two:  I am manifested for AF1 tomorrow, and I am
scheduled to be in the briefing just before departure.  Naturally, I'm not
on the helo.

If I have to choose, I should probably be at the briefing rather than on
the trip.  Or do you think I should send Bill to the briefing while I
catch the plane. Or is he likely to bag the briefing all together. Or am
I missing an obvious course of action here?==================== ATTACHMENT      1
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D8]MAIL453952142.116 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043C50E0000010A02010000000205000000D8780000000200002BBC40E305BD03FB6BBD5A
5F8E5D9B0734415ED786DF68C2F8ECCFCC379F1743CDE379CEDE4F30CE3940A34352045DOC856E
     federal government promotes outcomes-based education, politically-correct history,
     and a federal takeover of our schools?

     No. Goals 2000 provides federal support for state and local efforts to raise academic
     standards in the basic skills and core academic subjects, and for local, bottom up efforts
     to improve teaching and learning. There are no federal standards or curriculum, and no
     requirement for outcomes based education or any other particular approach.

     With regard to a"federal takeover" of local schools, that simply isn't accurate. Goals
     2000 supports local control, not federal control. You don't have to take my word for this.
      Harrison County and some 40 other school systems in West Virginia have received
     Goals 2000 funds. You should ask teachers, principals, school board members or
     parents in those communities if Secretary Riley and the U.S. Department of Education,
     have come in and set their curriculum or otherwise tried to tell them what to do.

     The national tests we are discussing today are focused on basic reading and math skills
     that all students should master. They are not part of Goals 2000 in any way, and you
     don't have to give the tests in order to keep receiving Goals 2000 funds. However, I
     believe every states should participate in Goals 2000 and in these tests. They are both
     ways of helping our students reach for the highest possible standards.

Q.   You say these are "national, not federal" standards and tests. What exactly does
     that mean, especially since the U.S. Department of Education is going to develop
     them?

     It means that while the federal goverment will fund the development of the tests, it is not
     in charge of what the tests measure, when they are administered, or how they are used in
     schools and communities around the country.

     The tests will be based on the existing National Assessment of Education Progress, which
     is already used in more than 40 states. The content for these tests -- the reading and math
     skills they measure -- have already been determined by outside groups of teachers,
     curriculum specialists and others, and by agreement of state education officials. These
     content frameworks for reading and math are widely accepted and are based on
     widespread input, and strong state involvement. They truly are national standards, built
     from the bottom up. And they are challenging for our youngsters. The new tests I have
     proposed will measure the same math and reading skills that NAEP already measures.

     The federal government will pay for the development of these tests, just as it helps pay
     for other research and development in education and other policy areas, and just as it has
     paid for the National Assessment of Education Progress for almost 30 years. Providing
     good information and good tools to improve our schools has long been part of the federal

                                                       Automated Records Management System
                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion



Q.   I am concerned about keeping our schools safe and disciplined. I understand that
     the new special education law (IDEA) just passed by Congress still makes it difficult
     to discipline disruptive students who are disabled. How can the other students learn
     if teachers can't maintain order?

     First, let me point that the federal special education law, first passed in the 1970's, has
     been essential for providing education opportunities for children with disabilities.
     Before that law was passed, many children with disabilities were denied an education.
     Since the law was passed, educational opportunities for children with disabilities have
     increased dramatically, because the law guarantees an education to these children. This
     is a good thing, because the education of every child is important, because education is
     the way for for all of our people to become productive and independent citizens. I am
     proud to be able to sign, next month, the bill continuing this law in effect.

     Second, I agree that it is very important for all children that classrooms be orderly places
     where children can learn and teachers can teach. While maintaining the responsibility to
     provide children with disabilities with a free and appropriate education, this new bill
     strengthens the ability of teachers and principals to deal with disruptive or dangerous
     students, including those with disabilities. It does this by:

           making it easier for principals to remove children with disabilities who bring a
            gun, weapon or drugs to school, or who pose a danger to themselves, their
            teachers or their classmates from the clasroom, while continuing to provide them
            with an education in another setting.
           making it easier to address a child's behavior problems early on -- before they get
            out of hand -- by requiring that these be considered in the development of an
            Individual Education Plan, and by making the regular classroom teacher a part of
            the team that develops the plan.

     Finding the right balance between the protection of individual rights and the needs of a
     larger group is often a difficult issue. I am pleased that the Congress, with an
     overwhelming bipartisan majority, has found a way to strike that balance.

Q:   WON'T YOUR HOPE SCHOLARSHIP PLAN JUST CAUSE TUITIONS TO GO
     UP EVEN MORE?

A:   Actually, Federal aid does not seem to have much of an effect on tuition costs. When
     Federal college aid was rising in the 1970s, real college tuitions remained fairly steady.
     But when real Federal aid dropped slightly during the 1980s, that is when tuitions rose
     most sharply. One study suggests that is partly because colleges are trying to provide aid
     to the lowest-income students, and to do that they increase tuition for everyone else. By
     and middle-income families -- we are helping to reduce one of the pressures that
     increases tuition and fees.

Q:   WILL THE IRS BE LOOKING AT MY GRADES TO SEE IF I'M ELIGIBLE
     FOR THE HOPE SCHOLARSHIP?

     [NOTE: On Sunday, Frank Raines told CNN that "we think that having the IRS trying to
     enforce grades may be going a little too far, and we're going to try to find a way to
     simplify the program."]

A:   The IRS would not be looking at student transcripts. But I do want to make sure that we
     are not only helping people pay for college, but also that they have an incentive to work
     hard once they are there. A new study from Georgia State University suggests that the
     grade requirement in Georgia's HOPE Scholarship plan has helped some of the
     borderline students, those who started out very close to the B average, to perform better in
     college.

     I have gotten some feedback about the grade requirement in my HOPE Scholarship
     plan, and Secretary Riley and Secretary Rubin will be working closely with
     Congress to make sure that we encourage students to work hard, but that we do it in
     a simple way, without imposing any undue burdens on taxpayers or colleges.

Q:   DOES THE BUDGET AGREEMENT CUT STUDENT LOANS?

A:   No, it will not affect student loan borrowers in any way. There are some savings to
     taxpayers that we can achieve by making government more efficient and reducing
     subsidies to middlemen -- something that I proposed in my Budget in January -- and the
     negotiators agreed to some of those changes to help bring the deficit down by $1.7
     billion. But the agreement makes it clear that there can be no cuts in benefits or
     availability of loans. (And colleges may continue to choose to participate in the Direct
     Loan program or the guarantee system).

Q:   WHY DOESN'T THE BUDGET PLAN INCLUDE HELP FOR SCHOOL
     CONSTRUCTION?

A:   This is a critical need, and I have proposed a plan for jump-starting State and local school
     constmction and renovation efforts. Unfortunately, there was considerable resistance in
     the budget negotiations to including it in the agreement. I am disappointed that it could
     not be included.

           We should remember that if we failed to reach agreement on a balanced budget
            plan, that would have made local school constmction efforts more difficult, by
            raising interest rates.

             Within the context of the agrec:;ment, I will continue to look for opportunities to
              address this problem.
[the q's above this line are the most important for the President to focus on]


Q.     Do you believe students should be required to pass these tests in order to be
       promoted to the next grade level?

       I believe that if we set standards for students, they should be required to meet the
       standards in order to be promoted from elementary to middle school, from middle school
       to high school, and before graduating from high school. When I was Governor, we
       required students to pass an 8th grade test before moving into high school. While some
       students had difficulty passing the test the first time, almost everyone did ultimately. We
       gave extra help to students who needed it, including summer school. And over time, the
       percentage of students who passed the test on the first time increased, as students,
       teachers and parents came to understand how well the did mattered.

       I believe every state should require students to meet standards before they move on.
       Every state gives their own tests, in addition to these national tests. Each state will need
       to decide what the best combination of tests would be.


Q.     The School-to-Work program has been somewhat controversial in West Virginia.
       Is it true that School-to-Work tracks kids into inferior programs of study with low
       academic standards and requires them to make job decisions in elementary and
       middle schools?

A.    텻o. The School-to,Work Program is designed to give students the academic and
       on-the-job-training to prepare them for high skill jobs and further education.
       School-to-Work does not in any way track students into certain career paths, nor limit
       their options. It gives students and parents information and opportunities to explore a
       wide range of career options, and it helps make sure that students learn basic and
       advanced academic skills that will prepare them either for work or for college.

Q:     WITH THE TAX CUTS, WILL THERE BE ANY MONEY LEFT FOR
       EDUCATION PROGRAMS?

A:     The budget agreement includes the largest increase in our investment in education in 30
       years, and the largest single boost in college aid since the G.!. Bill. It includes:

              Roughly $35 billion in tax cuts for higher education, consistent with the HOPE
               Scholarship and $10,000 tax deduction.
            boost of25%. The maximum award will reach $3,000, an increase of$300. In
            the 1998 budget alone, an additional 348,000 students will receive grants: 130,000
            young people from moderate-income families, and 218,000 low income students
            over the age of24.

           Technology Literacy. Double funding to help ensure that computers are in
            every classroom, every classroom is connected to the Internet, all teachers are
            trained, and that high quality software and on-line resources are available to help
            schools integrate technology into the curriculum so that students can become
            technologically literate.

           Head Start. Continued expansion toward my goal of 1 million kids in 2002.

           America Reads. A child literacy initiative consistent with the America Reads
            Challenge, to mobilize volunteers to help every child learn to read well and
            independently by the end of third grade.

           Job Corps and other Job Training. A 12% increase for job training programs,
            including continued expansion Of Job Corps


Q:   WHY HAVE COLLEGE TUITIONS BEEN GOING UP?

A:   Between the 1990-91 academic year and the 1995-96 academic year, overall price
     inflation was only 17 percent, but the average tuition and fees at public colleges increased
     by 31 percent and at private colleges increased by 33 percent. Some of the increase is
     the result of research and staffing costs that increased faster than inflation. At the public
     colleges, funding from State legislatures did not grow as fast as costs did. And at private
     colleges, while tuition went up, so did financial aid that the college was providing (in
     other words, not everyone was actually paying the full tuition and fees).




Q:   WHAT IS THE READING PROGRAM THA T WAS INCLUDED IN THE
     BUDGET DEAL?

A:   The agreement includes my plan to help make sure that every child learns to read well
     and independently by the end of third grade. Secretary Riley and Harris Wofford, the
     CEO of the Corporation for National and Community Service, will be working with
     Congress on some of the details. What I have proposed includes:

           America's Reading Corps: 25,000 reading specialists and 11,000 AmeriCorps
            members serving as recruitors and coordinators, to enlist an army of one million




                  volunteer tutors.

                 Parents as First Teachers: Grants to foster effective programs that help parents
                  help their children to become successful readers (e.g. HIPPY).

                 Head Start expansion.

    Q:     DOES TUTORING MAKE A DIFFERENCE? AREN'T TEACHERS MOST
           IMPORTANT.

    A:     Even the best teachers will te\l you that some children need extra help outside the
           classroom hours in order to catch up. And the research shows that tutoring programs that
           provide consistent help, with trained tutors, can make a big difference. For example:

           --In Simpson County, Kentucky, 25 AmeriCorps members helped second graders jump 3
           reading levels in one year

           --At Hands on Atlanta, in the first three years of AmeriCorps involvement, the schools
           have seen an II percent increase in performance on national standardized tests in reading
           and in math, and 25 percent few discipline problems.

           --At Reading One-to-One in Texas, with just a semester of tutoring, children improve one
           fu\l reading level.




    Question:     How will these tests affect students who participate in home schooling?

    Answer:       In a legal sense, it wi\l not affect those students at all. No student in a home
                  school will be required to take these tests, though they wi\l be able to if they want
                  to. Every parent will have access to the tests on the Internet each year, so if they
                  want to see for themselves how well their students are measuring up against these
                  standards, they can find out.

    Question:     Vouchers: I think voucher programs provide an opportunity to some parents they
                  otherwise would not have -- to send their child to a private or parochial school.
                  What is your position on school vouchers?

    Answer:       I believe there are better ways to provide greater school choice to students and
                  their families. One very good way is to have every state pass a charter school law
                  that a\lows parents and teachers to start new public charter schools that stay open
                  only as long they do a good job. In fact, I have proposed nearly doubling the
                  charter school start-up program (to $100 million next year) to help start 3,000
                  charter schools over the next several years.
            for private elementary and secondary schools. I also oppose state funded and
            locally funded vouchers, which take money away from public schools.

            School vouchers would divert critical dollars from neighborhood public schools
            that are already short on resources in order to send a few selected students to
            private schools--schools that are not publicly accountable. In addition,
            controversy over voucher proposals may distract long-term attention from the hard
            work of reform needed to change failing schools into good schools and good
            schools into outstanding schools. Instead, we need to work together to ensure
            that every student, no matter where he or she lives, can attend a public school that
            is safe and academically challenging. For this to happen, we need to build strong
            partnerships among schools, families and communities that make education
            everybody's top priority.




Q.   One of your goals is to make sure every 12 year old can log on to the Internet. I
     don't want my 12 year old to see some of the pornography on the internet. What are
     you going to do about that?

     [awaiting Kincaid - Kagan response]


