  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUN-1997 23:38:00.00

  SUBJECT:     My comments on IDEA speech draft for event this morning FYI; draft needs w

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ:UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  Kincaid is still doing his comments, but we agree it has a ways to go in a
  short time.

  ---------------------- Forwarded by Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP on 06/03/97
  11:36 PM ---------------------------



             Diana Fortuna
             06/03/97 11:24:48 PM

  Record Type: Record

  To: Jordan Tamagni/WHO/EOP
  cc: Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP, William R. Kincaid/OPD/EOP, Lucia A.
  Wyman/WHO/EOP, William H. White Jr./WHO/EOP
  Subject: Speech draft comments

  Here are my specific line comments on the speech draft in bold.   In a
  more general vein, it would be good to highlight how this agreement was
  the result of an extraordinary bipartisan process that augurs well for
  future bipartisan efforts, and how this furthers the President's overall
  efforts to improve standards and excellence in education.


   Thank you, Joshua Bailey, for that introduction, and for sharing your
  story.  I also want to thank the other children, their families and
  teachers, and all of you who have joined us here today.  I thank Secretary
  Riley for his leadership, and the Department of Education.   I especially
  want to thank Assistant Secretary of Education Judy Heumann, for her
  personal strength (could offend, as disabled donO,t like implication that
  they are stronger/braver than others; I would recommend "lifetime of
  leadership" or something like that instead) and commitment to help
  disabled children reach their highest potential. And I want give special
  recognition to the many parents, disability advocates, and education
  leaders who worked together to make IDEA a reality. (say: "these
  improvements to IDEA a reality")

  To the bipartisan leadership in Congress, especially Senator Jeffords and
 Representative Goodling; Senator Kennedy, Senator Harkin, Representatives
 Clay, Martinez, and Riggs, to David Hoppe [HOP-ee], Senator LottO,s Chief
 of Staff, and Bobby Silverstein [silver-steen] on Senator HarkinO,s staff,
 and to all the members here today: You are proving once and for all that
 politics must stop at the school house door, and I thank you for coming
 together to expand (I would say "strengthen"; not clear what "expand"
 means) the IDEA.

  Lucia: WeO,re not thanking Lott himself?



 We have come a long way since the days Judy just described -- days when
President Franklin Roosevelt felt he had to hide his disability from the
public; days when children like Joshua and the other young people here
today had to fight for their right to equal opportunity. (Advocates say
they still have to fight for this today but now law is on their side; in
the old days, they couldnD,t even fight; say instead "days when
children ... had no opportunity to reach their full potential" or something
like that )

 For 22 years, the IDEA has been the driving force behind that progress.
Because of that landmark legislation, disabled children allover our
country have a better chance than ever before to reach their highest
potential. And we have the same obligation to help them make the most of
that God-given potential as we do for every other child in America.

 We are here today to do exactly that. The expanded IDEA will give our
disabled children the educational opportunity that is at the very heart of
the American Dream.

  Education is the embodiment of everything we must do to prepare our
country -- and all our people -- for the 21st century. That is why I have
made education my number one priority as President.   Last month, I was
proud to reach a bipartisan agreement to balance the budget for the first
time since President Johnson was in the White House. This budget brings
the deficit down to zero over the next five years, but it also reflects
our values, preserving Medicare and Medicaid, expanding health care
coverage to five million uninsured children, and helping move people from
welfare to work.

 Most important, this balanced budget makes an historic investment in
education -- the most significant increase in education funding in 30
years.   It funds the America Reads program that will mobilize a citizen
army of one million volunteers to help children allover the country learn
to read.   It will give millions of families a tax cut to help pay for
college.   It will give hundreds of thousands more students Pell Grant
college scholarships; and it will help tens of thousands of schools across
America to wire their classrooms to the Internet.    (It is a VERY sore
point in the disability community that the PresidentD,s education budget
priorities to not extend to IDEA, since we have proposed modest increases
in IDEA vs. the huge increases in regular ed.   Last year, Congress
increased IDEA spending by 25%, but everyone knew it was their doing, not
ours.  So not sure this point works.)

 We know that education is the key to opportunity. But as we just heard
from Judy, for far too long, disabled children were closed out of the
classroom by ignorance, fear, and just plain prejudice. Their parents
were forced to wander in a system without guideposts, a system influenced
by stereotypes that disabled children could not be taught to higher
standards, could not learn on a par with their peers, and could not become
productive, successful members of society.

 Then, in 1975, Congress enacted the IDEA.  For millions of families
across America, it meant the difference between seeing their childrenD,s
potential languish, and watching it flourish.
 For millions of children, it has meant the right to receive the education
they deserved: to sit in the same classrooms with their peers, to be held
to the same expectations, and to dream the same dreams. And for the
millions of students who sat next to them in those classrooms, it has
meant the end of ignorance -- and the damaging stereotypes it has produced


    and the beginning of understanding.

(FYI, this makes it sound like everything was fine as soon as IDEA passed
in 1975.  In fact, all it meant was kids could go to segregated
classrooms. Things have slowly gotten better since then, with disabled
kids moving into regular ed classrooms. That "inclusion" is the new
frontier in IDEA that we are still working on.)

 since then, 90% fewer developmentally disabled children are living in
institutions. Hundreds of thousands of disabled children are attending
public school in regular classrooms. Three times as many disabled young
people are enrolled in colleges and universities. And twice as many
disabled. people in their 20s are in the American workplace, helping to
keep our economy growing and maintaining their sense of self-worth.

 We must continue to do everything we can to encourage our disabled
children, not only to dream of achieving great things, but to achieve
those great dreams.  Because our job is not yet done.   Despite our
progress, disabled young people still drop out of high school -- and into
uncertain futures -- at twice the rate of their peers.   For those who stay
in school, lowered expectations and exclusion are still far too common.
And too many parents still find themselves fighting for educational
resources and services that are their childrenD,s right        and their
hope for a brighter future.  We have to do better than this.

 Today, I am proud to say that we are taking the next step, and making a
good law even better. The expanded IDEA reaffirms and strengthens our
national commitment to providing a world class education for all of our
children. And it ensures that our nationD,s schools are safe and
conducive to learning while scrupulously protecting the rights of our
disabled children.

 First, this bill makes it clear once and for all that disabled children
have a right to be in the classroom (I would check this with Heumann; I
donD,t think the prior law was unclear on this), and to be included in
school activities like class trips and special outings.  It requires
states and school districts to help get disabled children ready to come to
school, and to accommodate them once they are there with services ranging
from preschool therapy to interpreters to special education tutors.    (This
was true of prior law, too; and it stresses the mandate on states.   I
would say instead "ensures kids with disabilities have the supports they
need in the classroom to learn, such as tutors or interpreters or
preschool therapy ... ")

 Second, this legislation mandates that disabled children learn the same
things, with the same curricula, and the same assessments, as all of our
children (say "can learn"? Because some students have cognitive
impairments). We know that children rise to the expectations we set for
them -- and disabled children are no exception.  I have· called for high
national standards for all of our children, and so far, ## school systems
from California to North Carolina have agreed to adopt those standards.
Today, I call on those states -- and every other state -- to hold every
child who has the capacity to meet those same high standards.

 Third, we know our childrenO,s success depends on the quality of their
teachers, and the involvement of their parents. This legislation will
help more regular classroom teachers get the full range of teaching skills
they need to teach disabled children. And it will require teachers to
develop individual educational plans to help disabled children to succeed
in the regular classroom. (Check with Heumann; IEPD,s have long been


    required; I think the change is that regular ed teachers have to be
    involved?} This legislation will also give parents a greater voice in
    their childrenD,s education. And at long last, it will give them
    something else that other parents have expected from their schools for
    decades: regular report cards on their childrenD,s progress.

     High school is a make or break time for all young people, but disabled
    teenagers often need more help to succeed as they make the transition from
    school to work. This legislation will require schools to (safer to drop
    phrase "require schools to"?) give them that help by developing individual
    plans that may include independent living skills, job training, and
    preparation for higher education. And because acquiring these skills may
    take extra time, these plans must be in place by the time disabled st
    udents reach the age of 14.

     That is what the expansion of the IDEA will achieve, and in a few
    moments, I will sign this vitally important legislation into law.   As I
    do, I want all of you to think about what we are accomplishing here
    today.  To the millions of children whose futures are in the balance, we
    are saying: we believe in your potential and we will do everything in our
    power to develop it. To the millions of families who are depending on us
    to help them prepare their children to take their place in the world, we
    are saying: we will help you meet that challenge. To the American people,
    we are saying that we will not rest until we have conquered the ignorance
    and prejudice that hurt us all.  And to the world we are sending a
    message, the same message that the FDR Memorial I was honored to dedicate
    last month makes so clear: in America, you are measured by what you are
    and what you have. achieved. (The disabled protested that the FDR memorial
    does not make that point clear; President called for modifications because
    he agreed.)   In America, the American dream is alive for all of our
    people.

     And now I invite the Members of Congress here with us today, and Tom Hehir
      [hair], the Director of the Office of Special Education, to join me as I
    sign into law the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act Amendments
    of 1997.


