 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( CN=william R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-JUN-1997 00:41:20.00

  SUBJECT:   Comments on draft remarks on IDEA

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 FYI--Both Diana and I feel that Jordan has a lot of ground to cover on
 this in the morning.  Diana's comments are more extensive.  I left a
 message with Mike last night that he needed to get back in early and look
 at this.

  ---------------------- Forwarded by William R. Kincaid/OPD/EOP on 06/04/97
  12:39 AM ---------------------------




 William R. Kincaid
 06/04/97 12:29:25 AM
 Record Type:    Record

 To:      Jordan Tamagni/WHO/EOP
 cc:      Michael Cohen/OPD/EOP, Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP, Lucia A. Wyman/WHO/EOP,
 William H. White Jr./WHO/EOP
 Subject:         Re: Draft

  I have reviewed Diana's comments and for the most part think they are
  right on target.  I have some added comments below, in bold, that begin
  towards the end of the second page.

  It is very important for Mike C. to review the paragraph on standards in
  the morning.

 Thank you, Joshua Bailey, for that introduction, and for sharing your
 story.  I also want to thank the other children, their families and
 teachers, and all of you who have joined us here today.  I thank Secretary
 Riley for his leadership, and the Department of Education.  I especially
 want to thank Assistant Secretary of Education Judy Heumann, for her
 personal strength and commitment to help disabled children reach their
 highest potential. And I want give special recognition to the many
 parents, disability advocates, and education leaders who worked together
 to make IDEA a reality.

         To the bipartisan leadership in Congress, especially Senator Jeffords and
 Representative Goodling; Senator Kennedy, Senator Harkin, Representatives
 Clay, Martinez, and Riggs, to David Hoppe [HOP-ee], Senator LottO,s Chief
 of Staff, and Bobby Silverstein [silver-steen] on Senator HarkinO,s staff,
 and to all the members here today: You are proving once and for all that
 politics must stop at the school house door, and I thank you for coming
 together to expand the IDEA.

         We have come a long way since the days Judy just described -- days
 when President Franklin Roosevelt felt he had to hide his disability from
 the public; days when children like Joshua and the other young peqple here


  today had to fight for their right to equal opportunity.

          For 22 years, the IDEA has been the driving force behind that
  progress. Because of that landmark legislation, disabled children all
  over our country have a better chance than ever before to reach their
  highest potential. And we have the same obligation to help them make the
  most of that God-given potential as we do for every other child in America.

          We are here today to do exactly that.  The expanded IDEA will give
  our disabled children the educational opportunity that is at the very
  heart of the American Dream.

          Education is the embodiment of everything we must do to prepare
  our country -- and all our people -- for the 21st century. That is why I
  have made education my number one priority as President. Last month, I
  was proud to reach a bipartisan agreement to balance the budget for the
  first time since President Johnson was in the White House. This budget
  brings the deficit down to zero over the next five years, but it also
  reflects our values, preserving Medicare and Medicaid, expanding health
  care coverage to five million uninsured children, and helping move people
  from welfare to work.

          Most important, this balanced budget makes an historic investment
 in education -- the most significant increase in education funding in 30
 years.   It funds the America Reads program that will mobilize a citizen
 army of one million volunteers to help children allover the country learn
 to read.   It will give millions of families a tax cut to help pay for
 college.   It will give hundreds of thousands more students Pell Grant
 college scholarships; and it will help tens of thousands of schools across
 America to wire their classrooms to the Internet.

          We know that education is the key to opportunity. But as we just
 heard from Judy, for far too long, disabled children were closed out of
 the classroom by ignorance, fear, and just plain prejudice.  Their parents
 were forced to wander in a system without guideposts, a system influenced
 by stereotypes that disabled children could not be taught to higher
 standards, could not learn on a par with their peers, and could not become
 productive, successful members of society.

         Then, in 1975, Congress enacted the IDEA.   For millions of
 families across America, it meant the difference between seeing their
 childrenO,s potential languish, and watching it flourish.
         For millions of children, it has meant the right to receive the
 education they deserved: to sit in the same classrooms with their peers,
 to be held to the same expectations, and to dream the same dreams. And
 for the millions of students who sat next to them in those classrooms, it
 has meant the end of ignorance    and the damaging stereotypes it has
 produced -- and the beginning of understanding.

         Since then, 90% fewer developmentally disabled children are living
 in institutions. Hundreds of thousands of disabled children are attending
 public school in regular classrooms.  Three times as many disabled young
 people are enrolled in colleges and universities. And twice as many
 disabled people in their 20s are in the American workplace, helping to
 keep our economy growing and maintaining their sense of self-worth.

         We must continue to do everything we can to encourage our disabled
 children, not only to dream of achieving great things, but to achieve
 those great dreams.  Because our job is not yet done.  Despite our
 progress, disabled young people still drop out of high school -- and into


 uncertain futures -- at twice the rate of their peers. For those who stay
 in school, lowered expectations and exclusion are still far too common.
 And too many parents still find themselves fighting for educational
 resources and services that are their childrenD,s right       and their
 hope for a brighter future.  We have to do better than this.

         Today, I am proud to say that we are taking the next step, and
 making a good law even better.  The expanded IDEA reaffirms and
 strengthens our national commitment to providing a world class education
 for all of our children.  And it ensures that our nationD,s schools are
 safe and conducive to learning while scrupulously protecting the rights of
 our disabled children.

 Should lead instead with the higher expectations/greater focus on results
 point.  Not sure what the following paragraph is referring to in terms of
 the reauthorization) .
         First, this bill makes it clear once and for all that disabled
 children have a right to be in the classroom, and to be included in school
 activities like class trips and special outings.  It requires states and
 school districts to help get disabled children ready to come to school,
 and to accommodate them once they are there with services ranging from
 preschool therapy to interpreters to special education tutors.

         Second, this legislation mandates (donD,t use D&mandates;DS maybe D&calls
 for disabled children toDS or D&acknowledges that disabled children
 can.DS) that disabled children learn the same things, with the same
 curricula, and the same assessments, as all of our children. We know that
 children rise to the expectations we set for them -- and disabled children
 are no exception.  I have called for high national standards for all of
 our children, and so far, ## school systems from California to North
 Carolina have agreed to adopt those standards. (Not accurate; could say,
 D&and so"far, education leaders in six states from California to North
 Carolina have endorsed this initiative.DS)  Today, I call on those states
 -- and every other state -- to hold every child who has the capacity to
 meet those same high standards. (Suggest: D&to help every child who has
 the capacity to meet high standards.DS Public is receptive to all
 students reaching much higher standards or challenging standards, but even
 with your qualification will balk at D&same high standards.DS)

         Third, we know our childrenD,s success depends on the quality of
 their teachers, and the involvement of their parents. This legislation
 will help more regular (omit D®ularDS--the legislation is supposed to
 improve quality for all those who teach special ed kids) classroom
 teachers get the full range of teaching skills they need to teach disabled
 children. And it will require teachers to develop (the legislation
 already requires this; suggest D&ensure that regular education teachers
 help prepareDS) individual educational plans to help disabled children to
 succeed in the regular classroom.  This legislation will also give parents
 a greater voice in their childrenD,s education. And at long last, it will
 give them something else that other parents have expected from their
 schools for decades: regular report cards on their childrenD,s progress.
 Could split this into one graph on teachers, one on parents.

         High school is a make or break time for all young people, but
 disabled teenagers often need more help to succeed as they make the
 transition from school to work. This legislation will require schools to
 give them that help by developing individual plans that may include
 independent living skills, job training, and preparation for higher
 education. And because acquiring these skills may take extra time, these
 plans must be in place by the time disabled students reach the age of 14.



          That is what the expansion of the IDEA will achieve, and in a few
  moments, I will sign this vitally important legislation into law. As I
  do, I want all of you to think about what we are accomplishing here
  today.  To the millions of children whose futures are in the balance, we
  are saying: we believe in your potential and we will do everything in our
  power to develop it. To the millions of families who are depending on us
  to help them prepare their children to take their place in the world, we
  are saying: we will help you meet that challenge. To the American people,
  we are saying that we will not rest until we have conquered the ignorance
  and prejudice that hurt us all. And to the world we are sending a
  message, the same message that the FDR Memorial I was honored to dedicate
  last month makes so clear: in America, you are measured by what you are
  and what you have achieved.  In America, the American dream is alive for
  all of our people.

          And now I invite the Members of Congress here with us today, and
  Tom Hehir [hair], the Director of the Office of Special Education, to join
  me as I sign into law the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
  Amendments of 1997.


