RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Sarah S. Freeman ( CN=Sarah S. Freeman/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-JUN-1997 15:14:23.00

SUBJECT:   Abortion form letter

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
please review that current abortion form letter and let me know if it's OK
or if you want to make any changes. Thanks.   Sarah

Abortion form letter
 Thank you for your message regarding a woman's right to choose.
I appreciate knowing your views on this extremely complex issue.  It
is simply wrong for politics to interfere with such a deeply
personal matter. At the same time, we should do everything in our
power to make abortion rare.  I have always maintained that the
decision to have an abortion is personal and private, and should be
made solely among a woman, her doctor, her conscience, and her
faith.

     Since I took office, I have worked to protect the right to
choose guaranteed by Roe v. Wade.  My Administration reversed the
"gag rule," which prevented women from discussing abortion with
health professionals. Additionally, we repealed the "Mexico City"
policy, which banned the distribution of family planning funding
overseas.  I also signed into law the Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances Act to protect women seeking family planning advice from
violence or physical intimidation.

     We have also worked to help reduce the number of abortions.
Since I became President, I have fought for improved and expanded
family planning services and education programs.  I have also worked
to prevent teenage pregnancies by promoting efforts to teach young
people about personal responsibility and help them make the right
choices.  Further, I remain committed to breaking down barriers to
adoption.  Since the start of my Administration, there has been a
60 percent increase in the number of children with special needs
adopted with federal assistance.  I've also strongly supported the
Multiethnic Placement Act and the adoption tax credit.

     It is by advancing these efforts that we can reduce the number
of abortions, strengthen American families, and give more children
loving parents and a healthy home.  Though some in Congress oppose
our efforts, I am continuing our work to protect women's
reproductive health and their constitutional right to choose while
seeking to reduce the numbers of unwanted pregnancies. I am
grateful for your perspective on this issue and glad you took the
time to write.


