    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP   [ OPD ) )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:12-JUN-1997 16:03:35.00

    SUBJECT:    fyi

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    ---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 06/12/97
    04:03 PM ---------------------------




    Michael Waldman
    06/12/97 03:21:37 PM
    Record Type:    Record

    To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
    cc:
    Subject:         fyi

    THANKS for your memo.  I may want to use it instead of our current
    ending! Here, fyi, is the current draft     the ending is, in fact, midway
    through a reconstruction ...


    Draft 6/12/97 1:30pm [draft 3)

    PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
    ONE AMERICA IN THE 21ST CENTURY
    UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT SAN DIEGO
    "JUNE 14, 1997

               [Acknowledgments)

            Today, you take your place as citizens of the great American
    community in a golden moment for our nation. The Cold War is over, with
    freedom ascendant around the globe. Our economy is the healthiest in a
    generation and the strongest in the world. Our culture, our science, our
    technology are on the cutting edge.  Social problems -- from crime to
    poverty -- which for so long seemed destined to deepen, are now bending to
    our efforts.

            On these issues, we have made more progress, in a shorter time,
    with less rancor, than many thought would ever be possible. Sooner, and
    to a greater degree than any other nation, we have made the transition
    from the old economic order to the new world of technology, information
    and free trade. Without fanfare, without crisis, quietly and in that very
    practical American way -- at the very moment when some were predicting our
    decline, we have entered a new era of American leadership. Today we stand
    on the eve of a second American century.

            But there is one thing that can still hold us back -- a
    contradiction not yet resolved that lies at the heart of our history.
    More than 200 years ago this nation began with a pledge of equality, but


then long continued to condone slavery.  More than 30 years ago, at the
high tide of civil rights, the Kerner Commission said that we were
becoming two Americas, one black, one white, separate and unequal. Now, in
this new era of American leadership, there is one place where we continue
to lag behind: we are in danger of becoming many Americas, separate,
unequal, and isolated. Lincoln warned us, quoting the Scripture, that a
house divided against itself cannot stand. And a nation not at peace with
its identity cannot continue to move forward.  We must be one America --
or we wonD,t be America at all.

         The great civil rights leader W.E.B. DuBois said that D&the
problem of the 20th century will be the problem of the color line.DS In
so many ways, he was right. At times, in flames and in anger, racial
conflict almost consumed us. And it was only during those hours of
maximum danger that we faced this issue squarely.   Now, at a time of
gathering hope, when there is no firebell in the night, we must pledge:
Our great and growing diversity will not be D&the problem of the 21st
Century. OS   It falls to us to fashion for the next century the greatest
multiethnic, multi-religious, multiracial democracy the world has ever
known.

        We must find our new unity in the face of stunning change: Within
the next three years, right here in California, no single race or ethnic
group will make up a majority of the stateD,s population. And a half
century from now, when your own grandchildren are in college, it is
entirely conceivable that a majority of the population will be Latino,
African American, Asian American, Native American and other people of
color.

        It is clear': the face of America is evolving. And, I will tell
you, we cannot greet that fact with indifference; we cannot ,run away from
it; we cannot retreat into racial and ethnic enclaves of isolation. And
we cannot pretend that the changing face of America is invisible. We must
look in the mirror and ask the question anew: What does it mean to be an
American? The face of America is changing, and the soul of America must
rise to the challenge.

        I want US to define our greatness as a country based on our
extraordinary achievements, the great freedom we enjoy, the texture of our
relationships with the world and each other.

        Alone among nations, America was founded not on race, or religion,
or geography, but on an ideal -- an ideal so revolutionary and so profound
it guides us still. D&We are all created equal.DS This was the
proposition to which Abraham Lincoln rededicated our nation at Gettysburg.
This was the true meaning of our creed to which Martin Luther King
summoned us a century later.

        For two centuries, wave upon wave of immigrants have come to our
shores, to work, to raise their families, to build a new life, speaking
many tongues, wearing the garb of many cultures, but all drawn here by
those same ideals. We have never lived up to our founding vision, but we
have never stopped trying -- and our people, even those who have suffered
the most, have never lost faith in the American creed.

        For four years, as your President, I have worked to offer
opportunity to all Americans, to demand responsibility from all Americans,
and to bring our people together across all the lines that divide us, in a
true national community.  To that effort, we must turn as a nation with
even greater fervor.



        So today, and for the next year, and for the years to come, I want
us to face honestly those things that divide us -- to embrace those things
that unite us -- and to join in a national effort, aimed at action, that
will move us forward.

The divisions in our land

        We must begin by acknowledging that our house is divided.

        Scripture teaches us, D&Love thy neighbor as thyself.DS Too often
in our past, and sadly even today, we have defined our greatness not by
lifting each other up, but by putting each other down -- the sufferings
heaped upon Native Americans, the enslavement of Africans, and the tragic
litany of injustices inflicted upon immigrants of every race and color at
various times in our history.

        I am a son of the South and the grandson of a man who taught me a
valuable lesson at a young age. He told me, yes, I was different than the
black children who came into his small grocery store, but I was no
better. But I could see that on the black side of town streets were left
unpaved. And segregation was legally sanctioned. There were D&whites
onlyDS signs at public restrooms.  Blacks and whites could not swim
together, we could not drink at the same water fountain, we could not even
sit in the same section at the movies.  I was 11 years old when President
Eisenhower ordered troops into Little Rock so that nine black children
could integrate Central High. And when I was your age and in school in
Washington, DC, Martin Luther King was killed and the streets exploded in
flames. My memory is forever singed by the pain and anger I saw.

        In the time and place where I grew up, the color line was black
and white.  In other communities, the targets were different, but the
hatreds were the same.

        We have torn down the barriers in our laws. Now we must tear down
the barriers in our minds. Even with more of us working together, living
side-by-side, and intermarrying more than every before, we know there is
still more than one way of looking at an event, at the world, at each
other. We know that blacks and whites can look at the same reality and
see two different things; hear the same remark and hear two different
meanings. And we know that stereotypes -- some of them ugly, some mild,
but all destructive -- still keep us apart.

        Many whites believe that the problem of racism is over.  They
honestly believe that the playing field is equal and blacks have the same
opportunities as they do when in comes to jobs, and housing and
education. But, feelings and reality are starkly different for blacks.
We must tell the truth.

        The truth is that more people than ever are benefitting from our
strong economy. But there is another truth that must be told. African
American and Latino workers still earn markedly less than what whites in
the same jobs make.   [In Los Angeles, unemployment east of the highway is x
, and west of the highway is x.J   And for many minority communities, there
are still glaring disparities in access to health care, educational
attainment, the administration of justice, and housing.

         But just as we must tell the truth about what racism is, we must
also tell the truth about what it is not.  LetD,s not hide behind the ugly
wall of racism to explain away some of our worst behavior. Racism


doesno,t cause a 14 year-old boy to commit a murder in a street corner
drug deal.  It is not racist fo~ a middle class family of any background
to feel safer in a suburb away from the crime and drugs of some of our
neighborhoods.  Hatred and self destruction are their own demons, and as
we banish racism, we must banish them too.
        We must tell the truth.   To whites I say, do not pretend there is
no prejudice. We will never get beyond this problem unless we first
acknowledge its existence. To minorities, I say, most whites are not
prejudiced -- and the people who seek to sow hatred and division are their
own very small minority.

        To the grandchildren of European immigrants: do not pull up the
ladder from the new immigrants who come here for the same reason and with
the same values as your ancestors.

        To the media both news and entertainment: understand that your
depictions of people can either play on stereotypes or pull them down.     Do
not take your power -- or your responsibility -- lightly.

        And to all our young people, especially young men, do not use race
or racism as an excuse for hatred or violence against people who look
different than you.  Do not let real or imagined racism cause you to
retreat into enclaves of rage and recrimination.

What unites us

        All these problems are real. But we must have the clarity of mind
and charity of spirit to realize that they are not new -- and that the
striving to surmount them is the story of America.

        We are all, in Martin Luther Kingo,s words, woven into o&one
garment of destiny.oB We rightly celebrate the mUltiplicity of America
our marvelous blend of cultures, beliefs and races.  Yet despite this
diversity, or above it, we possess a common identity -- as Americans and
as human beings.

        We must recognize that the same ethnic and racial ties that can
offer us a sanctuary of meaning and personal strength also contain the
possibility of a frightening fragmentation.  We must honor our diversity;
we must cherish the uniqueness of each culture that feeds into the
American experience; we must find new ways of talking to one another with
respect instead of disdain. But we must reach with even greater fervor
across those lines that divide us, to honor and strengthen those bonds of
community and shared values that have always united us.

        Our national motto says: E Pluribus Unum, o&Out of Many, One.oB
What unites us as Americans?

        We Americans are a people bound by faith.  Every week we flock to
our churches, mosques and synagogues. Religious observance in our nation
is the most intense in the Western world.  That is true across every
ethnic line. We are truly o&one nation under God.oB

        We are a people united by respect for the value of work.  It is
our work that supports all our efforts to build strong families and strong
communities.

        We cherish our families; we expect that the lives of our children
can be better than the lives of our parents; and we strive to give them
that future.


        And we are a people who still believe -- more than any other on
earth -- that every individual has within himself or herself the spark of
possibility, that still, 220 years later, we are all created equal.

        opportunity for all.  Responsibility from all.  Faith, family,
community. These are the values of no one color or region or religion.
These are AmericaD,s values. And these are the values we must put to work
as we prepare our nation for the century ahead.

What we must do now

        First, we must press on with our nationO,s strategy of expanding
opportunity.  For far too long, poor and working people of all races have
been told by political leaders that their problems were the fault of
D&themD8 -- minorities, immigrants, women -- D&them,DB always O&them.D8
There is no D&them.D8 There is only D&us.D8 And it is clear that racism
would be less of a problem if everyone had a good job.  Racism would be
less of a problem if everyone had a chance to get a good education, safe
and decent housing and health care.

        So we must continue the strategy for economic growth that has
brought our nation the strongest prosperity in a generation.  I am
especially pleased that, this time, the economic gains of our expansion
are being widely shared. Wages have begun, finally, to rise; income
inequality, to shrink.

        And we must work to prepare all our young people to take their place in
this new economy. Our most important goal must be to give our young
people the worldO,s best education. We must hold all our children to the
highest standards, and give them the tools and help they need to succeed.
We must open the doors of college wider than ever -- and we can never
allow them to be slammed shut.

        We do not believe in guaranteeing equal outcomes, but we do
believe in guaranteeing equal opportunity -- and that means education. A
college education means stability, better jobs, a chance to join the
middle class, another stakeholder in America. We cannot abandon any
efforts to expand access to higher education -- and that includes
affirmative action.

        It is a stunning and dismaying fact that African-American and
Latino enrollments at this university and all across California and Texas
are plummeting, for the first time in decades.  We cannot afford to turn
back the clock and resegregate higher education. I saw school segregation,
and it took years to begin to turn back the damage it did socially and
economically to the South. My home region to this day is grappling with
the self-inflicted wound of segregation.  America cannot make that mistake
again.

        And to those who say that any preferences are wrong, that scores
on standardized tests should be the sole measure of qualification, I say:
We give preferences to athletes, to musicians, to children of alumni. A
diversified student body has value, too.

        I want to be clear: We will continue to fight the rollback of
affirmative action in higher education because it is wrong, it is hurtful
to our progress and it divides our people.

                LEARN FACTS/REALITIES


        The economy has created many jobs.  But disparities remain.   In
some states, unemployment is so low there is a labor shortage; while in
some of our cities, unemployment is quite high and so are the social ills
that accompany poverty.   We are working hard to encourage employers to
locate in the cities, but businesses need to make a commitment to the
cities, too. We cannot leave our cities behind.

        Third, we must continue to be vigilant against discrimination, wherever
and whenever it appears.

        The fight against crime is a fight for the rights of all our
people -- especially the poorest people in the poorest neighborhoods, who
are most often the victims of violence. Community efforts across the
country have brought crime to a 30 year low (ck).    We are putting 100,000
new community police officers on the streets, but our minority communities
are still underserved.   Our police officers are the protectors of order in
our society, putting their lives on the line every day to keep our people
safe. But we have seen that authority can be abused and brutal force used
on some of our citizens.   So, as we call for our citizens to respect the
law, we need the law to respect our citizens, no matter their color or
economic condition.

        And our civil rights agencies are among the most critical law
enforcement agencies in the government -- and we must give them the
resources they need to end the crushing backlog of cases and get the job
done.  ItO,s time for Congress to put our money where our ideals are.

        These are all areas that need our focus.   But we cannot come to
solutions or even truly identify our problems unless we are willing to be
honest with each other.   ItO,s time to let down our guards, and to be
honest with people different from ourselves. We have talked at each other
and about each other.   It is high time we begin talking with each other.

        Beginning today, I want to lead the American people in a great and
unprecedented conversation about race.   I have asked one of AmericaD,s
greatest scholars, Dr. John Hope Franklin to chair an advisory panel of
distinguished Americans.   [OTHER NAMES]

        We will examine the stereotypes and the facts D) the myths and the
reality D) that hold us apart. We will ask Americans to talk to one
another everyday, at home, in their communities, in school, at work.  I
will join this conversation with Americans across our nation at four town
meetings over the next year.

        And in one yearD,s time, I will report directly to the American
people about what I have found and what we must do.

        The town meetings I will hold are just the start.  I calIon
Americans of all colors to begin a D&table feilowshipD8 within their
communities, to break bread together and begin to know each other. And I
want every American to see this as an opportunity to learn about each
other by doing with each other.  Tutors are needed in many communities to
teach reading and other skills; that kind of interaction pays dividends in
many ways.  Churches, mosques, synagogues could consider exchanging
congregations for a day.

        I know that honest dialogue and exchange will not be easy at
first.  We need to get past defensiveness, fear, political correctness and
other barriers to honesty. That may open wounds, but that is how we begin
the healing so that we may mov~ past them.



        What do we want from all this? If we achieve nothing more than
talk, that will be too little. If we propose nothing but policy ideas
that are merely small gestures along the way, that will be too little.
But if 10 years from now, people can look back and see that AmericaD,s
commitment to our ideals was renewed and reinvigorated and that the
post-Martin Luther King generation finally shouldered its fair burden in
this historic struggle, then this effort will have been a success.

        From our earliest days, America has been a beacon to the world.
For two centuries, on every continent, people struggling for freedom
looked to see if our D&great experimentD8 would succeed.  Over the past
century, we have taken our greatest strides when we knew the whole world
was watching. Today, the people of Bosnia and Rwanda and the Middle East
are watching. with American ideas and ideals ascendent, with ancient
racial and ethnic hatreds once again flaring around the globe, we must be
a beacon, we must be that last great hope for mankind.

        We may not achieve as much as we want, but let us set our aim as
high as we can.  Let us resolve that we shall overcome in our day and
generation. We cannot be many Americas. We must be One America. We are
One America.

       Thank you, God bless you and God bless America.


