     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES   ~IL)


     CREATOR: Elizabeth Drye ( CN=Elizabeth Drye/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:12-JUN-1997 07:17:51.00

     SUBJECT:   Tobacco Talking Pts; Another Waxman Bill

     TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     1. Waxman press conference.

     FYI Waxman is holding press conference tomorrow to release a minority
     staff report on Ligget's attorney-client privileged documents (should be
     newsworthy) and announce a bill on industry accountability.  Under the
     bill, if the industry is shielded from liability, the bill would:  set up
     an independent (non-regulatory) board of 5 HHS appointees charged with
     investigating the tobacco industry; require companies to turn over all
     documents relating to marketing and health studies to the board (including
     150,000 privileged documents Minnesota has collected), and make public all
     documents that do not disclose trade secrets. The board would have
     subpoena powers and report annually to Congress.  Also requires tobacco
     companies to have member of the oversight board sit in on company board
     meetings.  This is Waxman's attempt to put corporate accountability into
     the mix.

     2.   McCurry's briefing.

             You asked for talking points for McCurry reo our process which I
     will do in early a.m. once we have closure.   Here are McCurry's remarks
     today.  Reuters is apparently reporting based on them that we will wait
     for Koop-Kessler.  But the remarks certainly give us a lot of room.

     Excerpt from McCurry's Press Conference:

      Q    This just in. A source close to the tobacco talks
     says the Attorneys General expect to have a deal next week. A, has
     the White House heard this? B, what are you going to do when there
     is a deal?

                  MR. MCCURRY:  The last we checked before I came out
     here, and of course I've been out here almost an hour now, so it is
     conceivable that it is not -- something has happened in that time.
     (Laughter.)  But the last I checked, when we checked with Lindsey
     prior to this, is that they're about where it was reported today.
     They've got a lot of work to do and it doesn't look like they're
     close anywhere to a deal.

                  Q    What's going to happen when they do get a deal?     It
     will come here, right?

                  MR. MCCURRY:  Well, they will be -- we'll know about it
     because we're in direct contact with the parties and we'll see what
     it is and see whether we like it or not.


                  Q     Mike, on that, did the President receive a letter
      from C. Everett Koop and the associated groups yesterday?

                   MR. MCCURRY:  It hasn't come in yet.  We heard about it.
      Dr. Kessler and Dr. Koop both sent a letter down here.

                    Q     Saying don't sign off on anything until health
      groups have

                   MR. MCCURRY:  And we don't intend to.  I think we would
      very closely consider the views of the public health advocates in
      their community prior to rendering any judgment on a bill, but we've
      been in active contact with them during the process of these
      discussions so that we can sort of get their sense of what they're
      hearing and know more about their thinking.


                    In a sense, a lot of that has already happened.


