  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-JUN-1997 17:25:48.00

  SUBJECT:     Response to NGA - Contingency Fund MOE

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  I hate to do this to you, but could you glance at these drafts from
  presidential letters, in response to letters to the Pres. from NGA and
  Gov. Underwood complaining about our bifurcation/MOE positions. We have
  worked with the letters people to get the draft as good as it is, but it
  seems prudent to get your reaction.

  ---------------------- Forwarded by Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP on 06/13/97
  05:24 PM ---------------------------



             Diane Ikemiyashiro
             06/13/97 01:00:29 PM

  Record Type: Record

  To: Emily Bromberg/WHO/EOP, Keith J. Fontenot/OMB/EOP
  cc: Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP, Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP
  Subject: NGA -' Contingency Fund MOE

  Emily and Keith --

  The following drafts are POTUS responses to letters from the NGA regarding
  TANF and MOE and from Gov. Cecil Underwood, WV, regarding TANF.  You will
  notice that the drafts are based on the same language.  FYI, I will fax to
  you the incoming letters.

  (Emily -- these are drafts 3 and 4 of the 4 drafts that I mentioned to
  you.  If the drafts are okay, I suggest that they be prepared for autopen,
  not BC SIGs. What do you think? Does Fred DuVal make that decision or
  you?)

  3.) NGA

  Thank you for your letter regarding the Temporary Assistance for Needy
  Families Program requirements on separate state maintenance of effort
  welfare programs.  I appreciate knowing of your concerns.

  The enactment of the welfare reform law was the beginning -- not the
  end -- of welfare reform, ard I am pleased of the progress we have
  made.  We all have a responsibility to cooperate to make this law
  work, and we need to continue our bipartisan effort to help ensure
  that TANF clearly and effectively accomplishes our goals.

  Because of our concern that welfare reform be about work, my


Administration will remain committed to working with the States and
Congress to help ensure that each state's overall work effort meets
TANF's work participation requirements.   As you know, I've always been
a strong supporter of state maintenance of effort welfare programs,
and we will work with the States and Congress to develop legislation,
if necessary, to ensure that state flexibility in maintenance of
effort programs does not result in costs to the Federal government due
to the potential loss of child support collections.   I am also
concerned that proposed changes' to the Contingency Fund Maintenance of
Effort requirements may undermine work requirements and state
financial commitments to work programs.

 4.) Gov. Underwood

 Thank you for your letter regarding the Temporary Assistance for Needy
 Families Program.  I appreciate knowing of your concerns.

 The enactment of the welfare reform law was the beginning    -- not the
 end -- of welfare reform, and I am pleased of the progress   we have
 made. We all have a responsibility to make this law work,    and we need
 to continue our bipartisan effort to help ensure that TANF   clearly and
 effectively accomplishes our goals.

Because of our concern that welfare reform be about work, my
Administration remains committed to working with the States and
Congress to help ensure that each state's overall work effort meets
TANF's work participation requirements.  In addition, we will work
with the States and Congress to develop legislation, if necessary, to
ensure that state flexibility does not result in the loss of federal
child support collections.

 I will keep your thoughts in mind as we address the fair and effective
 implementation of the welfare reform law.


