     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( CN=william R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-JUN-1997 16:15:44.00

     SUBJECT:   race speech concept

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     r know itO,s very late in the game, but it sounds like things could still
     be a little fluid on the UCSD speech, so I wanted to quickly throw out an
     idea for tomorrow  (or perhaps for follow-up).  rD,d be more than happy to
     help flesh this out if you are interested.

     To help improve race relations in this country, I would argue that a big
     part of what the President needs to do is simply to help people of
     different racial and ethnic backgrounds better understand each other and
     help them begin to figure out how to candidly, but respectfully discuss
     their differences.   He needs to start a national conversation on race
     relations, but one that is conducted in small settings by real people who
     actually take some time to get to know each other, not just in big forums
     or on TV. Without being too specific in his speech tomorrow, I think he
     could challenge Americans to take a risk and move beyond the surface
     relationships that they already have with people of different races in
     their workplace or at school, and really take some time to sit down and
     talk with each other about their values and how they see the world, and,
     in particular, their perceptions on race.  He could charge this new
     advisory group that he is forming to work with national and community
     organizations around the country to foster such discussions.

     The model I have in mind is something that I participated in during law
     school, and that eventually expanded to other campuses because it was so
     powerful. The main feature was a small, 10-14 person discussion group
     that made a firm commitment to meet every two weeks throughout the school
     year.  The initial group was half black and half white, roughly half male
     and half female. As more groups formed, Hispanic and Asian-American
     students took part, as well. We would typically gather for dinner in
     peopleD,s homes, and then engage in a focused, extended discussion on some
     aspect of race relations, often based on short readings that participants
     did beforehand, and guided by a small number of questions prepared by a
     rotating set of leaders. The first conversation took as a starting point
     a passage by W.E.B. DuBois on D&the color line,D, and focused on when and
     how each of us first became conscious of race.    Subsequent discussions
     (after people got to know and trust each other) dealt with such topics as
     friendships with people from other racial/ethnic backgrounds, affirmative
     action (related to both employment and university admissions), D&blackD8
     TV programs (like Fresh Prince of Bel Air), rap music, language, and so
     forth.   (If we began the series today, there would clearly be a night on
     the OJ verdict). The discussions--which were sometimes fairly wrenching--
     illuminated the often radically different experiences and perceptions that
     whites and minorities have in this country, but also helped participants un
.'
     derstand how to take account of those differences in working and
     communicating with each other. Over the course of the year, some very
     close friendships resulted.

     No doubt our discussions were far easier for a bunch of idealistic law
     students to pull off than they would be for folks in the real world, and
     much different approaches would be needed from community to community.
     Moreover, this concept doesnD,t directly address that so much of the
     racial tension in this country is as much about class as race.   Still, I
     believe many, many Americans would respond to this kind of challenge,
     especially if given the right kind of help from others in their community.
     Extending a challenge like this would allow the President to demonstrate
     leadership on something that really matters--helping people understand
     each other--without proposing some big new progam. This approach would let
     the President make the point strongly that we canD,t ultimately bridge
     AmericaD,s racial divide just by something that our leaders say, or by
     laws that they pass, but that it depends on millions of individual
     Americans .taking time to get to know each other and to trying to see the
     world from anotherD,s point of view.


