RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-JUN-1997 15:13:39.00

SUBJECT:   FYI in case you didn't see it,here's what the President said yesterday at

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
             Let me say, finally, that there are a few other things
that I think we have to do beyond these three issues of finishing the
work of the budget, investing in our people, and expanding trade.
This moment of prosperity and stability has given us an opportunity
to work together to repair our social fabric, to join together to
face those issues which, if we don't face them, could flare into
crises and keep us from becoming the nation we ought to be in the new
century.

             And let me just mention a few.  You were kind enough to
mention the Summit of Service that President Bush, President Carter,
Mrs. Reagan, and General Powell and I and others sponsored in
Philadelphia. One of the things we have to do if we want to give our
children a better future is to help their parents be gainfully
employed.  We were able to reduce the welfare rolls dramatically
because of a growing economy and because of work we did with states
before the passage of the welfare reform bill to help them move
people from welfare to work.

             Now, this welfare reform bill did two things.   It
required people on welfare who are able-bodied to move from welfare
to work within a certain amount of time, and it gave the states in a
block grant funds that used to be spent in a federal entitlement so
that they would have more flexibility to create incentives for people
to move from welfare to work.

             Forty of our states now have a windfall there because
they're getting money based on how much they got when the welfare
rolls were at their peak, and there has been a 20 percent-plus drop
in the welfare rolls in the last three years.

             I urge you, in all the states that you're working in, to
get the governors, to get the legislators to work with the business
community to spend that money in ways that, with your efforts, can
move a million more people from welfare to work in the next four
years. We moved a million people in the last four when we were
creating 12 million jobs -- that had never been done before, the 12
million jobs. Neither had the million people.


             Under the terms of this welfare reform law, whether we
create 12 million jobs or not in the private sector, we have to move


nearly another million people. We have got to have your help. But
the states have the power to do things like give employers the
welfare check for a year or two to use as an employment and training
subsidy for people that are especially hard to place; to spend even
more money on child care; to spend money on education and training.

             So I implore you to help us do this.  It will be a
terrible thing if, having called for welfare reform and personal
responsibility, the end of it is to wind up hurting poor people.
That was never what was intended. The children should not suffer in
this. And you are going to have to take the lead in helping to do
this.

             The second thing I'd like to say is, we have to -- now
having faced the structural budget deficit in the country -- we have
to deal with the generational deficit. That means we have to have
long-term entitlement reform to face the realities of the baby boom
generation retiring.  And I will be -- as soon as we get the budget
out of the way, I'll be working with the bipartisan leadership in
Congress on an approach to that, and I ask for your support.

             It also means that we have to fulfill the mission of the
Philadelphia summit, with the public and the private sectors doing
their jobs. Remember what the Philadelphia Summit was about:   every
child ought to have a safe place to grow up, decent health care, a
good education and marketable skills, a mentor and the chance to
serve.

             And we live in a country where 11 percent of the people
over 65 are poor, but 20 percent-plus of the' people under 18 are.
And we cannot do well unless we do better by our children.   So this
inter-generational thing is about entitlement reform, but it's also
about giving our kids a better chance.

             The third issue -- the one I'm going to speak about in
San Diego in a couple of days -- and that is the challenge presented
to us as we become the world's first truly multi-racial democracy.
We have five school districts in America today with kids from over
100 different racial and ethnic groups -- five.  We'll soon have 12.

             We have -- we all know this, but my Baptist minister
from Arkansas came up to see me during the Inaugural and he told me
he had a cousin who had a Baptist church across the river here in
Virginia that now has a Korean mission and runs English as a second
language classes out of the church.  There are thousands of stories
like this.

             And yet we know. that there are still dramatically
different perceptions among different racial and ethnic groups,
starting with the historic tensions that have existed between African
Americans and whites in the country and layered on by the successive
waves of immigrants that pose great challenges to us.

             When you look at how the world is being torn asunder in
the Middle East, in Bosnia, in Northern Ireland, and Africa, by
people who would rather kill each other over their differences than
celebrate what they share, you realize that what we are trying to do
here is truly astonishing.

             Within the decade, more than one state in America will


have no majority race -- within the decade. Within three decades,
the whole country will almost have no majority race. We are going to
tese whether what we always say about America is true -- that we are
basically a country founded on an idea.  It's not about land.  It'S
not about race or ethnic origin.  It's about the idea that all of us,
are created equal. And that means, among other things, we have to
deal with both the perceptions and the reality.

             And I don't want to get into this except to say that I
hope that all of you are concerned by the consequences of the
wholesale abolition of affirmative action on enrollment in higher
education that we've seen in California and Texas. And I know a lot
of employers of large companies have led the way in trying to
preserve a sensible form of affirmative action.  So I ask you to
consider that because this is not just the President and the
government. All of us are the stewards of whether we can become one
America in the 21st century.


