RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL                         (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-JUN-1997 18:54:23.00

SUBJECT:          Today's Welfare Strategy Meeting

TO: Elena Kagan
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP                                                 [ OPD
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Elisabeth Stock ( CN;Elisabeth Stock/O;OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN J
READ:UNKNOWN

CC; Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP                                                 [ OPD J
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
A few important issues were discussed:

1) Strategy on Minimum Wage: Dept. of Labor wants to know what are the
plans for the high profile White House media strategy on minimum wage.
Elena -- were you going to talk to Podesta about this?    Seth said Podesta
told a large group of labor leaders 10 days ago that the White House would
have a public and high profile message strategy.    Geri says that the House
Democratic leadership is gearing up and that they will define a message if
we don't.   Gephardt may do an event comorrow and build up for a floor
fight next week.    In the House they want to tie minimum wage exemptions
with other policies which hurt low wage workers, such as a tax provision
on independent contractors which apparently makes it easier for employers
to label someone an independent contractor instead of an employee.

Also, Labor wants to know how they can be better plugged into the
conference negotiation strategy, which they expect to be a budget
negotiators-driven process.  I made a major mistake by mentioning we were
writing a memo to the President on minimum wage and Labor wants to be
plugged into that too but I did not give them hope.

2) Welfare to Work Funds: We brainstormed a bit on how to highlight our
success in not only getting $3 billion but targetting it to cities and
other high need areas.  I'll send a note to Jonathan reminding him that it
should be in the U.S. Conference of Mayors speech. Also, welfare to work
will be the focus of Secretary Herman's speech to the mayors on Tuesday,
and Slater will talk about NEXTEA welfare to work on Saturday.

3) Welfare to Work Regs: Olivia says they are meeting with the Secretary
next week to discuss their proposed regs and will soon be ready to discuss
them with us.  She wants very much to establish a process and a timetable
to work through these regs as quickly as possible this summer.

4) Child Care Regs.  Melissa says HHS is okay with using the child care
regs for an immunization event in early July.

5) HHS Reports. I
II t s i mp 1 y                                               P6/(2)W
                                                                          P6/(b)(6)

          summa r i z est he wa i ve r s gran t e'"'id-"b:-e:-fFo-r"'e--'t-'h""e~-s~i""g-n""l~'n.,..."g-o....,f~'""'t;:-h;-"e-n-e-w---'
                                                                                                                                           [coi]
welfare law, but they should have shared it with us sooner.                                                       P6/(b)(U


                   P6/(b)(6)               I (Melissa had seen it but saw
no news so didn't mention it) and we agreed that they would alert us to
things coming down the pipeline from ASPE and elsewhere at HHS.    I also
asked them to organize themselves to come give us a briefing on the whole
research and evaluation plan, which this rogue report is part of.


