RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna ( FORTUNA_D )   (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 23-SEP-1996 18:57:57.57

SUBJECT: For you Medicaid afficianados ....

TO: Jeremy D. Benami                           BENAMI J        (WHO)
READ:24-SEP-1996 10:25:07.66

TO: Stephen C. Warnath                         WARNATH S        (OPD)
READ:23-SEP-1996 20:16:49.55

TO: Elena Kagan                                KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ:24-SEP-1996 09:03:55.11

TO: Emily Bromberg                             BROMBERG E        (WHO)
READ:24-SEP-1996 08:51:09.98

TO: Keith J. Fontenot                          FONTENOT K ) Autoforward to: Remote Addre
READ: NOT READ

TO: Richard E. Green                           GREEN R      (OMB)
READ:23-SEP-1996 19:09:17.90

TEXT:
here are comments from Nancy-Ann Min's staff on implementation
issues in Medicaid.
I am debating whether to send you my equally lengthy response.
You can ignore all this if you like for now -- but, Elena, I think
there are some legal questions that you will have to get involved
in eventually.
I am hoping there is discretion here to do interesting things to
blunt the legal immigrant cuts, within the parameters of the law.
==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:12-SEP-1996 17:39:00.00

ATT BODY PART TYPE:B

ATT CREATOR: Nicolette Highsmith

ATT SUBJECT: Comments on HCFA's Draft White House Report

ATT TO: Diana M. Fortuna                           FORTUNA D

ATT TO: Nancy-Ann E. Min                           MIN N   )


ATT CC: Barry T. Clendenin                         CLENDENIN B

ATT CC: Mark E. Miller                            MILLER ME       )

ATT CC: barbara E. Washington                     WASHINGTON_B

TEXT:
At a meeting of the welfare implementation work group, you requested that HCFA
provide a summary of issues facing Medicaid in light of welfare reform.  Last
week, you sent us a document from HCFA entitled, "White House Report - Delinking
Medicaid from AFDC," which addressed such Medicaid issues.
We wanted to clarify a couple of points made in the document to avoid confusion.


  1) HCFA's first paragraph notes that "regardless of whether an individual is
  eligible for TANF, states in general will be required to maintain Medicaid
  eligibility for individuals eligible for benefits as of July 16, 1996.
  The law states that an individual's eligibility for Medicaid will be based on
  the income and asset standards used to determine AFDC eligibility as of July 16,
  1996.   This means two things: 1) Medicaid is no longer linked to TANF cash
  assistance.   This could result in families receiving TANF without being eligible
  for Medicaid, and 2) It is not a "grandfather" provision for people receiving
  AFDC on 7/16/96.   If individual circumstances change, such that they no longer
  meed the AFDC eligibility standards as of 7/16/96, they would lose Medicaid.
  2) HCFA also made the point that "a number of currently eligible individuals may
  fall through the cracks as a result of the transition from AFDC to TANF and the
  de linking of AFDC and Medicaid eligibility systems."
  "Theoretically," individuals eligible for Medicaid as of 7/16/96 would not
  lose coverage under the law.   What could happen, is that, in implementing the
  law, states' systems that are currently in place for tracking eligibility may
  not accurately track the transition from AFDC to Medicaid.   Furthermore,
  Medicaid offices will have the added responsibility of determining Medicaid
  eligibility for individuals on cash assistance, which could cause administrative
  complications.   Thus, due to the result of systems or administrative problems
  (not the law), some eligible individuals might lose coverage.
  HCFA's document did not fully explain the subtle technicalities of the Medicaid
  issues. As Judy Moore mentioned in the last meeting, some of these Medicaid
  issues are extremely technical, but some of them have the impact of either
  retaining or eliminating Medicaid coverage for individuals.
  We wanted you to be aware of our understanding of what the major outstanding
  issues for Medicaid are:
  Immigration
  1) Mandatory SSI Ban - In general, SSI eligibility also confers Medicaid
  eligibility.   It is unclear if an immigrant continues to be eligible for
  Medicaid, if they lose SSI coverage due to the mandatory ban on SSI for current
  immigrants in the country.   The law is vague on this point and HCFA has had
  different interpretations.   HCFA is working through this eligibility
  complication.
  2) Deeming - As you know, this issue cuts across many agencies.   The general
  issue is what types of exclusions (i.e. car, house) are used in the determining
  income level of the sponsor for the purposes of determining the immigrant's
  eligibility for federal benefits.
  1115 Waivers
  HCFA is looking into issues surrounding Medicaid 1115 waivers and eligibility.
  HCFA is looking into the question of whether states can cover individuals under
  their 1115 Medicaid waivers (if currently eligible under the 1115 waiver), who
  could lose coverage under the welfare law (i.e. immigrants).
  SSI Kids
  HCFA partly addressed this issue in their document by noting that guidance would
  go out to the states on SSI children losing SSI benefits, and therefore Medicaid
  eligibility.   SSA intends to send letters to beneficiaries that will lose
  coverage as a result of the redetermination policy. We are not sure if HCFA has
  consulted with SSA on inserting a Medicaid part to the SSA letter or whether
  HCFA intends to send out letters to beneficiaries noting the policy change and
  noting that individuals can reapply for Medicaid, based on other criteria.
  Administrative Allocation
  The Welfare bill includes $500 million for increased Federal Medicaid
  Administrative Matching funds for states to set up new eligibility systems
  (because Medicaid will have to determine eligibility for individuals who would
  have received AFDC).   The law gives the Secretary the authority to determine
  the appropriate FMAP percentage (i.e. % Federal versus % state funds).    HCFA
  will also have to determine how the funds will be allocated across the states.
  We assume that these would be the issues that HCFA would present to the DPC in a
  more detailed meeting.



;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;; END ATTACHMENT   1 ;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;


