    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP 1

    CREATION DATE/TIME:20-JUN-1997 17:08:51.00

    SUBJECT:   Here's a summary of the settlement from the Campaign's WWW page

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kag-an/OU=OPD/O=EOP   @   EOP [ OPD 1
    READ:UNKNOWN

    TO: Elizabeth Drye ( CN=Elizabeth Drye/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Friday, June 20, 1997
                             1:30 p.m.
                             Summary of provisions that have been agreed to as
    part of the settlement
                           agreement with the Attorneys General, the tobacco
    industry and public health
                           advocates.

                             1.   Youth Access

                             The full substance of the August 28, 1996 FDA youth
    access provisions have
                             been agreed upon.

                             The FDA rule:

                                 Bans sales to kids under 18;
                                 Requires proof of age;
                                 Limits, but does not ban vending machines;
                                 Limits self-service displays, but permits
    tobacco to be displayed on the
                                 counter;
                                 Establishes the minimum pack size at 20 and
    prohibits the sale of single
                                 cigarettes;
                                 Bans free sampling; and
                                 Uses FIjAD, s normal enforcement tools with
    enforcement funding subject
                                 to annual Congressional appropriations.

                             In addition the tobacco industry has agreed to:

                                  A ban on all vending machines;
                                  The placement of tobacco products behind the
    counter and out of reach
                                  of consumers;
                                  Further restrictions of mail order sales,
    subject to conditions that
                                demonstrate that an effective mechanism
    exists to restrict sales only to
                                adults;
                                A nationwide licensing system for all sellers


of tobacco products with
                               graduated penalties and license suspensions
for violations of the youth
                             access and marketing provisions to be
established.  The licensing system
                             shall apply to all sellers of nicotine -
containing tobacco products,
                             including manufacturers, distributors,
wholesalers, retailers and importers;
                             Full funding from money paid by the tobacco
industry for enforcement by
                             FDA and state and local authorities;
                             States and local governments would not be
preempted from enacting
                             stronger laws;
                             Dual enforcement authority with both the FDA
and state attorneys
                             general, each being able to enforce these
provisions.  In addition, the
                             FDA will have the power to contract with other
state and local authorities
                             to assist it to enforce the rules; and
                             Enforcement to require unannounced, random
stings.

                          2.   Marketing and Advertising

                       The industry has agreed to the full substance of
the August 28, 1996 FDA youth
                       advertising and marketing ,provisions (which were
struck down in Federal District
                       court but which have been appealed) :

                          The FDA rule before the court ruling:

                               Text-only ads in youth oriented magazines and
newspapers;
                            Ban brand name event sponsorship;
                            Limit billboards near schools and limit
billboards to text only with no
                            color;
                            Ban use of non-tobacco brand names on tobacco
products;
                            Ban advertising on non-tobacco products, like
clothing and gear;
                            Ban offers of non-tobacco items or gifts based
on proof of purchase; and
                            Require ads to carry FDA-mandated statement of
intended use.

                          In addition to the FDA provisions above, the
industry has agreed to:

                            The elimination of all billboards and outdoor
signs, including all signs in
                            stadia and arenas and signs that face outwards
in enclosed areas, such as
                            stores;
                            The elimination of all human images and
cartoon characters from all


                              advertising and from all cigarette packages;
                              Additional restrictions on point of purchase
advertising regarding the
                             placement on point of purchase ads to limit
their size and number, remove
                             them from the line of sight of children and
remove them from close
                             proximity to candy and other goods likely to
attract children;
                             The elimination of Internet advertising and
the agreement on the use of
                             whatever technology is available to make
tobacco advertisements that are
                             placed on the internet from foreign countries
inaccessible in the US;
                             The prohibition on product placement in movies
and on TV;
                             The prohibition on any payments or fees to
celebrities to smoke in movies
                             or on TV or to any other person or entity to
glamorize tobacco use in
                             movies or on TV, and the prohibition of any
D&in-kindD8 actions to
                             accomplish any of these same purposes;
                             Without limiting the FDAD,s normal authority,
limits on the use of words,
                             such as D&lightD8, that currently appear in
some product names and that
                             could be misinterpreted as health claims;
                             Protection against First Amendment challenge:
an agreement to consent
                             to the placement of all of the advertising
restrictions contained in the
                             August 28, 1996 FDA rule plus the above noted
restrictions in consent
                             decrees to insulate the restrictions from
First Amendment challenges by
                             parties outside the tobacco industry;
                             Dual enforcement authority with both the FDA
and state attorneys
                             general, each being able to enforce these
provisions.   In addition, the
                             FDA will have the power to contract with other
state and local authorities
                             to assist it to enforce the rules; and
                             Funding from the tobacco industry to pay the
cost of enforcement for
                             both FDA and the state authorities with
enforcement power.

                       3.     Public Education/Counter Advertising

                       The tentative agreement with the tobacco industry
includes:

                              Funds for the largest, most-sustained
nationwide public
                              education/counter advertising program ever
done for tobacco or for any
                              other public health hazard.   The campaign wou


ld be similar to those
                                campaigns in Massachusetts and California.
The program would operate
                                independent of the tobacco industry, which
would have no say over the
                                content or placement of the program.      Funding
for the program would be
                                guaranteed, and to the extent possible, the
program would be insulated
                                from political pressure.

                         4.     Health Warnings

                                There would be a dramatic revision of the
warning label system.    The
                                current system would be replaced with the far
more specific, more detailed
                                eight Canadian warnings.

                         They include warnings, such as:

                                     "D&WARNING: Cigarettes are
Addicti veDB;

                                     "D&WARNING: Cigarettes Cause CancerDB;

                                     "D&WARNING: Smoking Can Kill YouD8;
and

                                     ." D&WARNING: Tobacco Smoke Causes
Fatal Lung Disease In
                                     Non- SmokersDB
                                The warnings on packages would be moved to the
front of the cigarette
                                package and the most prominent side of the
smokeless tobacco product
                               package.
                               The warnings would appear in the Canadian
format (the top of the front
                                with white lettering on a black background) .
The warning would occupy
                               at least 25 percent of the top of the front of
the package.    All warnings
                            would appear simultaneously on tobacco
packages and would be rotated
                            quarterly on ads by brand.

                         5.    Full Disclosure

                         Under the agreement:

                               Each company will make specific changes in its
position regarding the
                               harm caused by its products.
                               At least as many, and very likely many more
documents will be made
                               public through the settlement process than
would have been revealed
                                through the litigation process.   Also, the
industry has agreed to make


                              public its past, present and future he
alth-related research.

                         6.    Youth Smoking Targets

                               The industry would be subject to penalties if
youth tobacco use fails to
                               drop by 30percent in 5 years, 50 percent in 7
years and 60 percent in 10
                             years.  The penalty would be based on the
value of a teen tobacco user to
                             the industry over the lifetime of the
individual.  It would be worth
                             approximately $80 million per percentage point
each and every year in
                             which the target is not met, up to a maximum
of $2 billion per year.  The
                             baseline for measurement of youth smoking will
be an average of youth
                             prevalence rates for the past ten years.  This
will require a much more
                             substantial reduction in youth smoking than
would be required if only the
                             most recent data were used to establish the
baseline.

                         7.    Funding for State and Local Tobacco Control
Activity

                       Active state and local tobacco control efforts have
been proven successful in
                       reducing tobacco use. Current programs are under
funded and funding for these
                       programs is in jeopardy.

                         Under the agreement:

                               State and local tobacco control activity
modeled after the successful
                               ASSIST program would be funded out of tobacco
industry funds,
                               permitting the ASSIST program to be funded in
every state from these
                               funds.

                         8.    Tobacco Cessation

                         Under the agreement:

                               Out of funds to be provided by the industry,
funding would be provided
                               for tobacco cessation programs and devices for
those who want to quit
                               and for whom cost is an issue.   These funds
would be available to
                               individuals nationwide.

                         9.    Protection from Environmental Tobacco Smoke

                         Under the agreement:



                               Protection from environmental tobacco smoke
would come from the
                               enactment of the text of HR 3434   (the bill
originally introduced by
                               Congressman Waxman) that restricts tobacco use
in public places and
                            most workplaces to locations that are
separately ventilated to the outside
                            and through which non-smokers do not pass. To
avoid heavy opposition
                            from the hospitality industry, restaurants
(excluding fast food
                            restaurants), casinos, bingo parlors, and bars
would be exempted.
                            The federal law would not preempt state and
local governments from
                            retaining or enacting more restrictive
requirements governing ETS.

                       10.      Monitoring Corporate Behavior

                       The tobacco industry has the most irresponsible
corporate record of any industry
                       in the United States. Currently, no mechanism
exists to ensure that the industry
                       complies with the letter or the spirit of existing
law.

                       Under the agreement:

                               Manufacturers would be required to develop
detailed compliance plans
                               describing how they intend to comply with the
law and monitor their own
                               employees behavior.
                               Corporations would be required to set up
incentive plans to encourage
                               compliance and internal compliance checks to
catch and report violations.
                               Corporations would be required to establish a
corporate code of behavior
                               with outside monitors, a system of auditing,
and reports to shareholders
                               and the FDA.

                       11.      General Authority of the FDA

                       FDAD,s authority over tobacco products as D&drugsD8
and D&devices08 has been
                       upheld by the trial court in North Carolina and is
now on appeal.  To date, the
                       FDA has only sought to exercise its authority by
establishing youth access and
                       marketing rules, but it has far broader authority.

                       Under the agreement:

                               The judicial challenge by the tobacco industry
would be dropped and


                            FDAO,s authority explicitly recognized.
Therefore, tobacco will continue to
                            be categorized as a O&drug08 and a O&device08
under the Food, Drug and
                            Cosmetic Act and the agencyO,s authority to
regulate the products as
                            O&restricted medical devices08 will be
recognized.
                            FDAO,s authority to regulate nicotine,
carcinogens and all other tobacco
                            constituents will be recognized.  The agency
will create a Science
                            Advisory Board immediately to begin to study
and advise how best to
                            regulate nicotine and the other components of
tobacco products.  FDA
                            will be authorized to remove harmful
ingredients and to reduce nicotine
                            levels immediately if it finds that to do so
will reduce harm, is
                            technologically feasible, and will not lead to
a significant black market in
                            unregulated tobacco products. Administrative
procedures consistent
                            with the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act would
apply.  After 12 years, the
                            Agency will be authorized to eliminate
nicotine entirely, but to do so in a
                            manner that gives Congress time to review it,
if it so desires.
                            For the first time, all non-tobacco
ingredients in tobacco products would
                            be required to meet safety standards
established by the FDA, with the
                            burden placed on the industry to demonstrate
that they are not harmful
                            when used as intended.  The safety standard
will apply to new ingredients
                            immediately, and to existing ingredients after
a five year grace period.
                            Tobacco companies would be required to provide
the FDA with complete
                            information regarding tobacco additives, and
would be required to
                            disclose all additives publicly in a manner
analogous to the disclosure of
                            food ingredients. However, companies would be
protected from
                            disclosure of confidential and proprietary
information to the public during
                            the five year grace period.
                            Provisions are included to require tobacco
companies to use the best
                            available technology to produce and market
O&reduced risk08 products.
                            Implicit health claims for tobacco products,
including O&low tar08 and O&low
                            nicotine08 products, will be strictly
regulated by the FDA. Words such as
                            O&light08 and that are part of currently


established brand names would be
                             allowed to continue, but with the addition of
statements to prevent them
                             from being misinterpreted as health claims.
                             FDA would exercise its normal authority to
inspect, enter manufacturing
                             plants, demand certain records and record
keeping, and would have its
                             normal enforcement authority.
                             The tobacco industry would be required to
provide FDA with all current
                             and future research and all non-public
information it receives that relates
                             to health, toxicity, addiction and drug
dependence.
                             The FDA would be required to create a
scientific Advisory Committee to
                             study issues relating to the regulation of
nicotine and other health and
                             safety issues.

                       12.   Tobacco Industry Liability and Other Legal
Issues

                       The tobacco industry has lost only one court
challenge in its history and only
                       Liggett has actually paid any money in damages.
Nonetheless, the tobacco
                       industry faces unprecedented court challenges
today.  Under the agreement:

                             The rights of individuals to sue for
compensatory damages will not be
                             abridged.
                             There will be no limits on individual
judgments.
                             The tobacco industry would pay approximately
$368.5 billion over 25
                             years, including approximately $60 billion in
lieu of punitive damages for
                             past conduct.
                             Funding includes approximately $1.5 billion
for tobacco control purposes
                             per year and a $25 billion trust fund, to be
created over 8 years, to fund
                             additional public health-related matters.
                             The tobacco industry would be fully liable for
punitive damages for any
                             future behavior.
                             Tobacco companies would be required to reserve
$4 billion per year to
                             pay for compensatory damages arising from
individual lawsuits.   The total
                             amount the industry would be required to pay
through litigation in any
                             one year would be capped at $5 billion per
year.   It is highly unlikely that
                             this fund would be exhausted in anyone year.
However, if this were to
                             occur, payments to individuals winning cases


against the industry would
                             be extended over more than one year. This
would not result in restricting
                             the overall award an individual could receive,
but it could lead to a delay
                             in the total payment.  Any money from the
annual fund not won through
                             litigation would then be transferred to
national public health, anti-tobacco
                             programs and would not revert to the tobacco
industry.
                             The Attorneys GeneralsD, lawsuits would be
legislatively settled in return
                             for these public health concessions, with the
payment of a substantial
                             sum of money to the states to reimburse them
for the tobacco-related
                             costs they have incurred. Funding provided to
the states would be
                             sufficient to extend health insurance to
uninsured children consistent with
                             proposals recently debated in Congress by
Senators Hatch and Kennedy.
                             Class action lawsuits also will be
legislatively settled in return for these
                             public health concessions, and future class
action lawsuits based on past
                             conduct of the tobacco companies will not be
allowed.
                             The tobacco industry will drop all pending
lawsuits against the FDA, EPA
                             and FTC.
                             The Tobacco Institute and the Council for
Tobacco Research will be
                             disbanded.
