    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Elizabeth Drye ( CN=Elizabeth Drye/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

    CREATION DATE/TIME:20-JUN-1997 09:31:58.00

    SUBJECT:     first draft of post-settlement talking points/Q&A

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP    @   EOP [ OPD 1
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/Ou=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    These are measured and purposefully stay away from praising the industry
    in any way. Elena -- thoughts on punitives Q? I'm in this MADD Board of
    Directors briefing from 10-11 but can be paged.

    Talking Points and Q&A on Tobacco Settlement Talks
    DRAFT -- POST SETTLEMENT

    o       The settlement talks among the state attorneys general, public
    health representatives, private lawyers, and the tobacco industry have
    produced a far-reaching agreement. The parties have worked hard, and I
    especially want to commend the attorneys general and public health
    representatives for their efforts.

    o       My Administration will now begin a careful and thorough review of
    the proposal, and will seek the advice of the public health community,
    members of Congress and others. Congress will need to write legislation
    to implement the agreement and provide a thorough public review.

    o       As I have said previously, our focus will stay squarely on protecting
    the public health and especially our children. My job is to make sure
    that the settlement is a good deal for the American people. The hard,
    investigative work of the Food and Drug Administration and the tough
    regulations we've begun to put in place have helped bring the industry to
    the table. We're going to proceed with the same intense focus on the
    public health.

    Q.         Did the Administration help close the deal?

    A.      No. My staff monitored the talks closely so that we would be
    in a position to evaluate and respond to any possible settlement.

    Q.         How will you proceed?

    A.      White House and Agency staff expect to spend the next couple of
    weeks analyzing the details of the agreement, and consulting with the
    public health community and others.

    Q.         How will the review work and how long will it take?

    A.      A number of the Federal agencies have a role in tobacco policy,
    so the review will be coordinated out of the White House.  The review will
    take as long as necessary to conduct a careful analysis, but we will seek
    to work promptly and expeditiously.

    Q.         Dr. Kessler and Dr. Koop have asked in a letter to you that you


 give them 30 days to complete their own review before signing off on
 anything.  Are you going to wait?

 A.      I intend to very closely consider the views of the public health
 community prior to rendering any judgment on the settlement, and my staff
 was in contact with members of the community during the whole course of
 the discussions.  I am not going to judge a deal before I know the views
 of the public health community, including Dr. Koop and Dr. Kessler, but it
 is premature to commit to any particular timetable.

 Q.      This deal limits punitive damages -- a key concession to the
 tobacco industry.   Won't you oppose that given your previous opposition
 to caps on punitive awards?

 A.      I am going to look at this proposal in its entirety before
 deciding whether any specific provision is acceptable. Giving this
 industry any protection against punitives is a step we should only take if
 the overall package is on balance a clear victory for the public health
 and the public interest.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 013 - FOLDER -001


[06/23/1997]


