RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-JUN-1997 16:23:04.00

SUBJECT:   VP's Family Conference: Decision for you

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
It's time to decide if you or Bill Kincaid goes to the Family Conference
with POTUS. My bottom line is that it makes more sense for you to go than
Bill, though I don't think we go wrong either way. The President will
have plenty of education advisors there -- Riley, Riley-s senior staff,
The VP's education people, and Bob Shireman from NEC.  Since there will be
some Supremen Court announcements that morning, he is more likely to need
someone who can deal with unanticipated developments there.

 Here's the relevant information:

1. Format:    POTUS speaks immediately after a roundtable discussion in
which both he and VPOTUS participate. This means that his remarks will
bear even less resemblance to his prepared text (which will be talking
points rather than full speech) than is usually the case.   I'm sure that
he will weave together much of the discussion with his remarks.
2. Announcements:    Just came from a meeting with Ann Lewis, and here is
where things stand:
1. The overall theme of POTUS remarks will be something along the lines of
"we all have to do our part"   -- with "we" including parents, educators
and the federal gov't, among others
2. At the top of his remarks POTUS will highligh budget agreement, and
urge Congress to live up to the agreement, including his higher ed tax
package.  Some particulars in this statement will depend upon legislative
developments in the next day, and we'll have to work with NEC closely on
th~s (Bob Shireman will be in Nashville if we need him)
3. There are several court decisions that might be announced that morning
and which will warrant comment (Brady, CDA).   These will make news.
4. There may be a deal tomorrow night on TV ratings; if so, this will be
in POTUS remarks as well.
5. Last Friday a suit was filed to overturn FCC decision on e-rate.
POTUS will defend his technology policy, including e-rate.
6.  POTUS will make challenges to parents and teachers to improve student
learning (very rough draft below; I'll be working on this overnight), and
release Education Department Handbook on School-Family-Community
Partnerships.

Ann did not buy the afterschool announcement tied to the juvenile bill.
I'm checking with Jose to see if he (or Rahm) wants to push harder on
this. Do you want me to push againg on this tomorrow?
She also didn't want to release the "Helping yor kid get ready for
college" guide from ED, as too soft.  I'm ok with this; it's no big deal,
and we can hold it for back to school time, a higher ed event, or ED can
always release it on its own.  It's not exactly a weighty or Presidential
volume.


