     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO]     )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:23-JUN-1997 08:46:44.00

     SUBJECT:    CLOSE HOLD MAYORS DRAFT

     TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: William P. Marshall ( cN=william P. Marshall/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]    )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Michael Waldman needs to know if the this okay with Counsel and DOJ
     -please let me know.
     ---------------------- Forwarded by Michelle Crisci/WHO/EOP on 06/23/97
     08:43 AM ---------------------------



                Jordan Tamagni
                06/20/97 08:40:06 PM

     Record Type: Record

     To: Rahm I. Emanuel/WHO/EOP, Ann F. Lewis/WHO/EOP, Mickey Ibarra/WHO/EOP,
     Gene B. Sperling/OPD/EOP
     cc: Jonathan A. Kaplan/OPD/EOP, Michelle Crisci/WHO/EOP
     Subject: CLOSE HOLD MAYORS DRAFT
                \


     Please note: this draft includes inserts regarding possible Supreme Court
     decisions.  Please do not circulate. The draft circulated through the
     Staff Secretary does not.

     Comments back to Terry Edmonds or Jordan Tamagni by 12:00pm tomorrow.
     Thanks.



     ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D91]MAIL45112337U.116 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF575043C8040000010A02010000000205000000815100000002000045B16FIF5DB07B24E16051
     0629EC4F43248893255998A319BF06C86C8DDIBA14D99C5E22828AB3F3724E0754328109E7940D
     62DD2431B7A8325DAE3B895D636309CEB858A242FC4F096BC97AADE3922EC026460D9CA298A150
     B9E78AOD803BF9E7026CDE26FCB6B796057286BDEE35092C9593Fl8F5C4245E2F16A5EF6E8783C
     C983BB6695DACC02FD18BC2B6493843097A7035B12FE586EE938E9A67874024C47EE982DF6DE46
     FF95670DA155F942720BE19D33D935AD644B2210540733A865A04249CA141356F655682C2E6EOC
     DDD7389A81B9BE4B4578DF92A283799DIE82A9D77F21D7C27386CE807721B5904C9548B05E78EO



     Draft 6/20/97 9:00pm

                                 PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
                                  U.S. CONFERENCE OF MAYORS
                                  SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA
                                          JUNE 23, 1997

              Acknowledgments: Sec. Cuomo; Sec. Herman; Sec. Slater; Sen. Barbara Boxer; Rep.
      Zoe Lofgren; Mayor Daley; Mayor Willie Brown; Mayor Helmke; Tom Cochran. Announce
      intention to nominate Sol Ramierez, mayor of Laredo Texas, to be Assistant Secretary of HUD
     for Community Planning and Development.

              I want to congratulate the Conference of Mayors for choosing San Francisco as the site
     for this year's meeting. It isn't very hard to see why year after year, San Francisco is one of the
     world's most visited cities. From the Moscone Center to 3Com Park, from Twin Peaks to Coit
     Tower, from its thriving waterfront to its stunning coastline, San Francisco is a great city in a
     nation of great cities.

             I want to talk to you today about the vitally important role all of our nation's cities will
     playas we prepare our country to meet the challenges ofthe 21st century. Throughout our
     history, cities have been the gateway to hope and opportunity for millions of Americans, and for
     millions of immigrants who came to our shores in search of a better life. Our cities have always
     been symbols of the economic progress and cultural achievement that has made America the
     envy of the world.

            Today, our cities are still centers of commerce and culture, science and technology,
     education and the arts. New waves of immigrants are starting new businesses and bringing new
     energy to many of our largest urban centers. Our cities and the suburbs around them are home to
     almost 80% of the American people, and they contain close to 85% of America's jobs.

            Now, at the dawn of a new century, we must make sure that our cities are the engines of
     opportunity and progress that will drive our success in the global economy of the 21 st century.
     And the key is empowerment -- giving cities and citizens the tools they need to succeed.

              [Over the last four-and-a-halfyears, we have worked together to revitalize our cities.
     One of the things we should be most proud of is the progress we have made in turning back the
     tide of violent crime that threatens too many of our cities. Our strategy of more police, tougher
     punishments and fewer guns in the hands of criminals is making a difference. Last year we saw
     the largest drop in violent crime in more than three-and-a-half decades. Murders dropped a
     stunning II percent in 1996. Cities all around the country, including San Francisco, are
     experiencing dramatic declines in their violent crime rates.]

           [The Brady Bill has kept 250,000 felons, fugitives and stalkers from purchasing
     handguns. You stood with us to pass this important legislation, and it has been critical to our



                                                                         Automated Records Management System
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion
deeply disappointed by the Court's decision. But let me be clear: Today's ruling should not
mean an end to the background checks that are helping keep our streets safe. Twenty-seven
states, including California, now conduct background checks as a matter of state law and will
continue to do so. Today, I have instructed Attorney General Reno and Treasury Secretary
Rubin to make sure police departments across the country know that they can keep conducting
Brady background checks on a voluntary basis.

        [Our goal is clear: No background check, no handgun. And I will continue to do
everything in my power to keep handguns out of the hands of criminals and to keep our cities
safe.}

       OR [The Brady Bill has kept 250, 000 felons and fugitives from purchasing handguns.
You stood with us to pass this important legislation, and it has been critical to our success. This
morning, the Supreme Court upheld the Brady Law. This is a victory for all Americans.}

        Safe streets are only one part of our strategy to make our cities thrive. We must create
the economic conditions that will bring business, jobs and people back to our cities ... and keep
them there. Our economic strategy is simple: reduce the deficit, invest in our people, and open
the world to trade. It is designed to stimulate private sector growth, to help America move from
the industrial age to the information age, and to make sure all of our people could benefit from
the new opportunities of the new economy.

        Today, our economy is the strongest in a generation -- and for the first time, the effects of
this economic revival are being felt all around the country. Unemployment has dropped below
5% for the first time in 24 years, with the largest decline in income equality since the 1960s. We
have cut the deficit by 77% -- from $290 billion the day I took office to less than $70 billion this
year. And now, with the balanced budget agreement I have reached with the leaders of
Congress, the deficit is heading to zero.

        [The Supreme Court's decision today to strike down the line item veto deprives the
President of a valuable tool to help keep the budget in balance and ensure that we put our public
funds to the best possible uses. It will make the job of balancing the budget more difficult, but it
will not deter usfrom that goal).

        OR [The Supreme Court's decision today to uphold the line item veto gives the President
a valuable tool to help keep the budget in balance and ensure that we put our public funds to the
best possible uses. It is a victory for all Americans.}

        America's cities reflect the progress we have made in the last four and a half years.
Today, Secretary Cuomo has released a "Report on the State of American Cities" that documents
the real progress our cities have made, but also identifies the real problems that we still face. It
lays out a comprehensive urban agenda that will empower citizens and local governments to meet
their challenges and bring our cities into the 21st century, stronger than ever.


                                                 2
people to work with us as they solve thei~ own problems. This strategy is working. As
Secretary Cuomo's report makes clear, after decades of decline, the last four years have shown
the first real economic resurgence in our cities since World War II. In America's 50 largest
cities, the unemployment rate has been cut by nearly a third. Because of the disciplined
leadership of so many people in this room, the fiscal health of our cities is stronger than it has
been in decades. More downtowns are coming back to life, with sports and tourism and local
business all booming.

        There is much to be proud of -- but there is much to do. America has produced more
than 12 million jobs in the last 4-1/2 years, but more and more of those jobs are being created in
the suburbs, not in our cities. At the same time, hundreds of thousands of people in our cities
are struggling to move from welfare to work. And our cities are still a gateway to opportunity
for new waves of immigrants all in need of jobs. Meanwhile, the migration of middle class
families of all races from cities to suburbs continues.

        The first thing we must do to make sure that our cities can overcome these problems is
give them the tools to attract businesses and jobs. We have already created 105 Empowerment
Zones and Enterprise Communities -- providing a powerful combination of tax incentives and
freedom from government red tape -- to leverage the power of the private sector, and create jobs
and opportunity where both have been absent for too long.

        Our Community Development Financial Institutions initiative is infusing our cities with
the capital that entrepreneurs needto start new businesses, expand existing ones, and create jobs.
 And our Brownfields National Partnership is creating jobs and attracting new businesses by
cleaning up contaminated sites that were the shame of our cities and converting them into
productive assets.

         The historic bipartisan budget agreement we reached with Congress last month expanded
Empowerment Zones, Enterprise Communities, and Brownfields tax incentives. These
initiatives are essential to the health of our cities. But the tax plans put together by the House
and Senate fail to live up to this deal. That is wrong. I want every one of you to make it clear
to the people who represent you in Congress that you expect them to honor this agreement and
their commitment to the health of your cities.

        The second thing we must do to revitalize our cities is create jobs for the one million
people who we have pledged to move from welfare to work by the year 2000. That is why I
fought for a $3 billion welfare-to-workjob challenge fund in our balanced budget that
specifically gives cities the resources they need to help get and keep good jobs. I also fought for
a new welfare-to-work tax credit that will give private employers extra incentive to hire
long-term welfare recipients.

      I am very pleased that working together with Members of Congress of both parties, we
have made sure that funds will go directly to cities and other communities where so many


                                                 3




    welfare recipients live. I am also pleased that we reached bipartisan agreement to restore
    benefits to legal immigrants who work hard and play by the rules, and I strongly urge the
    Congress not to renege on any part of this deal.

            The third thing we must do is to make our cities places that anyone would be proud to call
    home ... and make it easier for people to buy homes in our cities. Homeownership is one of the
    best ways to empower local residents, to give them a stake in the community, and to increase the
    bonds that tie people together. So far, our successful economic strategy has helped 2.5 million
    people across America to become new homeowners. But, not enough of these homes are in our
    cities.

            In the last four years, we have reduced FHA mortgage premiums three times to lower the
    average closing cost on a new home by $1,200. Today, I am happy to announce that we are
    cutting the premium by an additional $200 for families who buy in our central cities, bringing the
    total reduction in closing costs to $1400. This could make all the difference to a family
    struggling to escape the spiral of renting.

            And there is even more that we can do to promote homeownership in our cities. Many of
    the hard-working families who receive Section 8 rental assistance are ready to assume the
    responsibility of owning their own homes ... and they deserve a chance to do it. There is now
    bipartisan legislation before Congress to allow many of those families to use their Section 8
    vouchers to help buy a home. And today, I am happy to announce that Freddie Mac will help
    us launch this important initiative by financing up to 2,000 of these mortgages.

            Fourth, we have made remarkable progress in reducing crime and restoring peace and
    security to our cities. [IF NO BRADY ANNOUNCEMENT: Our strategy of more police, tougher
    punishments and fewer guns in the hands of criminals is making a difference. Last year we saw
    the largest drop in violent crime in more than three-and-a-half decades. Murders dropped a
    stunning 11 percent in 1996. Cities all around the country, including San Francisco, are
    experiencing dramatic declines in their violent crime rates).

            You and I know that community policing and our efforts to fight violent youth gangs have
    been critical to our success. That is why we are moving forward toward our goal of putting
     100,000 new police officers on our streets. And that is why I will continue to push for real
    juvenile crime legislation that guarantees more prosecutors, probation officers, and afterschool
    programs for at-risk young people.

            The "every day" presence of police on our streets has made a huge difference to the safety
    of our communities. We can increase that presence even more by encouraging police to live in
    the communities they serve. Today, I am pleased to announce that we are taking steps to do just
    that. In the coming year, we will offer law enforcement officers in designated areas a 50%
    discount on 2,000 HUD-owned single family homes in our central cities. More police on the
    beat have made our neighborhoods feel like home again -- just think what it will be like when
    more of our police make our neighborhoods their homes.


                                                    4
children -- no matter where they live -- get the best education in the world. That is why I made
education my number one priority. But one of the main reasons families leave our cities is
because they don't believe that city schools are doing a good enough job. We have challenged
all of our schools to set and meet high national standards -- and our cities' schools are no
exception. Each of us has an obligation to help our children reach those standards. That is
why cities must have the flexibility to close down schools that aren't meeting those standards.

        I am pleased that Mayor Daley and the city of Chicago has moved aggressively to stop
social promotion once and for all, and to take over schools that are failing. I am strong
supporter of public education, but I do not think that we must defend or accept schools that aren't
making the grade. We need to tum them around, not just in Chicago, but all over the country.

        Finally, we must do more to deal with the scourge of AIDS that has gripped so many of
our cities. Last month I issued a call to find an AIDS vaccine within the next ten years.
Yesterday in Denver, the other leading industrialized nations pledged to help us meet that
challenge. Last week, the Department of Health and Human Services announced comprehensive
new guidelines to help people with HIV and AIDS get the most up-to-date information on the
dramatic new drug combination therapies -- including protease inhibitors -- that are helping to
prolong lives. People with HIV and AIDS deserve the best possible care; this guide will help
them get it.

        Today I have outlined our urban agenda for the 21 st Century, and I look forward to
working with you in the coming years to put it into action. For 4-112 years, the Department of
Housing and Urban. Development has been your partner as we have worked to make our cities
better and brighter than they have ever been. But it wasn't always that way. Before I took
office, HUD was a symbol for overblown democracy -- a poster child for the failed policies that
sapped our cities of their vitality. We changed all that -- and we are not through yet.

        Six months ago, I directed Secretary Cuomo to undertake a complete overhaul of HUD
and transform it into an engine of empowerment. I am proud to say that he has developed a plan
to make HUD smaller, leaner, and better. And I know that he will make the new HUD the best
partner you have ever had.

       Economic empowerment, jobs for all who can work, citizen involvement in fighting
crime, good schools, homeownership -- these are the best ways to create equal opportunity
and a sense of community. And they are key to our mission of creating One America in
the 21st century.

       America's cities are clearly at a crossroads. If we do nothing, they will surely fall
into decline and despair. But if we act with vision and courage, we will make them
flourishing examples of America at its best. In the 21st century we know that America will
be more multiracial, multicultural and multireligious than at any time in our past. This



                                                5


    growing diversity is already taking root in our cities. And it must be a source of strength,
    not division.
            [We must do everything we can to promote greater tolerance andfreedom, including
    religious freedom. That is why I am pleased by today's Supreme Court decision upholding the
    Religious Freedom Restoration Act. Throughout our history, men and women have come to
    this nation to escape religious persecution and secure the precious freedom to choose whether
    and how to worship. This legislation assures that the religious liberties of all Americans will
    be strongly protected.] or...

            [We must do everything we can to promote greater tolerance andfreedom, including
    religious freedom. Today the United States Supreme Court held part of the Religious Freedom
    Restoration Act unconstitutional. We will study that opinion closely. Religious freedom is
    central to the American system of liberty. Throughout our history, men and women have
    come to this nation to secure the precious freedom to choose whether and how to worship.
    This legislation reaffirmed that right. Although we are disappointed by the Supreme Court's
    ruling, we will continue to work to protect religious liberty to thefullest extent the
    Constitution allows.]

           In this new era, our cities must be the wellspring of a renewed sense of citizenship
    that unites us across all our differences. We must define what it means to be an American
    by the duty we owe one another, and by the values and dreams we all share. It would be a
    terrible mistake for any group of Americans -- one city, one neighborhood, even one block
    -- to build walls of division, separating neighbor from neighbor.

           It will take all of us, working side by side, to build the cities of our future.
    America's great mayors and great cities will lead the way. You are already showing us in
    so many ways how to live and work and grow together. You are sending a message to all
    Americans -- and to all the world -- that America's cities are on the rise, united in their
    diversity, providing opportunity for all of their people, and poised for greatness in the 21st
    Century.

           Thank you and God bless you all.




                                                   6


