RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-JUN-1997 11:25:36.00

SUBJECT:   Update from Scheduling/Message Meeting

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Don and Sylvia requested from DPC a memo listing our top 3 recommendations
for events in July and August on education, welfare, tobacco, and race.
(Environment and Budget were delegated to others.)

Specifically, on education they want recommendations for standards and
back to school events.  For welfare, they want suggestions for the welfare
anniversary. Right now we have requests in for the Eli Segal event and
DLC Conference. We can add a request on the announcement of new
figures/HHS report to release.

The President's vacation is now the last week in August and the first two
weeks in September.   (Note: He will be working the day of the Welfare
Anniversary on the 22nd, so we need to propose what he should do that
day. Ann believes our big event still needs to be a week earlier.)

Today's COS Scheduling meeting at 3pm will discuss possible events for
July.  The critical two weeks are when the President gets back from Spain
- July 14-July 25.  They want a great message event for July 14th b/c it's
his first week back, and it's the second week of the Thompson hearings.

In addition to any proactive recommendations, the event proposals that
will be brought up at today's meeting are:
        Education PSA Launch Cambden Yards - July 2
        NAACP Convention July 17 (Philadelphia)
        Conference of Black Journalists (Chicago)
        National Assoc. of Elementary School Principals Conf. on July 25th
(D.C. )
        Immunization Data - July
        Release Genome Action Plan w/ National Academy of Sciences - July
        Internet Initiatives in the wake of the Communications Decency Act
decision.

Also at today's 3pm meeting they will be looking for suggestions for the
Radio Address for July 4th weekend. Although the President departs the
next day for Madrid, Don was concerned about having a foreign policy
message on Independence Day and he talked about how perfect the food
safety announcement was last year.  Lockhart suggested seat belts or air
bags.

I would be glad touch base with each "team"  to develop a list of event
ideas for those two weeks in July or for the long term memo if you would
like. Please let me know.


