RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-JUN-1997 22:13:26.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The Vice President is planning to make four announcements:

 Findings from a parent survey sponsored by the Department of Education,
the Family Involvement Partnership for Education, and GTE. Key findings:

         88% of parents of parents think schools treat them as important
partners in helping children learn, and 86% say teachers generally listen
to what they have to say.

         However, close to 80% of parents believe they and their teachers
should learn more about how parents can be more effectively involved in
their childrenD,s education.

         Parents give higher marks to elementary schools than middle
schools on several measures of parental involvement.  For example, 62% of
elementary school parents said schools do a very job explaining to parents
what students should know and be able to do in each subject, versus 45% in
middle school.

 Establishment of a new partnership to train teachers on parental
involvement, with a kickoff teleconference on effective use of technology
set for this fall.

         Founders include members of the Department of Education-sponsored
Family Involvement Partnership for Education and four leading schools of
education: Vanderbilt University, University of Minnesota, Bank Street
College (NY), and Columbia Teachers College.

         In addition to the fall conference, the partnership expects to
produce and disseminate a guidebook on effective practices, sponsor new
research, and organize follow-up meetings and activities to allow teachers
to share ideas.

 Creation of a privately financed school reform fund that would provide
grants to support good school leadership and innovation among three
different categories of public schools: D&start-up,D8 D&speed-up,D8 and
D&turnaroundD8 schools.

         The fund is being established as a 501(c) (3) based in Silicon
Valley, headed by John Doerr and overseen by a board of private sector and
education leaders.

         The VP will have no formal role in the fund,   although it stems
from his challenge and vision of school improvement.

         The VP has agreed to be the honorary co-chair of a kickoff
conference to be held in the next several months.


 Announcement (and demonstration) of a new technology tool _.- an
D&electronic dashboardD8 -- that parents could access via computer to get
important information about their childD,s school (school standards,
events, homework assignments, etc.) and their childD,s performance
(homework completion, attendance, etc.).  The dashboard will also help
parents communicate with other parents, as well as with teachers.

         Student privacy will be scrupulously protected using cutting edge
technology, as well as passwords for parents.

         Developers of this new technology include Netscape and Marimba.
MarimbaO,s CEO is expected to assist with the demo.

         An early version of the dashboard will be used to gather input on
whatD,s useful, with a more complete version made widely available later.

         The VP will note that there are additional technology tools in
existence to help parents, students and teachers work together.


