 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP 1

 CREATION DATE/TIME:25-JUN-1997 14:19:39.00

 SUBJECT:   Some key tobacco stories not in WH clips

 TO: Elizabeth Drye ( CN=Elizabeth Drye/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP   [ OPD 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 I have attached 4 stories I thought you should see.


 Taxpayers Might Pay $147B Toward Tobacco Industry Deal
 001                                                    Newsday

 Tobacco Institute Workers Confident of Reincarnation
 + 027                                           Los Angeles Times

 Tobacco Deal's Mountain of Cash Has Tetons Buzzing
 028                                          Los Angeles Times

 Senate review of tobacco case may take until '98
 051                                      Winston-Salem Journal


 ------------------------------<001>------------------------------

 Taxpayers Might Pay $147B Toward Tobacco Industry Deal

 Newsday
 Wednesday, June 25, 1997
 By Harry Berkowitz. STAFF WRITER

 Taxpayers could end up subsidizing as much as $147 billion of the
 tobacco industry's landmark deal, tax experts said yesterday.

 Under a clause in the deal - which requires the industry to pay
 $368.5 billion over 25 years - the industry's entire cost would
 be counted as "normal and necessary" business expenses rather
 than a penalty or fine.

 That means, if Congress does not change the provision, the entire
 amount would be tax deductible, at the rate of about 40 percent
 between state and federal taxes, the experts said.

 "If it were not in there, the argument could be made that the
 entire thing is a fine or penalty, which would be nondeductible,"
 said Bill Fleming, an executive and tax expert with Coopers &


 Lybrand in Hartford. If it is considered deductible, however, the
 cigarette companies would save $147 billion of the deal's cost.

 At the very least, the Internal Revenue Service would likely
 argue that a $60-billion portion of the deal that won the
 industry protection from punitive damages in lawsuits should
 count as a penalty, Fleming said. If it is considered normal
 business expenses instead, the companies save $24 billion.

 "If the money is going to be paid by Uncle Sam, the incentive is
 much smaller not to engage in the same misconduct in the future,"
 said Richard Daynard, head of the Tobacco Products Liability
 Project at Northeastern University in Boston.

 Steve Berman, a Seattle lawyer representing a dozen of the states
 that sued the industry to recover smoking-related Medicaid costs
 and agreed to the settlement, said the industry insisted that the
 clause be in the deal and would not give it up.

 "They made a big stink," Berman said, adding that the $60 billion
 should count as punitive damages, which would make it a
 nondeductible penalty if not for the clause.

 Negotiators also agreed to let the tobacco companies seek a
 rebate if they pay a penalty for falling short of goals to cut
 teen smoking. Those goals include a 60-percent cut over 10 years.
 The industry could face penalties of up to $2 billion a year for
 falling short. But if the industry shows that it did its best and
 the failure was beyond its control, it can get back 75 percent of
 that penalty.

 Critics say the potential penalty is too small and the possible
 rebate is outrageous.

 "The fines are not set high enough to provide a real disincentive
 to addicting kids," said Stanton Glantz, a critic of the deal and
 professor of medicine at the University of California at San
 Francisco.

 Lance Morgan, a public relations consultant hired by the tobacco
 companies, said the rebate kicks in only if the industry proves
 its case.

 "The burden of proof is on the industry in order to obtain that
 rebate," he said.

In another provision that's come under fire, if revenue from
adult smokers declines enough, the companies would pay lower
amounts into the settlement fund.

"It's like saying to a murderer if you don't murder as many
people when you get out of jail, we will cut your sentence," said
Joe Cherner, president of Smoke-Free Educational Services, an
anti-smoking group in Manhattan.

Negotiators, however, said the provision makes sense. "It gives
them an incentive to lower sales," said John Coale, a
class-action lawyer involved in the talks.


 ------------------------------<027>------------------------------
 Tobacco Institute Workers Confident of Reincarnation

 LoS Angeles Times
 Tuesday, June 24, 1997
 By MARLENE CIMONS, Times Staff Writer

 WASHINGTON--Although the landmark tobacco settlement announced
 last week requires the industry to abolish its controversial
 lobbying arm--the Tobacco Institute--the mood at the institute's
 office here on Monday was anything but grim.

 "All we're going to do is change the name on the door," said
 institute vice president Walker Merryman, noting that the
 deal--with some stipulations--allows the formation of a new
 industry trade association after the old one has been dismantled.

 Merryman added: "We're going to continue to do what we've always
 done. I don't really understand why they're going through this
 exercise, frankly."

 Like other elements of the settlement, the proposed elimination
 of the institute--and its sister scientific organization, the
 Council for Tobacco Research U.S.A.--may not be all it initially
 appeared.

 At least that's what folks at the institute think.

 "No one around here is updating their resumes and overloading the
 copiers," Merryman said. "And my phone hasn't been ringing off
 the hook over this."

 Both organizations, which are among the defendants in the
 numerous lawsuits filed against tobacco companies that would be
 settled in return for $368.5 billion under the deal announced
 Friday, have been regarded as key players in creating the
 industry's public image.

 The settlement, which must be approved by Congress and the White
 House, calls for tobacco-product manufacturers to disband both
 the institute and the council within 90 days of the effective
 date of the deal.

 But the deal goes on to say that the companies can form or
 participate in any new industry trade group, as long as for 10
 years at least one-fifth of the new association's board of
 directors "shall be other than a current or former director,
 officer or employee of any association member or affiliated
 company. "

 Copyright Los Angeles Times



 ------------------------------<028>------------------------------
 Tobacco Deal's Mountain of Cash Has Tetons Buzzing

 Law: Gathering of attorneys general is filled with talk of


 dividing up $300 billion. But criticism of accord mounts.

 Los Angeles Times
 Tuesday, June 24, 1997
 By MYRON LEVIN, HENRY WEINSTEIN, Times Staff Writers

 JACKSON HOLE, Wyo.--Against the awesome profile of the Tetons,
 one of America's natural treasures, attorneys general from all 50
 states Monday began considering how to divvy up an extraordinary
 treasure of a different kind: the roughly $300 billion that
 cigarette makers would pay in legal settlements to the states
 under the sweeping tobacco accord.

 The annual meeting of the National Assn. of Attorneys General,
 being held at a lodge on the shores of Jackson Lake in Grand
 Teton National Park, was scheduled long before last week's
 announcement that a group of state attorneys general had settled
 litigation against the tobacco industry for $368.5 billion.

 But the meeting here was abuzz with talk about how much lucre
 each state would get if the deal negotiated with the industry is
 approved by Congress and the White House. It appears that under
 almost any plan for dividing the loot, California would get
 roughly a half billion dollars or more annually through the life
 of the agreement, which initially covers 25 years.

 Meanwhile, there was mounting criticism of the deal Monday as the
 68-page settlement document began to receive thorough scrutiny
 from congressional and White House aides and public health
 advocates.

Among the troubling details they cited:

 * The industry would be able to write off its payments, meaning
 that the taxpayers would bear about $110 billion to $120 billion
 of the costs of the settlement.

* Industry obligations could be reduced by as much as 1% for each
percentage point drop in annual tobacco sales, creating an
anomalous situation where the size of the settlement pot is at
least partially dependent on millions of people continuing to
smoke.

* The industry's obligation to pay penalties if youth smoking
doesn't go down in five years could be dramatically reduced if
the cigarette makers can convince the Food and Drug
Administration that they have utilized all "reasonably available
measures. II

* A "passthr
ough" provision that may mean the industry's payments
would all be financed out of raising prices, not out of profits.

These criticisms come on top of those already leveled by former
Food and Drug Administration Commissioner David A. Kessler that
provisions of the deal will make it' very difficult for the agency
to regulate nicotine content.

On Monday, a White House aide said the FDA provisions will be
examined by the first of eight working groups formed by President


Clinton to review the settlement. The president has told the
working groups to complete their critique within 30 days, White
House spokesman Barry Toiv said at a briefing.

The other working groups are to study: how the money will be
spent, the impact of the settlement on the industry, workplace
smoking, smoking-cessation programs, the impact on litigation and
the. industry's obligations to disclose internal documents,
international issues and how the agreement would be implemented.

The massive settlement, in addition to being the costliest to an
industry in history, calls for the tobacco companies to submit to
FDA jurisdiction; eliminate their most potent advertising
symbols; fund a nationwide, government-run anti-smoking campaign;
and pay billions for smoking-cessation programs.

In return, the industry secured significant protections against
future legal liability. Among them are a $5-billion cap on the
amount of damages it would have to pay in any given year, a ban
on class-action lawsuits, a ban on Medicaid-recoupment suits and
a prohibition on punitive damages in any of the individual
product-liability cases now pending in courts around the country.

On the first day of the meeting in the Tetons, reporters flocked
around Mississippi Atty. Gen. Mike Moore, who filed the first
state lawsuit against the industry in May 1994, persuaded other
states to join in to make the attack a mass movement and then
spearheaded the negotiations that led to the settlement ..

Bristling at comments by some critics, who said the industry
yielded too little for the liability protections it got, Moore
remarked: "To the naysayers, I say, 'OK, guys, you do it. This
country has been waiting 50 years for you to do it.' "

Some skeptics, led by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), contend
that the settlement fund is not nearly large enough because it
fails to include money to reimburse the federal government for
Medicare and veterans smoking-related health costs. However,
Moore recalled that he tried and failed to persuade Atty. Gen.
Janet Reno to file a lawsuit similar to his.

"Everybody thought I was crazy," when the suit was filed,. Moore
recalled. "We've got the tobacco companies right around the neck,
and we're providing the leverage for Congress and the White House
to make this work," he said.

Many of the att·orneys general, who traded suits for chambray
shirts and windbreakers here, voiced at least qualified support
for the deal. Even Minnesota Atty. Gen. Hubert H. Humphrey III,
who on Friday ridiculed the deal as "woefully inadequate,"
tempered his remarks Monday, saying it "moved in the directions I
wanted" though it still needed to be beefed up by Congress.

The attorney general committee charged with coming up with an
allocation formula for the $6 billion to $15 billion per year
that the states would get is headed by Indiana Atty. Gen. Jeffrey
A. Modisett, who hails from--appropriately enough--Windfall, Ind.
He said the panel is seeking "the most fair, the most objective
variables to rely upon in coming up with a distribution formula."


He said it was likely that total health expenses for
tobacco-related illnesses--both Medicaid and private costs--would
be relied on heavily as the key factor in distributing funds.

In California's lawsuit against the tobacco companies, filed
three weeks ago, Atty. Gen. Dan Lungren claimed the state pays
$433 million a year in Medicaid funds to care for poor people
suffering from smoking-related illness.

"We expect to get at least our tobacco-related medical costs ..
and then some," said Tracey Buck-Walsh, a special assistant on
Lungren's staf f .

Although all 50 states would be   compensated--even the 10 that
didn't sue--still unresolved is   what share of the pot will go to
localities that sued, including   Los Angeles County and San
Francisco, both of which sued a   year ago, before 30 of the 40
states filed their cases.

"We were the first locality in the nation to sue, but we've been
frozen out of discussions so far about any allocations," said San
Francisco Deputy City Atty. Elizabeth LaPorte.

Los Angeles County Supervisor Zev Yaroslavsky expressed similar
concerns, saying the county's annual costs for treating indigent
smokers carne to $370 million. Yaroslavsky also stressed that he
would thoroughly review the agreement to see if it met public
health goals. He said he would take his lead from his political
ally, longtime tobacco foe Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Los Angeles)

On Monday, Waxman's chief aide, Phil Schiliro, said he was
troubled by a number of the settlement provisions, echoing
Kessler's concerns about how the settlement could make it very
difficult for the FDA to reduce nicotine levels in cigarettes.

One feature of the settlement that has received little public
attention is its prohibition on smoking at most work sites and
public places with the goal of protecting millions of people from
secondhand smoke. Efforts by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration and some congressmen, including Waxman, to
prohibit public smoking on a nationwide basis have languished in
recent years because of tobacco industry opposition.

Nonetheless, Schiliro said he was disturbed by a provision
exempting bars, casinos, bingo parlors and restaurants from the
agreement's landmark restrictions on secondhand smoke.

'You're exempting a class of employees from protection even
though the federal government recognizes secondhand smoke as a
carcinogen," Schiliro said. "At the same time, the settlement
takes away the ability of these individuals to file a
class-action suit against the industry in the future."

Levin reported from Jackson Hole and Weinstein from Los Angeles.

Copyright Los Angeles Times



------------------------------<051>------------------------------



 Senate. review of tobacco case may take until '98

 Winston-Salem Journal
 Wednesday, June 25, 1997
 BLOOMBERG NEWS

 WASHINGTON

 Orrin Hatch, the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee,
 moved quickly yesterday to begin a review of the tobacco
 settlement, though he said that it will probably take until next
 year for Congress to finish work on the agreement.

 Hatch scheduled a hearing for Thursday to hear from participants
 in the talks, including Attorney General Michael Moore of
 Mississippi, from tobacco company executives, and from Matt
 Myers, the only representative of a public health group to
 participate in the negotiations.

 Hatch said that his one day hearing "will help Congress and the
 public"  find out more about the accord, which would redefine how
 tobacco is marketed and regulated in the United States,and
 provide billions of dollars in compensation to states for
 smoking-related health costs. "This will be the start, hearing
 number one," Hatch said. "There will be many, many more"     when
 Congress returns next month from its Fourth of July recess .·

 Hatch agreed with an assessment voiced yesterday by wendell Ford
 of Kentucky, the Senate Democratic whip, that Congress will need
 until next year to complete its review and enact legislation. " I
 think it will take until next year,"  Hatch said. " I doubt we
 can get to it this year."

 Hatch said he hasn't yet read the entire accord, which was
 announced Friday, but likes a number of elements, such as $50
 billion from the tobacco industry to expand health-care coverage
 for children. Overall, Hatch called the accord' 'a step in the
 right direction. ' ,

 "We can't solve everyone's problems surrounding this issue in
 one bill, " he said. "But by moving in this direction -- the
 rest of the world tends to follow the lead of the United States
 -- I think it is going to ultimately clear up some of those
 criticisms that have naturally been raised. ' ,

 Hatch said he believes that the agreement is fixable and deals
 with a number of fronts. He said he doesn't oppose any specific
 section, but needs to study it further. "As of right now, it is
 an intriguing, interesting set of propositions that certainly
 deserve to be looked at carefully, " he said.

 Although Hatch wanted to quickly hold a hearing on the tobacco
 settlement, John McCain, R-Ariz., the chairman of the Senate
 Commerce Committee, said that he wants to wait a while.

 "I'd like to see how it sorts out before we hold a hearing,"
 said McCain, noting that the White House has just begun a
 monthlong review of its own.


Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Senate Democratic leader, named
a task force yesterday to examine the tobacco deal and make
recommendations to Senate Democrats. " I t is going to require a
lot of careful analysis,"  Daschle said.

 (c) 1997, Piedmont Publishing Co. Inc.


