RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN;Thomas L. Freedman/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-JUN-1997 11:11:42.00

SUBJECT:   Ideas

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Community prosecutors:   A crucial next step in community policing,
already in many cities around the country-- moving proseuctors into the
community where they can see problems first hand.  There may be money in
DOJ for encouraging this experimentation or the President could compliment
efforts going begun by Eric Holder here in DC, or in Howard County MD., or
in Boston.

Wilderness Designations:  The President last Earth Day endorsed an idea
supported by many previous Administrations (Democrat and Republican) to
further protect 17 vital areas in national parks from further
development. The legislation is ready to go, awaiting action by the
Administration, and the appointment of an NPS director .

. American Discovery Trails: A proposal to create a national trail, linking
  trails across the country, to enable hikers to go across the entire United
  States.  Supported by the National Park Service and relying greatly on
  on-going efforts by private, volunteer groups.

National Sexual Assualt Hotline: Modeled after our very succesful
domestic violence hotline, this 800 number would gaurantee universal
access to immediate counseling and referral services for women who are
victims of sexual assault.  the legislation is a high priority for the NOW
LDF and supported by groups like the National Coaltiition Against Sexual
Assault.

Gun scanners:  there is new technology develped by DOJ that allows
officers to use hand held devices to scan potential criminals for guns.
The idea for the research was originally the President's. The New York
Times scooped it two months ago.  The idea for the event is a
demonstration of the technology-- new tools in law enforcement. Here or
in Rome, New York where it was developed on a converted military base.

Heart attacks: 350,000 people a year die of heart attacks, the American
Heart Association .and the Red Cross have proposed a plan they say could
save 100,000 a year.   The proposal is for a comprehensive war on heart
attacks, encouraging training in CPR and the distribution of new
defibrillator technology to first responders like police. While we may
not endorse the whole plan, we could likely get a consensus for a
concerted attack plan by the agencies, including a significant new
multi-million dollar study of what is working in the new technology.

Underground Railroad:  The National Park Service has a plan to link our
historic underground railroad sites to form a coherent, educational
memorial for Americans to follow and understand the struggle and
cooperation of those fighting and fleeing slavery. The President could
announce this new effort.
..
