       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN;Michael Cohen/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

       CREATION DATE/TIME:26-JUN-1997 12:18:41.00

       SUBJECT:   urban education initiative

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: William R. Kincaid ( CN;william R. Kincaid/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       I need some help in better understanding the parameters of the urban
       education working group I was asked to set up, as part of the race
       initiative. specifically:

       1. What does it mean to be "part of the race initiative"? what other
       groups are there/will there be? Do we have any idea what process this
       will feed into?

       2.  I'm assuming that the primary task here is to develop and present to
       the President some policy options for dealing with urban education.
       Further, I assume that somewhere along the way we will need to think about
       events to underscore and highlight the issues and initiatives, but that
       the primary focus and driver should be the policy options. Am I right?

       3. Elena and I talked about having at least an outline of policy options
       by the end of next week.  This seems feasible (see below for my first
       cut).  I don't have a sense of a timeline beyond that.

       4. Related point:   some options are likely to cost money. (e.g., it will
       be hard to make a big deal out of an urban education initiative unless it
       contains something for school construction. How does this fit into the
       budget process, and what are the timeline implications.  How do we get a
       handle on the level of new resources, if any, that might be appropriate?

       5.  In addition to key people at the Education Department, some NEC
       representation (Bob Shireman, most likely), and OMB,  I think this working
       group should include Mickey Iberra and Maria Echeveste.  Any problems with
       this? Any additions?

       6.   Here is my initial cut at an outline of possible initiatives:

       1. What can be done with resources/programs already in place to more
       effectively support improvement of urban education?
       -- greater targeting of resources to urban areas either through regulation
       or amendments to existing legislation (e.g., focusing discretionary
       resources for charter schools and community schools on urban schools) .

           increased flexibility in use of formula funds to support local
       improvement strategies.

             targeted technical assistance, to help small number of districts use
       program funds and R&D to strengthen reforms.   This should be focused on


  reading and math standards, and could be part of ongoing effort to recruit
  cities for national testing, and help them by providing technical
  assistance, networking, etc ..

  2. Possible New Initiatives:
       Systemwide reform: starting with EDD,s proposed Urban Initiative from
  last year (which focused on standards, accountability and public school
  choice).  This could be focused more specifically on use of national
  standards in reading and math

       School Construction: either our original proposal or some revised,
  possiblys scaled down initiative

       Access to higher education: If anything new, whatever we come up with
  in response to Chakkah Fattah proposal

      Teacher Preparation and Recruitment:   HEA Title V Teacher
  Preparation/Incentives for teaching in urban/underserved areas

       Failing Schools:   Special focus on turning around failing schools in
  urban areas.


