       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN;Jose Cerda III/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1

       CREATION DATE/TIME: 26-JUN-1997 11:22:12.00

       SUBJECT:   Crime Events for the Summer

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN;Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       Elena:

       Here's mine and Shima's quickie ideas for the summer:

       1. Youth Gun Interdiction.   Soon after July, the Treasury Department will
       be ready to release a one-year report on the 17-city gun tracing
       initiative announced by the President last year. For the first time,
       these cities will have an unprecedented amount of information about the
       guns used to commit crimes in their communities. Some of the report's
       general findings include:

       -- 4 out of 10 crime guns recovered by police are from youth (17 and
       under) or juveniles (18 to 24);

       -- more than half of all crime guns are semiautomatic pistols, and more
       than 70 percent are handguns, generally;

       -- at least a quarter of the crime guns that police recover from juvenile
       and youth come from legitimate retail sales and are rapidly diverted to
       the black market; and

       -- while thousands of guns are available, crime guns are constrained to a
       relatively small number of makes and models in each city.

       We should release this report (in of the 17 cities, if possible) and
       announce an expansion of the youth gun interdiction/tracing initiative to
       another 10 cities. We are currently working with OMB to find funds for
       this purpose, and we may able to authorize the use of additional funds for
       state and local law enforcement in the juvenile crime bill. Moreover,
       this event could be used to keep pushing Congress to pass the President's
       juvenile crime legislation.

       2. COPS Report.   The Justice Department's COPS office has been working on
       a report that shows how the President's cops program has helped reduce
       crime in about 10 cities.  It's a snapshot in time of how the COPS program
       is working, and is intended to help give the Administration credit for
       continued drops in the crime rate.  We could release this report in August
       at NAPO's (National Association of Police Organizations) annual convention
       (August 8 - 13).

       3. Brady Response. Assuming the Supreme Court strikes down the portion
       of the Brady Bill requiring state and local enforcement to conduct
'; ."




           background checks, we could schedule an event (about 2 weeks from now)
           with state and local law enforcement to announce their recommendations to
           ensure that "no background check, no handgun" remains the policy in the 27
           Brady states.  Potentially, we could have the chief law enforcement
           officers of the 27 Brady states ·with their plans for continued Brady
           background checks -- as well as announce a Brady legislative fix to
           support them in their efforts.


