  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME:30-JUN-1997 17:27:07.00

  SUBJECT:   Conferee letter language on   FLSA/~isplacement


  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  Here is OMB's draft language for the Administration letter on conference.
  We think people will want it to move tomorrow, so we have to be ready with
  our comments.  Therefore, we need some guidance from you as to whether the
  attached is the right idea:




  Minimum Wage and Workfare -- The Administration applauds the Senate for
  refraining from
  modifying current law with respect to the application of the minimum wage
  and other worker
  protections for working welfare recipients under TANF.  We believe
  strongly that everyone
  who can work must work, and everyone who works should earn at least the
  minimum wage
  and receive the protections of existing employment laws -- whether or not
  they are coming
  off welfare.

  The Administration believes that working welfare recipients should have
  the same rights
  and protections as regular employees. We continue to have serious
  concerns that certain
  welfare recipients would be denied the status of employees under the House
  bill and
  thereby be deprived of worker protections. Although the House bill makes
  progress towards
  ensuring that welfare recipients in work experience and community service
  be paid the
  minimum wage, we believe the bill fails to provide an effective
  enforcement mechanism
  to ensure this happens. Also, while the House bill contains some
  protections against
  discrimination (gender, age, race, and disability) and threats to health
  and safety, we
  believe the limited grievance procedures provided in the bill are
  inadequate to ensure
  welfare recipients receive the same protections as regular employees, and
  regular
  employees receive protection against displacement.

  In addition, the Administration is concerned that the House bill weakens
  the welfare lawO,s
  strict emphasis on work by permitting states whose benefit levels cannot
.'
      Support the
      minimum wage to count education and training toward the work requirements.

      The Administration urges the Conferees to adopt the Senate position on the
      minimum
      wage, grievance procedures, and worker protections.

      Non-Displacement -- While the Administration supports the Senate
      non-displacement
      provisions which adopts worker displacement language from H.R. 1385, the
      Administration
      supports applying such protections to all welfare recipients who are
      making the transition from
      welfare to work as provided by the House.  In addition, we support
      maintaining the provision
      in the House bill that ensures nonpreemption of state non-displacement
      laws that afford
      greater protections to employees.

      We are seriously concerned the House bill weakens the protections against
      displacement
      of regular employees [Elena:  I think this is in error and I'm checking
      with OMB, since the House
      bill actually slightly strengthens TANFJ, and urge the Conferees to adopt
      the Senate
      proposal with the changes noted above.


