RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP    OPD

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-JUL-1997 14:50:43.00

SUBJECT:    here's the labor protections language again

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD J
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD J )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here's what we got from OMB yesterday. They has been eerily quiet about
this today, so we are making sure they don't send it out without hearing
from us on this.

---------------------- Forwarded by Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP on 07/01/97
02:49 PM ---------------------------



           Diana Fortuna
           06/30/97 05:26:42 PM

Record Type: Record

To: Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc: Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP
Subject: Conferee letter language on FLSA/displacement

Here is OMB's draft language for the Administration letter on conference.
We think people will want it to move tomorrow, so we have to be ready with
our comments. Therefore, we need some guidance from you as to whether the
attached is the right idea:




Minimum Wage and Workfare -- The Administration applauds the Senate for
refraining from
modifying current law with respect to the application of the minimum wage
and other worker
protections for working welfare recipients under TANF.  We believe
strongly that everyone
who can work must work, and everyone who works should earn at least the
minimum wage
and receive the protections of existing employment laws -- whether or not
they are coming
off welfare.

The Administration believes that working welfare recipients should have
the same rights
and protections as regular employees. We continue to have serious
concerns that certain
welfare recipients would be denied the status of employees under the House
bill and
thereby be deprived of worker protections. Although the House bill makes
"
             progress towards
             ensuring that welfare recipients in work experience and community service
             be paid the
             minimum wage, we believe the bill fails to provide an effective
             enforcement mechanism
             to ensure this happens. Also, while the House bill contains some
             protections against
             discrimination (gender, age, race, and disability) and threats to health
             and safety, we
             believe the limited grievance procedures provided in the bill are
             inadequate to ensure
             welfare recipients receive the same protections as regular employees, and
             regular
             employees receive protection against displacement.

            In addition, the Administration is concerned that the House bill weakens
            the welfare lawD,s
            strict emphasis on work by permitting states whose benefit levels cannot
            support the
            minimum wage to count education and training toward the work requirements.

            The Administration urges the Conferees to adopt the Senate position on the
            minimum
            wage, grievance procedures, and worker protections.

            Non-Displacement -- While the Administration supports the Senate
            non-displacement
            provisions which adopts worker displacement language from H.R. 1385, the
            Administration
            supports applying such protections to all welfare recipients who are
            making the transition from
            welfare to work as provided by the House.  In addition, we support
            maintaining the provision
            in the House bill that ensures nonpreemption of state non-displacement
            laws that afford
            greater protections to employees.

            We are seriously concerned the House bill weakens the protections against
            displacement
            of regular employees [Elena:  I think this is in error and I'm checking
            with OMB, since the House
            bill actually slightly strengthens TANFJ, and urge the Conferees to adopt
            the Senate
            proposal with the changes noted above.


