RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I     )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-JUL-1997 18:59:03.00

SUBJECT:     Houston-- we have a problem

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
We have reached what could be a huge stumbling block on the directive:   at
about 4:00pm today, Ken Schwartz at OMB informed me that they had some
concerns about what recommendations the Committee would give to the
President (i.e., tribal law enforcement needs could require $200-300
million in new funding).  Apparently, Michael Deich is concerned that we
will be locked into the funding level proposed by the Committee since it
is linked to a Presidential directive. OMB sent over some proposed
language this evening to address their concern. The key sentence reads,
"Recommendations should conform to the funding targets of the Bipartisan
budget agreement." Needless to say, Justice would have major problems
with including this sentence in the text of the directive.

I was then told later this evening that Michael Deich discussed his
concerns with Frank Raines at another meeting and Raines told him to "slow
down the process" on the directive so they could have more time to look at
the issue.

According to OMB, the timing on the directive does not need to be tied to
the subcommittee markup.  This is because the funds identified in the
reprogramming request to fund the Executive Committee is old, unspent
funding that the Approps Committee has not target ted for rescission and
does not otherwise revert back to the Treasury.

While this   may buy us some time, I am concerned that OMB's current
resistance   to a directive which merely asks DOJ/DOI to look into this
completely   legitimate problem and devise a recommendation may be thwarted
because of   their speculation on the results.

Bottom line: OMB will oppose going forward on the directive at least for
the rest of this week.  They have not ruled out that this could be done
next week.

We need to discuss where to go from here.    Thanks.


