RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-JUL-1997 11:06:24.00

SUBJECT:     McCurry on welfare yesterday

TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
         Q    Today is the deadline for the states to come up
with welfare programs. What is the White House view of the state of
play and the cooperation and --

             MR. MCCURRY: Well, the President's delighted with the
extraordinary. progress we're making towards reforming welfare as we
know it. There were many who felt at the time he signed the welfare
reform law that it would be a failure; it has, so far, been a
success. There are all but two states now who have got approved
plans for welfare reform; the final two states we expect to have
approved plans by the end of the day today. And people are moving
from welfare dependency to work; jobs are being created; training
programs are being developed. States that have enjoyed some a
surplus of funding are using that funding in many cases to help make
the transition easier by providing day care opportunities or training
opportunities or assisting with transportation needs in some cases.

             So it's hard work, but so far it's going well. The
President is satisfied with the progress and knows that we're going
to have to stay at it.

                Q       Do you really think you can declare a victory right
now --

               MR. MCCURRY:      I didn't.

             Q       when it hasn't even started?        These people
haven't been dropped yet.

             MR. MCCURRY:  I didn't.  I said that we've made progress
and it's good progress so far, and the jobs are being created and the
transition is occurring. And the President will continue to work
hard on it to make it a success.

             Q    Let me follow up, if I may. What's your view of
the various kinds of compliance that the states have come up with?

              MR. MCCURRY:  Well, each of the state proposals for how
they will implement welfare reform are worked through in discussion
with the Department of Health and Human Services, and it's been a
good process.   You might want to check further with them, but my
understand is that they've worked through a lot of issues.



             They've developed a lot of expertise on how to handle
welfare reform because of the waivers.  Remember, just about every
state one way or another had been conducting some welfare reform
experimentation, and that put federal officials in direct contact
with state welfare agencies and officials at the state level. So
there was a body of expertise that had developed already within
government at the state and federal level. And I think that's been
very conducive to making the implementation of the federal act
smoother.

             But by no means, Helen, do we declare victory at this
point.  It's going to be hard work.  We are creating jobs, especially
in the private sector for people to move from welfare situations to
work, but this will not be a snap decision.  This will be a very
ongoing and probably longstanding effort to change the culture of the
workplace and change the culture of dependency away from dependency
into work. That's going to take time.

             Q    Even though you're not declaring victory, there are
others who are declaring defeat already.

             MR. MCCURRY: There were pessimists at the time the
President signed the bill. And so far, their pessimism has not been
well-founded. The funding has gone towards projects that enhance the
opportunities available for those who are welfare-dependent. The
states have been responsive in trying to move resources to where
they're needed. The private sector has responded to the President's
challenge to create jobs specifically targeted on welfare-dependent
mothers, so we are confident we are moving in the right direction,
but we by no means suggest we're at the destination.

             Q    A related topic, since we're talking about jobs
--NAFTA -- you've got the anniversary. You have people complaining
they've lost jobs because of NAFTA.  Do you have an assessment on how
many jobs have been lost, how many

             MR. MCCURRY: We have a report that will go up to
Capitol Hill next week.   It's been late because the dog ate the
homework, I guess.   I mean, they've been working on it and the
deadline was missed.   But we expect to send a report to the Hill
early next week, and it essentially will say that there have been net
benefits that are positive for the American people because of this.

              Yes, there have been some people that have been
displaced, but on balance there have been more jobs created, the jobs
that are being created are higher-paying jobs, particularly in the
manufacturing sectors, and that if you look at the performance and
success of the U.S. economy, at least some part of the success that
we've seen is due to the commitment to free trade and to engagement
in global markets.  Without that, we wouldn't be creating the kind of
higher-paying jobs that we are creating in our economy and we
wouldn't be seeing the kind of success across the board in reducing
unemployment and creating more economic opportunity for the American
people.

             Q   What's the mechanism for people who have been
displaced who can't move having to

             MR. MCCURRY:   I think there are problems that exist.
l'

     There is trade adjustment assistance, there are Labor Department
     programs that exist to try to help train those people for
     opportunities·that do exist, but on balance, it appears to be true
     that free trade creates more economic opportunity for all those
     participating within the free trade environment.  That's been true of
     NAFTA, it's been true of the other 200 free trade agreements we've
     reached around the world that they've enhanced economic
     competitiveness for the United States, created more economic
     opportunity and it's one of the reasons why the U.s. economy is
     performing so strongly.

                  Q    Is there anything substantive about that report
     that's brought the delay, or it's just been hard to pull this
     together?

                  MR. MCCURRY: No.   My understanding is it's been a
     combination of things.  There are no surprises expected.  It will be
     pretty straightforward.  It just isn't done yet.

                  Q       Whose office is that, Mike, who generate the
     report?

                  MR. MCCURRY:  I think USTR has the lead.     It's an
     interagency report and it's overseen here by the NEC.

                  Q    Getting back to the welfare issue, you're saying
     that you're not declaring victory, but a lot -- getting back to what
     Bill said, too -- a lot of people are claiming defeat because there
     was a recent study that said over 70 percent of American businesses
     were saying no, that they would not hire welfare recipients; and
     especially there was an independent report that the Labor Secretary,
     Alexis Herman, she knew about it and she kind of commented on it, as
     well as --

                  MR. MCCURRY:  I'm not familiar with that report.    I
     think we've been very satisfied with the response we '·re getting from
     the private sector, many have stepped forward.  There's an
     independent effort within the private sector now to challenge
     business leaders to respond by hiring more welfare dependent
     individuals into job situations and that work has to continue.

                  But there are people who have never liked this bill,
     never will like this bill, will continue to criticize the President
     because he wants to reform welfare.  But the President's commitment
     is clear and his commitment includes continuing the hard work
     necessary to make welfare reform a success.

                  Q    How will you monitor that, the private sector
     effort that the President has called on? I mean, is this like a
     quarterly -- he'll talk about how many jobs --

                  MR. MCCURRY:  Well, remember, we put together a private
     sector group under Eli Segal's -- I guess through his effort and then
     they organized themselves.  They are continuing to look at what the
     commitments have been and who's being responsive and how we can
     accelerate the response in the private sector.  I don't know what --

                  Q    But does the White House have any plans to monitor
     the number of hires made?
,:
                  MR. MCCURRY: We'll continue to work with that group and
     others that gather data on this, just to see what the progress is
     going to be. And we'll continue to be after them on the subject,
     too.  I don't think an occasion goes by where the President has an
     opportunity to talk to, you know, executives in the business
     community where he doesn't implore them once again to see this as a
     challenge is worthy of very intense effort at the senior levels of
     management in corporate America.


