     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Ellen S. Seidman ( CN=Ellen S. Seidman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-JUL-1997 15:55:00.00

     SUBJECT:   Products memo

     TO: Jennifer D. Dudley ( CN=Jennifer D. Dudley/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]     )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Michael Deich ( CN=Michael Deich/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Tracey E. Thornton ( CN=Tracey E. Thornton/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]     )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Timothy J. Brennan ( CN=Timothy J. Brennan/OU=CEA/O=EOP @ EOP [ CEA]     )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD]    )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: William P. Marshall ( CN=william P. Marshall/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]       )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Steven D. Aitken ( CN=Steven D. Aitken/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ]    )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Peter G. Jacoby ( CN=Peter G. Jacoby/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Lisa M. Brown ( CN=Lisa M. Brown/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN]       )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     These are the cover memo for the products memo and the memo itself.
     Melissa (Gene's assistant) is sending the memo directly to the
     addressees. PLEASE NOTE THE TIGHT.TIMEFRAME.   I'd really appreciate your
     continued help in moving this along. You've all been great so far.
     Thanks so much.

     Ellen==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

     TEXT:
     Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D47]MAIL46338528Y.116 to ASCII,
      The following is a HEX DUMP:

     FF5750439A040000010A0201000000020500000049130000000200007BBA36A3EBA9E1041127EF
     FE68EB1B646ACIF4E939085E73145AC9650D4FCAE8577918C3D2595CE6D2AFC1DD81E1CA4F1A9F
     EA664B741FE6A3E0241B9AEDF10FBD9C81974499E8DAAD4587CFDFF236E059FD61CDECBB70A95A
     418FCE444E713EOC84CE9D1DF1CA2D653D4D8CCB976AB3BD133813F1FEB016FAD96DA49C70A08B
     ODD112824DADF5BB0684ABF4C3A8321D3F677D2E1CF6F26BB25A385E9090382E1DC540407F2616
     A36E21454EA525EB2D6A31EC8433149BF1F48DOCC2E1914592E81279D31B03B1F2B71503C13542
     7AFEF09CA4EFOCEBFD3DB069821DF53E90152206382BA06E1A8E53FF729A598DA70710AB138423
     OAE71D5D99C7E3443820E879ABC8E19152C5EF89208488EB2C563DFB8B00772743123927782899
     C6C3B67EA01B5648BF29C407B6558401D4AODB8E39B363B5F763F4CF3B593EE6567E3909DCA157
     28DDE53B70D9368B67409ABE15120E049F4E9EC19BFC9FF1EEDB656705054DB487DFF77208C169
     942462E783C604191D85FB94686A8626BE30AA122E4EC9555B4DEFFBF52C18DOC477F483FF6CE9
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion




                                                  July 2,1997

MEMORANDUM FOR                    SECRETARY RUBIN
                                  SECRETARY DALEY
                                  SECRETARYSHALALA
                                  ADMINISTRATOR ALVAREZ
                                  DIRECTOR RAINES
                                  CHAIR YELLEN
                                  CHAIR BROWN
                                  DEPUTY SECRETARY SUMMERS
                                  JOHN DWYER
                                  JOHN HILLEY
                                  CHARLES RUFF
                                  BRUCE LINDSEY
                                  BRUCE REED
                                  ELENA KAGAN
                                  ERSKINE BOWLES
                                  JOHN PODESTA
                                  SYLVIA MATTHEWS
                                  RONKLAIN
                                  CHARLES BURSON

FROM:                             GENE SPERLING

SUBJECT:                          Draft product liability memo

Attached is a draft memo to the President on federal product liability law, based on our discussions last week.
We ask two things: (i) your comments, edits and thoughts; and (ii) your choice among the three
recommendations set out.

Ideally, we would like your response by noon tomorrow, July 3_ Please forward comments to Ellen
Seidman of my staff, who can be reached at 456-5359 or by fax at 456-1605. We apologize for the short
timeframe, but we are attempting to get this memo in to the President before he leaves Washington tomorrow
evening. Even noon is going to be hard; we hope the memo is sufficiently reflective of our discussions that
turning it around in time is feasible. Please call me if you have any serious problems with this time frame.

Thank you all for your help, and for that of your staffs, in getting through this process.

cc:
Andrew Pincus                                      Michael Deich
Jeffrey Hunker                                     Steve Aitken
Fran Allegra                                       Tim Brennan
Donald Remy                                        Tracey Thornton
Tom McGivern                                       Peter Jacoby
Ed Murphy                                          Bill Marshall
Ron Matzner                                        Lisa Brown
Pam Gilbert
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion




                                                                  Draft:March 23,2010 (8:09AM)

SUBJECT:                      Product liability legislation

I. ACTION FORCING EVENT: On May 1, on a strict party line vote, the Senate Commerce
Committee reported out S.648, Senator Gorton's revision of the product liability bill you vetoed
last year. Senator Rockefeller not only voted against S.648, but has made it very clear that he
will not join until your concerns are satisfied, and Senator Gorton understands that without
Senator Rockefeller's support, the bill cannot pass. On the other hand, Senator Lott has been
pushing to bring the bill to the floor, leading Senator Rockefeller (together with Mr. Dingell) to
press us to negotiate changes in the bill to meet your concern. Senator Lott may well want to
move soon after the July 4 recess. Meanwhile, Senator Breaux is urging us to work with him on
an altemative to the Gorton bill.

II. BACKGROUND: The 104th Congress passed product liability refonn law -- a part of the
Contract with America -- by a vote of259 to 158 in the House and 59 to 40 in the Senate. The
bill would have partially preempted state law as to both standards of liability for sellers and
manufacturers of products that cause bodily harm and measures and allocation of damages. On
May 2, 1996, you vetoed the bill, citing eight issues:

      Interference with state prerogatives in tort law
      One-way preemption, where pro-consumer state laws were preempted, but laws that
       limited consumer rights were not
      The cap on punitive damages, particularly in light of the Statement of Managers, which
       virtually directed judges not to use the "additur" provision included in the bill under
       which caps could be superseded
      Several -- not joint -- liability for non-economic damages
      A too-short (15 years), too-broad (all products) statute of repose
      Preemption of state negligent entrustment statutes, which make sellers of dangerous
       goods (e.g., firearms and liquor) responsible for certain actions of the buyers
      Failure to toll the statute oflimitations during the period of a stay issued by a bankruptcy
       court
      Application of the limits on liability of biomedical materials suppliers to negligent
       suppliers

The House failed to override your veto by a vote of 258 to 163 to override. The House having
failed to override, the Senate never took a vote.

III. CURRENT CONGRESSIONAL ACTIVITY

   A. S.648
                                                                                  Hex톃ump conversion


                                                   -2-                  Draft:March 23, 20lO (8:09AM)

S.648 fixes the bankruptcy tolling problem, and makes an honest -- although not complete --
attempt to respond to the negligent entrustment issue. Moreover, it lengthens the statute of
repose to 18 years, and establishes two-way preemption for the statute of repose, so that shorter
state statutes would be lengthened (all state statutes that are set in years are shorter than 18
years). The bill does not respond to the two major problerns you cited -- the cap on punitives
and several liability for non-economic damages -- nor does it change the biomedical materials
provision.

    B. Senator Rockefeller and Mr. Dingell

Senator Rockefeller and Mr. Dingell are clearly looking for guidance on how to resolve the
remaining issues (punitive damages, several liability for non-economic damages, statute of
repose and biomedical materials) to meet both the concerns and fact patterns in your veto
message. They have said they will engage in negotiations with us (clearly they do not expect to
be able to accept our initial proposal) to develop legislation that will pass and will not be vetoed.
 Senator Rockefeller, in particular, has said he has no interest in another veto.

    C. Senator Breaux

Senator Breaux would like to deal with this issue in an entirely different way. He has developed
a bill focused far more on reducing frivolous lawsuits and less on substantive product liability
standards. Senator Breauxls bill would include a statute of repose that is more flexible than that
in S.648, would establish uniform federal standards for punitives damages but no cap, and would
do nothing to change state law concerning joint and several liability for non-economic damages. I
 His bill would also set stricter pleading standards for federal and state court product liability
actions, restrict multi-state product liability class actions, enact a very weak form of alternative
dispute resolution, and require a study by the Attorney General of the product liability system. It
is unclear how far Senator Breaux can get in moving support offthe Gorton bill without the
Administration's support for his approach.

    D. Consumer groups and other advocates

Consumer groups and others are strongly opposed to any legislation in this area, and have stated
that they view you as "the last bastion against tort deform." The American Bar Association has
written you in opposition to any federal legislation primarily on federalism grounds, but also
raising concerns that overlaying partial tort law preemption on the legal systems of fifty states
will cause more confusion and uncertainty, not less.

III. MAJOR ISSUES PRESENTED:


       I As discussed below, many states, including California, already have several liability for
non톏conomic damages.
                                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                  -3-                 Draft:March 23, 2010 (8:09AM)

Over the past eight weeks, we have jointly run an interagency process to consider whether there
might be ways to alter S.648 to respond to the concerns in your veto message in a manner that
could be acceptable to at least Democratic proponents of the legislation. Participants in the
process included: OVP, NEC, DPC, OMB, CEA, White House Counsel, White House
Legislative Affairs, Justice, Treasury, Commerce, and SBA and the Consumer Product Safety
Commission as an advisor. FDA is participating in the discussion of biomedical materials. The
working group surveyed the law in all the states on the critical issues of punitive damages, joint
and several liability and statute of repose, and developed a number of alternatives in each area
that we believe could move the bill closer (and in some cases, all the way) to your goals but may
have a chance of not being rejected out of hand by proponents? Two meetings of the NEC
principals were held, on June 24 and 26.

A. Whether there should be federal legislation in this area at all

The arguments of the business community in favor of national legislation rest on three
propositions:
    Concern about product liability litigation, and particularly concern about disproportionate
       awards for non-economic damages and punitive damages, is sapping American
       productivity by misdirecting management time and energy and capital and by putting an
       excessive -- and frequently non-insurable tax -- on innovation.
    In a national economy, subjecting products and manufacturers to 50 different liability
       regimes is not only inefficient but also -- because of the opportunities for forum shopping
       by plaintiffs, particularly in class actions, unfair.
    Manufacturers are the deep pocket focus ofliability suits that are in fact generated by the
       activities of those who repair and service products; making manufacturer liability more
       limited an predictable -- as occurred when the I8-year statute of repose was instituted for
       aircraft -- will put the burden of care of those most responsible for and able to accomplish
       it.

Consumer groups, as well as lawyers (the ABA as well as ATLA), argue against the need for
federal legislation based on:
     The lack of any explosion of product liability suits, and in particular, excessive punitive
        damage awards that survive judicial remittitur, suggesting there's no problern to be fixed.
     The fact that all recent proposals in this area would cut back on traditional principles of
        tort law that benefit plaintiffs, suggesting that what the manufacturers want is not
        uniformity but a tilt in their direction
     The traditional role of the states in tort law, combined with the fact that all existing
        proposals would only partially preempt state tort law, leading to even more


        2  Based on discussions with the Center for Violence Policy, we have also crafted a more complete
fix to the negligent entrustment provision. We believe there will be no problem getting the proponents to
adopt this.
                                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion



                                                      -4-                    Draft:March 23,2010 (8:09AM)

     non-uniformity and uncertainty as this law is overlaid on, e.g., state medical malpractice
     law.
    Whatever limitations are initially included in federal product liability legislation will be
     vulnerable to cutbacks in future Congresses; the time to stop erosion is before it starts
B. One-way or two-way preemption

One of the most contentious issues that runs through the legislation is whether federal standards
should preempt all state laws ("two-way preemption") or whether they should function solely as
a floor, with states free to establish more defendant-friendly standards ("one-way preemption").
For example, if the federal statute of repose were 18 years, two-way preemption would both
lengthen shorter statutes and impose the I8-year limitation in states that have no statute of
repose; one-way preemption would only lengthen shorter statutes. Similarly, if the federal
government were to enact standards for awarding punitive damages, two-way preemption would
both tighten the standard in states that, for example, allow punitives to be awarded for reckless
behavior and require states that do not allow punitives at all to allow them according to the
federal standards. One-way preemption would only tighten standards in some states, leaving
others free to bar punitives entirely.

The bill you vetoed last year was almost entirely one-way preemptive. In your veto message you
said, "As a rule, this bill displaces State law only when that law is more favorable to consumers;
it defers to State law when that law is more helpful to manufacturers and sellers. I cannot
accept, absent compelling reasons, such a one-way street of federalism. As noted above, S.648
is two-way preemptive as to the statute of repose (as well as with respect to the general standards
of manufacturer and seller liability and the statute oflimitations) but retains one-way preemption
on punitive damages. 3

While one of the arguments manufacturers and sellers make in favor of national legislation is the
desire to create uniform federal standards, which would support uniform two-way preemption, on
the two issues where they have made serious headway in the states -- limitations on punitive
damages and imposition of several liability -- they are far more interested in a federal floor than
in uniformity. We have been told, for example, that establishing the right to punitive damages
in states where it does not exist, or limiting several liability for non-economic damages where
state law has established it, would be totally unacceptable.

Consumer groups argue in favor of two-way preemption, ostensibly on the ground that the only
good reason for federal standards is uniformity. However, many of these same groups regularly
argue that federal environmental and consumer protection standards should function only as a
floor, allowing states to impose more rigorous rules. It is conceivable that the consumer
argument for two-way preemption is more an effort to highlight the inconsistency in the

       3 In fonn, S.648 is two-way preemptive on several liability for non-economic damages.
However, since it imposes the least plaintiff-friendly rule possible (totally several liability), it is effectively
one-way preemptive.
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion

                                               -5-                Draft:March 23, 2010 (8:09AM)

manufacturers' position -- and perhaps to raise an insurmountable barrier to legislation -- than a
firmly held constitutional principle.
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion


                                                -6-              ESDraft:March 23,2010 (8:09AM)

c.   Several liability for non-economic damages

Over the last several years, tort refonn at the state level has essentially done away with the
traditional rule of no comparative fault and full joint and several liability. (Only Alabama,
Maryland, North Carolina and Virginia retain this combination.) Nine states4 have full joint and
several liability, but include comparative fault, thereby reducing the defendants' joint
responsibility by the measure of the plaintiff's responsibility. Thirteen states5 have pure several
liability, for both economic and non-economic damages, and 24 states have various hybrid fonns.

Both last year's vetoed bill and S.648 limit a defendant's responsibility for non-economic
damages "in direct proportion to the percentage of responsibility of the defendant for the harm to
the claimant." The trier of fact is required to assign this percentage taking into account the
responsibility of all persons responsible, including those not before the court, such as settling
defendants.

In vetoing last year's bill with respect to this issue, you cited the provision's general effect of
preventing ''many persons from receiving full compensation for injury," noting in particular the
problems created by insolvent defendants. You also cited the particular impact of a several rule
for non-economic damages as unfairly discriminating against ''the most vulnerable members of
our society." You said, "Noneconomic damages are as real and as important to victims as
economic damages."

Manufacturers assert that the problem with joint liability for non-economic damages is that such
damages -- unlike economic damages -- are totally unpredictable and subject to the whim of the
jury, thereby making any assessment of the risk, or the purchase of insurance against the risk,
virtually impossible. They are particularly concerned about the potential for a large award
against the only solvent defendant in a case in which that defendant is only marginally at fault.
Opponents make the argument that non-economic damages are as real and as important --
particularly to the poor, the young and the old -- as economic damages, and should not be treated
differently. Some also contend that the different state standards represent the innovation and
experimentation that is the role of the states, and this should not be preempted.

D. Punitive damages




       4  Arkansas, Delaware, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South
Carolina and West Virginia

      5 Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, North Dakota, Tennessee, Utah,
Vermont and Wyoming
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                   -7-               ESDraft:March 23, 2010 (8:09AM)

The process of awarding punitive damages and the amount of such damages have been the
subject of some of the most intense controversy. Both last year's vetoed bill and S.648 cap
punitive damages -- at the greater of two times compensatories (including non-economic
damages) or $250,000 for most companies and the lesser of these two amounts for individuals
and small businesses. Upon consideration of a list of eight factors 6 , a judge could award
damages in excess of the large business cap (but not the small business cap), up to the amount
awarded by the jury, which would not be informed of the cap. 7 The "additur" provision
explicitly constitutes one-way preemption -- it does not permit additur where state law otherwise
limits punitive damages.

The bills would also: (i) establish a uniform federal standard of proof of "clear and convincing";
(ii) establish a uniform standard for award that conduct "carried out with conscious, flagrant
indifference to the rights or safety of others was the proximate cause" of the harm; and (iii)
authorize any party to request that punitive damages be considered in a separate proceeding
(generally so that evidence of the defendant's financial condition would not be allowed into
evidence during the liability and compensatory damages phase of the trial). While these rules are
meant to apply in all states that have punitive damages, they would not apply in states where
punitive damages are prohibited by law. 8

In vetoing last year's bill, you stated that you "oppose arbitrary ceilings on punitive damages,
because they endanger the safety of the public. Capping punitive damages undermines their very

        6  The factors are: "(i) the extent to which the defendant acted with actual malice; (ii) the
likelihood that serious harm would arise from the conduct of the defendant; (iii) the degree of the
awareness of the defendant of that likelihood; (iv) the profitability of the misconduct to the defendant; (v)
the duration of the misconduct and any concurrent or subsequent concealment of the conduct by the
defendant; (vi) the attitUde and conduct of the defendant upon the discovery of the misconduct and
whether the misconduct has terminated; (vii) the financial condition of the defendant; (viii) the cumulative
deterrent effect of other losses, damages, and punishment suffered by the defendant as a result of the
misconduct, reducing the amount of punitive damages on the basis of the economic impact and severity of
all measures to which the defendant has been or may be subjected ... "

        7 The judge would be required to hold a separate proceeding on awarding an additional amount,
consider each of the items, and state the court's reasons for an award above the cap in fmdings of fact and
conclusions of law. A separate fmding on each factor is not explicitly required. The conference report
on last year's bill, of course, virtually directed judges not to use this authority.

         8 In seven states punitive damages are generally forbidden; in 16 others, they are capped in one
way or another. Twenty-seven states allow unlimited punitive damages in product liability cases. Most
states that allow punitive damages have adopted the "clear and convincing" evidentiary standard. While
the liability standards are less uniform, only a few states allow the award of punitive damages for reckless
behavior without some other aggravating factor. We have not found any state that requires that the
conduct leading to the punitive damages be the "proximate cause" of the plaintiffs harm, although the
words "cause" and "result" are used. Bifurcated trials -- at least on the issue of the defendant's financial
condition -- are allowed or required in 15 states.
                                                                               Hex-Dump (.;ollversion


                                                  -8-               ESDraft:March 23,2010 (8:09AM)

purpose, which is to punish and thereby deter egregious misconduct." You noted that the
additur provision might have mitigated this concern, but the Statement of Managers virtually
directing it not be used made it ineffective in that respect.

Manufacturers assert that unpredictable and unjustifiably large punitive damage awards have
driven them out of markets and impinged on innovations. Consumer advocates assert that only
potentially unlimited punitive damages can deter harmful misconduct by large companies.
Surveys suggest that neither the award ofpunitives nor the amount is skyrocketing in products
cases. 9

E. Statute of repose

At its starkest, a statute of repose bars litigation after a product has been in service a specified
period of time. Twenty-two states and the District of Columbia currently have statutes of repose
for product liability; 17 of the states and the District restrict lawsuits after a specified number of
years (ranging from 5 to 15) and the remainder use some variation of ''useful life" as the bar. In
1994, you signed legislation establishing a preemptive 18-year statute of repose for general
aviation.

The bill you vetoed last year included a preemptive IS-year statute of repose for all products.
The statute would, however, only have preempted states without any statute of repose, or with a
statute longer than 15 years. Shorter state statutes would have remained effective. Your veto
message referenced the length of the statute, the fact that it was broadly inclusive (you cited
handguns), and the fact that the preemption was only one way. The Senate bill from the 104th
Congress had covered only durable goods in the workplace and had an 18-year one-way
preemptive statute.

S. 648, as reported out of the Senate Commerce Committee on a voice vote, includes a fully
(two-way) preemptive I8-year statute of repose, covering all products except: (i) motor vehicles,
vessels, aircraft and trains used to transport passengers for hire; (ii) products that cause toxic
harm; and (iii) products with express written warranties that exceed 18 years.

Manufacturers assert that a firm, and broad, statute of repose is necessary not only to provide
them some certainty, but also to put the risk of injury from long-lived products on those most
able to prevent it -- owners, upgraders and servicers. They argue that the I8-year statute of
repose for general aviation you signed in 1994 has not only increased the willingness of
manufacturers to produce the aircraft, but has made owners and servicers far more careful,



        9  A recently-released Rand study has found an increase in the number and amount of punitive
damage awards in financial fraud cases, such as cases involving insurance or fmancial products
misrepresentation. This does not appear to extend to cases involving products as defined in the bill, which
is limited to physical goods.
                                                                                 Hex텱ump Conversion

                                                -9-                 Draft:March 23,2010 (8:09AM)

because they understand the deep pocket of the manufacturers will not be available to bail them
out.

Consumers, on the other hand, argue that injuries from long-lived products -- including those that
have not been altered or do not need service -- are common, and often the manufacturer should
have foreseen and prevented the problem that caused the injury. They argue it is particularly
important that those injured by long-lived consumer goods (such as camping equipment and
cedar chests) not be barred from court completely by a strict statute of repose. Workers, they
note, at least can collect worker's compensation for injuries caused by long-lived defective
goods in the workplace.

IV. ALTERNATIVES

Working from the alternatives developed by the working group in each of the three major areas
identified, your advisors concluded that the choice of alternatives really depends on another
decision, whether the Administration should:
     take the position that state law developments and the lack of strong evidence of major
        problems in this area that are caused by lack of national standards leads us to conclude no
        federal legislation is appropriate at this time;
     put forward a series of proposals that are fully consistent with both your veto statement
        and the principle of promoting national uniformity, even if such proposals have little or
        no chance ofleading to a bill that can be enacted; or
     put forward a series of proposals that product liability legislation proponents will regard
        as an acceptable place to start negotiations and that can, albeit with some difficulty, be
        squared with your veto message.

Some of your economic advisors believe the business community may be correct in asserting that
the current tort liability system, and in particular the issues raised in this legislation, over-deter
businesses in their development and production of innovative products. In our discussions with
the business community, we have asked them to provide ernpirical evidence that innovation has
been stymied by litigation in general or the issues that particularly concern us: punitive damages
and several liability for non-economic damages. Unfortunately, empirical evidence is not
available, and the anecdotes relate to pharmaceuticals or related products, and often to the issues
raised by mass tort claims for economic compensatory damages, not non-economic damages or
punitive damages ..

As your advisors looked into the issue, we came to the following conclusions:
    While logically there might be some impact on manufacturing innovation and
      productivity from the tort system,
       there is no empirical evidence
       all the anecdotal evidence is from one sector -- pharmaceuticals, including vaccines --
          but the legislative proposals are far broader
       there is no explosion of either litigation or punitive damages
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                 -10-                 Draft:March 23,2010 (8:09AM)

         the economy is booming and productivity is rising
       Over the past several years -- indeed, even since the start of the 104th Congress -- the
        states have made major moves toward making the tort system more defendant-friendly,
        ranging from the virtual abandonment of traditional principles of joint and several
        liability to the imposition of caps on punitive damages
       If federal legislation is not to lead to uniform national standards, there is little justification
        for it; there is little or no justification for one-way preemption
       Overlaying limited product liability preemption on the tort law and civil procedure of 50
        states will likely increase confusion and uncertainty, not decrease it
       Recent Supreme Court decisions, including the Brady bill decision, may call into question
        the constitutionality of federal legislation that attempts to mandate changes in state law
        and judicial procedure

Thus, while there continues to be sentiment among your economic advisors for "doing
something" to improve the tort system, it is mild and tempered by the recognition that current
proposals may do as much harm as good. Your legal advisors do not believe the current
proposals should be supported. Both groups of advisors feel strongly that if there is to be any
federal legislation, it should establish uniform national standards, and should -- in the areas
explicitly covered -- completely preempt the field. There is no justification for one-way
preemption in this area.

This position can be manifest in two ways: taking a strong against any legislation, or developing
an Administration bill that is consistent with both the veto statement and the current state of the
law, even if that bill cannot be reconciled with the prime tenets of the Gorton bill.

A_ Oppose federal product liability legislation at this time

-:-_ _,--_ _ _ _ _...,-_ _-:-...,---,-_--,-_[names of advisors] recommend that you take a
firm and overt stance against any federal product liability legislation at this time. Recent
changes in state law as well as in federal constitutional law, combined with the lack of evidence
of serious widespread problems suggest that the burden of showing why traditional state
prerogatives in this area should be overruled and state law overlaid with potentially incompatible
federal law has not been met. If legislation is needed in the area of pharmaceuticals (including
vaccines), then it should be pursued on a targeted basis, taking advantage of -- and protecting-~
the strong federal regulatory system for drugs.

B. Develop an Administration bill we can support, consistent with both the veto statement
and the current state of the law

The hallmarks of this option are: (i) full two-way preemption, such that states with currently
more defendant-friendly laws would be brought to a uniform national level as well as states
whose laws are currently more pro-plaintiff; (ii) consistency with your veto message in all
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

                                                -11-                Draft:March 23,2010 (8:09AM)

respects; and (iii) inclusion of items that were not part of either the vetoed bill or S.648 that can
enhance the effectiveness of the legal system for injured plaintiffs.

This option does not include any provision on joint and several liability for non-economic
damages. Since part of the focus of your veto message was on the unfairness of distinguishing
between economic and non-economic damages, no provision that deals only with non-economic
damages can be fully consistent with the veto message. Moreover, we have reason to believe
some proponents of legislation would be willing to put forward an altemative without any change
in joint and several liability. However, we also know the business community regards this as an
important issue but, given current trends in state law toward several liability, they will be
extremely unlikely to accept two-way preemption in this area. Appendix A contains altemative
formulations of joint and several liability for non-economic damages that were developed by the
working group, together with pros and cons.

This option would consist of the following:
   Punitive damages - Advisory jury opinion with judicial determination and a breach able
   cap for small businesses, two-way preemption
    The jury would render a solely advisory opinion on punitive damages
    The actual determination of punitive damages would be made by the judge
    The judge would be required to consider the factors in S.648, and would be required to
       explain why the judge's award differs (either higher or lower) frpm the jury's advice
    The judge could allocate a portion of punitive damages to the state rather than to the
       plaintiff
    Cap punitive damages at the lesser of twice compensatories or $250,000 for firms that
       have 10 or fewer employees and annual revenues of $1 million or less. The jury would
       not be told of the cap, and the judge could award damages in excess of the cap only upon
       a specific finding that damages in excess of the capped amount were not only needed "to
       punish or deter," but also that the financial impact of the higher award had on the
       defendant and its employees had been explicitly considered by the judge.
    Couple this with procedural changes to set the evidentiary standard at "clear and
       convincing evidence," the substantive standard at "willful and wanton" (excluding
       recklessness), and to require bifurcation of the damages determination if requested by any
       party
   Pros
    Is analogous to criminal law, by keeping the jury involved but placing the decision on
       what is essentially a punishment in the hands of the person most experienced in deciding
       such issues, the judge
    Since historically, punitive damage awards that seem unjustified have stemmed from jury
       decisions, may increase rationality in the system
    Provides some protection for truly small businesses, responding to one of the complaints
       about the capriciousness of punitives
                                                                                Hex-Dump Conversion
                                           -12 -               Draft:March 23, 2010 (8:09AM)

  Since businesses of the size described are rarely hit with significant punitive damages,
   since in most states the defendant's financial condition is already taken into
   consideration, there may be little practical negative effect.
 Allows the Administration to agree with some sort of cap
 By adopting the S.648 factors, may be seen as a good faith offer
Cons
 Agreeing to any cap at all breaks through a clear line we established last year of "no caps
   on punitives"; it may be very difficult to hold the line against expansion of this cap, either
   to larger businesses, or by limiting the judge's discretion
 Any proposal that limits punitive damages in any way may be seen as tipping our hand --
   or limiting our options -- with respect to the tobacco settlement
 Takes away from the jury what has been regarded as a traditional jury function
 While judges may determine punitive damages in many states in cases where they are the
   trier offact, only Connecticut and Kansas provide for initial judicial determination (in
   contrast to appellate review or remittitur) where a jury has sat
 Unlikely to solve concerns of either proponents or opponents of caps; consumer groups
   and lawyers have not favored judicial determination
 May raise difficult Seventh Amendment issues ("no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise
   reexamined in any court of the United States than according to the rules of common law")
 Making it f).Iily two-way preemptive, thus forcing some states to allow punitive damages
   that do not currently do so, is likely to be regarded as both unacceptable and
   inflammatory by the business community

Statute of repose
 Two-way preemption of state law (as in S.648)
 18 year statute of repose (as in S.648)
 Which a plaintiff may overcome by clear and convincing evidence that the product had a
    longer useful safe life (not included in S.648, and responsive to the victim of the
    hay-baler accident cited in the veto message and to accidents involving products clearly
    intended to be longer-lived, such as elevators and most firearms)
 Covering only durable goods in the workplace (narrower than S.648, retaining plaintiff
   rights concerning consumer goods in states without any statute of repose and responding
   to your concern about handguns)
 With further exceptions for toxic substances, vehicles used in transportation for hire, and
    express warranties (as in S.648)
 And with a provision that extends the statute to allow full benefit of the two-year statute
    oflimitations after injury or discovery of harm in, for example, year 17 (not in S.648, but
   not expected to be a problem)
Pros
 By building on S.648, demonstrates good faith to proponents of that legislation
 Two-way preemption is responsive to principles of veto message, and also lengthens
    statute in the 22 states that have them
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion

                                              -13-                Draft:March 23, 2010 (8:09AM)

       Number of years is longer than in any current state statute
       Rebuttable presumption protects workers injured by products clearly intended to be
        longer-lived
       Bright line number of years, combined with clear and convincing standard, means
        manufacturers will be free from arguments about whether something was intended to
        have a useful life slightly longer than 18 years
       By restricting statute to durable goods in the workplace, consumers in states without
        statutes of repose retain their access to court for injuries from long-lived or
        intermittently-used consumer goods such as cedar chests and camping and baby products
       Until late last year, all formulations of this statute had been limited to durable goods in
        the workplace, in part because those injured in such accident will at least have received
        some compensation through workers compensation
       Expands on an already-existing federal liability scheme -- workers compensation
       Exceptions protect access to court in latent defect cases
        Cons
       Opponents of product liability reform will oppose any statute of repose as limiting
        plaintiffs' rights in states without such statutes
       Combination of two-way preemption and bright line (even with rebuttable presumption
        and limitation only to durable goods in the workplace), will restrict the access of some
        injured parties to court
       Proponents of S.648 may regard rebuttable presumption and limitation to durable goods
        in the workplace as unacceptable limitations, particularly given that they extended the
        statute from 15 to 18 years and made preemption two-way in response to the veto
        message

In addition to these proposals, we recommend that option 1 include items plaintiffs believe could
make a real difference in their ability to recover, as well as provisions in the Breaux draft:
     Provision for alternative dispute resolution for small claims that both defendants and
        plaintiffs would find appealing
     Limitations on the use of protective orders where disclosure ofthe information is relevant
        to the public health or safety unless disclosure is clearly outweighed by a substantial
        interest in maintaining the confidentiality of the records
     Stricter pleading requirements and limitations on multi-state class actions where parties
        allege different types of damages
     A requirement for a study of the product liability system by the Attorney General
The first of these items might -- depending on how it is drafted -- gain the support of both
plaintiffs (who cannot find lawyers to take small claims through the traditional legal system for a
contingency fee) and defendants. The second (based on a bill that has been introduced by
Senator Kohl) would be strongly supported by consumer groups and -- in light of the tobacco
revelations probably could generate strong public support -- but would certainly be opposed by
defendants and perhaps even by the plaintiff bar. The third and fourth provisions are from the
Breaux draft. The class action may not be giving up much from the plaintiffs' perspective given
the Supreme Court's recent decision overturning the asbestos settlement.
                                                                             Hex-Dump Conversion

                                               -14-                 Draft:March 23,2010 (8:09AM)


This option is recommended by _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ [names of advisors]

c.   Make a proposal that has a viable chance of starting negotiations with proponents

As described in the specific pros and cons below, the items in this option cannot be completely
squared with your veto statement. On the other hand, they represent real movement toward
responding to your objections. However, it is critical to recognize that once these options are
on the table, negotiations may take them even farther afield, and lead to a negative
dynamic in which bill supporters think they've come "most of the way" toward your
position and assert that refusal to support their bill amounts to "moving the goalposts."
The danger with this option rests far less in its particular parameters than in the slippery slope it
sends us down.
Again, no provision on several liability for non-economic damages is included, based on
indications some proponents may be willing to move without such a provision. Appendix A
contains options developed by the working group, of which only Proposal2B is likely to be
acceptable at all to the business community.

This option would consist of:
   Punitive damages - Cap with easier breakthrough, one-way preemption
    Cap punitive damages at the greater of $250,000 or twice compensatories (the lesser of
       the two for small businesses)
    Do not tell the jury of the cap
    Allow the judge to award punitive damages above the cap (for both small and large
       businesses) without an additional proceeding and on a simple finding that the capped
       amount is "insufficient to punish or deter," the standard in S.648, with no consideration
       of specified factors
    Insist that there be no legislative history suggesting this authority is to be used any more
       sparingly than implied by the statutory standard
    Couple this with procedural changes to set the evidentiary standard at "clear and
       convincing evidence," the substantive standard at ''willful and wanton" (excluding
       recklessness), and to require bifurcation of the damages determination if requested by any
       party
    This would be two-way preemptive, except with respect to states that do not allow
       punitives in products cases at all
   Pros
    Closest to both S.648 and earlier versions of bill, and thus likely to be most easily
       regarded as acceptable by proponents
    Particularly given that there are few punitive damage awards in excess of the cap and that
       judges now have remittitur authority, this would likely have little practical impact on
       actual awards
    The procedural changes may produce more uniformity across the country
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion

                                               -15 -               Draft:March 23, 20lO (8:09AM)

     Making the additur provision two-way preemptive is a real improvement for plaintiffs
      compared to S_648
   Cons
    This looks like a cap on punitive damages, which you said you opposed; "no caps on
      punitives" has been used as a shorthand description of the Administration's firmest
      position
    It may actually be a cap with judges reluctant to award punitives
    Holding the line on the legislative history can be very difficult, particularly if the statute
      is acceptable in all other respects

   Statute oJrepose
   The proposal would be the same as under option 1, which we believe will be regarded as a
   good faith offer to negotiate_

The primary dangers with this strategy are the likelihood that opponents will not believe even the
initial positions are consistent with the veto statement, and that it will be relatively easy for the
other side to make what look like cosmetic changes that may in fact be quite significant For
example, deleting the plaintiff s option to breach the I8-year statute of repose by a clear and
convincing showing that the useful safe life was intended to be longer -- a likely demand of the
manufacturing community -- would look minor, but in fact would work a major change in that it
completely shut the courtroom door on plaintiffs in the many states with no statute of repose_

This option is recommended by _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ [names of advisors]

V. DECISIONS:

           Let's take the offensive against any federal product liability legislation

           Propose option B to Senator Rockefeller, understanding he will not regard it as a
           serious offer.

                       Discuss the offer with Senator Breaux before making it public, and make
                       common cause with him ifhe's interested

                       Make the offer public to head off claims by bill proponents that we did not
                       have anything to offer

           Propose option C to Senator Rockefeller, making explicit that this is a best and final
           offer and any further movement will result in a veto

           Propose option C to Senator Rockefeller, being prepared to negotiate

           None of the options is good. We need to talk.
                                                                                    Hex-Oump Conversion


                                                     -16-                   Draft:March 23, 2010 (8:09AM)

                                        APPENDIX A
               Options on Joint and Several Liability for Non-Economic Damages

The formulations described below reduce the negative impact of imposing several liability for
non-economic damages. However, any formulation that does not guarantee the plaintiff 100%
of non-economic damages (where there is any solvent and available defendant) is discriminatory
against non-economic damages in those states that retain joint liability for economic damages.
Assuming you do not want to put several liability for economic damages into play, you should be
aware that all of the options described -- except pure reallocation -- have this flaw.

Informed by various state law provisions concerning joint and several liability, your advisors
considered formulations for federal preemption involving the following concepts:
     Several liability with reallocation among remaining defendants (and plaintiff if the
       plaintiff is at fault) in the event the amount allocated to any defendant is uncollectible
       (thus guaranteeing plaintiffs 100% recovery for the portion of the damage not their fault,
       but sparing low-fault, deep-pocket defendants the need to sue for contribution)
     Setting a level of fault below which only several liability will apply (thus responding to
       the concerns oflow-fault deep-pocket defendants)
     Setting a threshold of fault below which several liability will apply, but with a multiplier
       (thereby guaranteeing the plaintiff some recovery where only the low-fault defendants are
       solvent)
     Guaranteeing the plaintiff a specified percentage of recovery of non-economic damages
     The extent to which plaintiff fault will be taken into account to reduce recovery for
       non-economic damages
     Special rules for small businesses, particularly as to responsibility for more than their
       share of damages
     Two-way preemption, which would be meaningful if federal law were less pro-plaintiff
       than some state laws

Working on the assumption that you wished us to develop proposals that include several liability
for non-economic damages -- so as to be able to convince those favoring product liability of our
good faith, but that are least restrictive of the rights of plaintiffs, your advisors developed the
following alternative formulations relating only to non-economic damages:

   Proposall - ReaUocation 10
    Joint and several if the plaintiff is fault-free




       10   This is based on the statute currently in effect in Missouri.
                                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion


                                                     -17 -                 Draft:March 23, 2010 (8:09AM)

      If the plaintiff is at all at fault, liability is several, but if the plaintiff cannot collect from
       one or more defendant after a specified period of tim ell , the plaintiff can petition the
       court for reallocation of damages not attributable to the plaintiff among the remaining
       defendants, but no defendant less at fault than the plaintiff may be charged with more
       than twice his proportionate share of damages
     This would be two-way preemptive
    Pros
     Preserves balance between faultless plaintiff and defendant with any fault in favor of the
       plaintiff
     Is generally consistent -- or at least not less pro-plaintiff -- with the laws of most states l2
     Where plaintiff is at fault, less culpable defendants -- even if they are deep pockets -- will
       have their damages limited
     Of all the potential limitations, is most likely to retain 100% recovery for non-economic
       damages
     By retaining joint and several liability in many situations, should encourage settlement
    Cons
     May be viewed as excessively pro-plaintiff, and thus not a good-faith offer, particularly if
       it is two-way, thus increasing defendants' responsibility in states, such as California, with
       several liability for non-economic damages
     May limit plaintiff's recovery where plaintiff is at fault and there are multiple defendants
     Requires fact-finders in (the 13) states that currently do not have comparative fault or
       several liability to assign degrees of responsibility
     Shifts from defendants to plaintiffs the responsibility for collecting from each defendant,
       potentially adding to delay in recovering and increased expense
     As among defendants, it is unclear why the extent of the plaintiffs responsibility should
       have an impact on defendants' responsibility to pay the judgment

    Proposal2A - Guaranteed recovery, two-way preemption
     Joint and several liability of any defendant is than 30% at fault (taking into account the
       fault of the plaintiff and settling defendants)
     If any defendant is less than 30% at fault, that defendant's responsibility would be limited
       to a maximum of twice the defendant's proportionate share of non-economic damages
       except where a greater multiplier was needed to ensure the plaintiff recovery of at least
       50% of the assessed non-economic damages.


        II   In Missouri it is 30 days, which may be too short to actually encourage the plaintiff to try to
collect; in Connecticut it is one year, which may be too long.

         12 Only plaintiffs with some degree of fault in the four states that ~etain traditional no comparative
fault/joint and several liability would be significantly disadvantaged; plaintiffs in the nine states with
comparative fault and joint and several liability could be somewhat disadvantaged. Plaintiffs in states
with any further restrictions would likely benefit.
                                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion


                                              -18 -                Draft:March 23,2010 (8:09AM)


   Proposa12B - Guaranteed recovery, one-way preemption
    Joint and several liability of any defendant is than 10% at fault (taking into account the
       fault of the plaintiff and settling defendants)
    . If any defendant is less than 10% at fault, that defendant's responsibility would be limited
       to a maximum of twice the defendant's proportionate share of non-economic damages
       except where a greater multiplier was needed to ensure the plaintiff recovery of at least
       60% of the assessed non-economic damages.
   Pros
    Should be seen by proponents oflimitation as a good-faith offer, with real limits
    Preserves joint and several liability for defendants with significant degree of fault
    Ensures that no low-fault defendant will have to pay more than 50% (or 60%, if one-way)
       oftotal non-economic damages, and that in most cases they will be limited to their
       proportionate share
    Although it limits responsibility of low-fault defendants, it guarantees that plaintiff will
       collect substantial portion of assessed non-economic damages (if there are any solvent
       and available defendants)
    The two-way preemption version would increase plaintiff's guaranteed level of recovery
       in states with several liability for non-economic damages (such as California and Illinois),
       and thus might be considered an acceptable tradeoff for limitation on guaranteed recovery
       in other states
   Cons
    Setting the guaranteed recovery level at 50% or 60% (or, in fact, any level lower than
       100%) may be viewed as non-responsive to both the objections in the veto statement --
       not full recovery, and discrimination against non-economic damages
    Will require fact-finders in the 13 states that don't have both comparative negligence and
       several liability to make additional determinations
    Defendants who view themselves as likely to be low-fault deep pockets will object that
       their potential for payment of non-economic damages is so high that they cannot take
       limitations into account in either settlement discussions or purchase of insurance
    Small degrees of differentiation of fault -- e.g., between 9% and 11 % -- could have major
      repercussions on responsibility to pay damages

Your advisors recommend that proposal 1 be the first one we explore with proponents of product
liability. It is by far the most consistent with the veto statement. If, however, it is rejected out
of hand by product liability proponents, and you believe it is essential that we continue to
negotiate, we would recommend Proposal 2A, which includes two-way preemption. We should
make it very clear that if forced to one-way preemption, we would only accept a proposal with a
significantly higher level of guaranteed recovery for the plaintiff (e.g., 60%), and a significantly
lower threshold offor imposition of several liability (e.g., 10%).

Areas where we believe some negotiation could be possible include:
                                                                         Hex-Dump Conversion

                                         -19 -               Draft:March 23, 2010 (8:09AM)

   Some decrease in the minimum level of recovery for two-way preemption (we would
    put an absolute floor at 50% for one-way preemption and 40% for two-way preemption)
   Some increase in the threshold for imposition of joint and severa1liability (we would put
    an absolute ceiling of 3 5% for two-way preemption and 15% for one-way preemption)


