RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 3-JUL-1997 11:52:57.00

SUBJECT:   final version

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP on 07/03/97
11:52 AM ---------------------------




Michael Waldman
07/03/97 11:30:10 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP, Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP
cc:
Subject:         final version

Draft 7/3/97 11:30am

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
RADIO ADDRESS ON DECREASED WELFARE ROLLS
THE WHITE HOUSE
JULY 4, 1997

        Good morning. We come together this weekend to celebrate Independence
Day, our national heritage, and the fundamental values that unite us as
one America: In America, everyone should have an equal chance to succeed.
And everyone has an obligation to work hard, to give something back to
their community, to earn in each generation the freedom that our Founders
established.

        These are the values that have guided our efforts to end welfare
as we know it. Today, I want to talk to you about the progress we have
made over the past four and a half years, the changes now underway, and
what we must all do to make sure that welfare reform honors those values,
too.

        For four years, my administration has been committed to putting an
end to the old welfare system that trapped too many families in a cycle of
despair. Working with the states we launched welfare reform experiments
in 43 states which emphasized work and personal responsibility.

        Then last summer, I signed historic legislation that
revolutionized welfare. It was a dramatic step, but we knew that the time
was right to put an end to a system that was broken beyond repair. As of
July 1, welfare reform has taken effect in all 50 states. This week, the
old welfare system came to an end.  Now a new system based on work is
taking its place. This system demands responsibility, not only from the


people we are requiring to work, but from every American.

         We knew last August that the new welfare reform law was not a
guarantee, but a bold new experiment. And so far, welfare reform is
working.   I am pleased to announce that today, there are 3 million fewer
people on welfare than there were on the day I took office -- a remarkable
1.3 million fewer since I signed welfare reform into law.    This is the
largest decrease in the welfare rolls in history -- and the lowest
percentage of the population on welfare since 1970.

        We have proven that we can begin to put an end to the culture of
dependency, and elevate our fundamental values of family and work and
responsibility. Now we must continue to work together to meet our goal of
moving one million more people from welfare to work by the year 2000.

        Since I took office, the economy has added 12.8 million new jobs
-- and many economists believe that we will continue to produce the jobs
we need to meet our challenge. But even so, it will not be easy. Many of
the people who remain on welfare have never worked before; still others
live in poor communities without enough jobs. If we expect people to
work, we need to make sure thereD,s work for them to go to.

        The national government will do its part.  First, the balanced
budget agreement we reached with Congress in May provides $3 billion to
create jobs to move people from welfare to work.  I secured a commitment
from congressional leaders to give private employers tax incentives to
hire long term welfare recipients. And I believe that every one of those
new workers should earn at least the minimum wage and receive the
protections of existing employment laws.

         Second, we must help welfare recipients get to the new jobs which
are often outside their neighborhoods.   That is why I recently proposed
legislation that provides $600 million to help states and local
communities devise transportation strategies to move people from welfare
to work.

         Third, we must make sure that mothers who must now go to work
have good child care
-- and adequate health care -- for their children. That is why I made sure
that the welfare reform bill added $4 billion more in child care
assistance.  And that is why I fought for the balanced budget agreement to
extend health care coverage to millions of uninsured children.

        States must also do their part. Many states are already working
to reduce caseloads and free resources to put even more people to work.
Wisconsin and Florida are significantly increasing their investment in
child care.  In Oregon, they are providing health care and transportation
support, and subsidizing jobs with money that used to pay for welfare
checks. Today, I challenge every state to take the money they saved from
lowering their case loads and use it for child care and transportation to
help move more people from welfare to work.

        As much as the national and state governments can do to move
people from welfare to work, we know that the vast majority of the jobs
must be created by private business. The most lasting way to bring people
on welfare into the mainstream of American life is with a solid job in a
private business. So to every businessperson who ever criticized the old
system, I say: the old system is gone. And it is up to you to help make
the new system work.
·
        This Independence Day, all Americans should be happy that 3
million of our fellow citizens are off the welfare rolls. As we celebrate
our nationD,s past and the values that unite us, we must look forward to
the future, and redouble our determination to put an end to the culture of
dependence.

       Thanks for listening.
·

