RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Kyle M. Baker ( CN;Kyle M. Baker/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-JUL-1997 09:29:38.00

SUBJECT:     Re: Late term abortion letter from Bishop Anthony Pilla

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I hear you. I'll just warmly -- but shortly -- reply without going into
any AMA response. He knows exactly where we stand after getting so many
letters from us already.

Thanks ...

Kyle
     .'
.'   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO ]

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-JUL-1997 09:37:58.00

     SUBJECT:   more on partner benefits

     TO: Elena Kagan       CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ]
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     WASHINGTON POST, July 6, 1997
     More Companies Reaching Out With Gay-Friendly Policies
     Domestic Partner Benefits Gain Momentum in Tight Labor Market, Despite Risk
     of Offending Conservative Customers
     By Steven Ginsberg
         Two years ago, a group of Discovery Channel employees approached
     management and asked the company to extend medical benefits to domestic
     partners of gay and lesbian workers.
         The Discovery Channel considered the request and responded with what
     its
     managers say was a business decision.
         "In 1995, we began offering coverage for same-sex domestic partners,"
     said
     Peter Likouris, human resources coordinator at Discovery. "We did some
     research and found that it wasn't going to raise [insurance] rates. We also
     did comparisons and saw that other companies in the industry were going
     this
     way. Part of our decision was to stay competitive, and part was to meet the
     needs of our employees."
         The nature of today's tight labor market, with highly skilled workers
     at a
     premium, dictates that employers consider workers based on the skills they
     possess rather than the partners they prefer. Despite the risk of offending
     conservative and religious groups, such as the Southern Baptist Convention,
     which is boycotting Walt Disney Co., an increasing number of companies have
     come to the same conclusion as the Discovery Channel: Domestic partner
     benefits are a necessary tool to help attract and retain employees.
         "We try to respond to employees' changes in lifestyle," said Likouris,
     who
     estimates that about 12 of Discovery's 850 employees have signed up for the
     benefits. "We've also seen that it increases morale, which in turn raises
     productivity. And when recruiters contact me they are aware of the policy
     because some of the candidates are interested in it."
         KPMG Peat Marwick last month released a survey of 1,502 companies with
     200
     or more employees; it found that 13 percent of respondents provide health
     benefits to nontraditional partners. Among companies with more than 5,000
     employees, the number jumps to one in four businesses.
         The survey also found that the "costs of coverage for firms offering and
     not offering traditional coverage were equivalent, as were rates of
     increase
     in premiums." Employers in the high-technology, retail and government
     sectors
     were the most likely to offer benefits to domestic partners.
         "Domestic partner benefits are a smart business decision," said Mark


Johnson, media director for the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force
 (NGLTF) .
"Companies and city governments realize that it's a good way to attract and
retain employees."
    Most companies offering domestic partner benefits treat same-sex couples
exactly as they do married couples; packages carry the same benefits,
including health care, bereavement leave, and family and medical leave.
    Determining who is a domestic partner can be tricky. A handful of
jurisdictions have domestic partner registries, but without a uniform
national law, each company is left to set its own criteria. Typically,
employers require employees to sign a form declaring that they live with
and
share financial responsibility for partners. Locally, the District and
Takoma
Park have domestic partner registries, but Congress has not
funded the District's, so it exists.in name only.
    Even though some companies offer these benefits, that doesn't mean
employees are using them. The NGLTF estimates that gays and lesbians make u
p
2 pe'rcent to 10 percent of the work force, yet few sign up for domestic
partner benefits.
    "The number of people actually using these benefits is kind of
discouraging," said Johnson, who added that it is nearly impossible to
track
the trend. "It relates to a fear that they'll be found out." Another reason
for the low participation may be that many employees' same-sex partners
also
are professionals with their own benefit plans,
Johnson said.
    Even though employers that offer same-sex benefits believe gay-friendly
policies make financial sense, doing so can be problematic, particularly
for
high-profile companies such as Disney. In the wake of the Southern Baptist
boycott, the giant entertainment company has absorbed a number of public
relations hits, and critics have questioned whether the boycott is
affecting
company policy. Just days after the boycott was launched, Disney recalled
an
estimated 100,000 copies of an
obscenity-laced album by a hip-hop group called Insane Clown Posse. Disney
said the recall had nothing to do with the boycott.
    American Airlines, another gay benefits pioneer, also is coming under
pressure from conservative groups, such as the Family Research Council and
the American Family Association. American was the first airline to adopt a
nondiscrimination employment policy that covers sexual orientation, a
policy
that is law in only 11 states and the District. Virginia and Maryland do
not
have such laws.
    "We don't have a boycott" of American, said Bill Merrell, vice president
for convention relations for the executive committee of the Southern
Baptists. "But I know of large numbers of Christians that select around
certain long-distance carriers, airlines and computer companies. If any
group
says we're not going to do business based on certain principles, it has to
affect the revenue flow."
    Still, local and national employers, such as the law firm Covington and
Burling, say they are undeterred.
    "We've had absolutely no controversy," said Jean Waxman, benefits
coordinator at Covington and Burling, which offers domestic partner
·

    benefits
    to all couples, including heterosexuals. "We were told that there would be
    a
    rush of employees using it and our costs would be much higher, but neither
    of
    those things happened."
       Waxman estimates that 18 of Covington and Burling's 865 U.S. employees
    have signed up for the plan since its inception in 1994. "It's been really
    easy to administer," Waxman said, "and we've had no problems whatsoever."


