RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-JUL-1997 19:34:58.00

SUBJECT:   Answers to your questions on executive order for employment of disabled

TO: Elena Kagan
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Thanks for the advice; I'll follow up with Mac Reed and company. NEC is
positive on this with some significant editing.  I'll check with Lancaster
to make sure the disability community will be happy with this, but with
the imprimatur of all the appointees it's hard to lose.

As I mentioned in a previous email, public liaison has put in a scheduling
request for an event at a conference on youth with disabilities and work
(again, the official preference of the appointees), and this would
therefore fit right in.  The President has always done an ADA
commemorative event all the years I can recall, certainly going back to
1994, so I would be surprised if one doesn't ultimately make it on the
schedule.

In terms of whether we could add some substance to the EO's more general
call to make this a priority, there are a few good possibilities:

You recall one of them correctly -- that we expand the Defense
Department's CAP program government-wide.   CAP provides electronic and
computer accommodations to all disabled Defense Dept. employees who need
them, through a centrally funded pool of money and expertise.   It's a very
good program and it would be good to have it go government-wide.   It would
cost $2-6 million a year to do so.
There are some specific Federal hiring things in the draft EO, but we
wouldn't want to overdo this, a la welfare reform.
We can talk up our "return to work" proposals, which will be under active,
bipartisan consideration on the Hill at that time.   To remind you what
this is:   (1) our "ticket" to reward performance for successful private or
public rehab providers was just sent to the Hill; and it will be the
subject of hearings held July 23 by Rep. Bunning, who has a ticket
proposal of his own, so this is nice and bipartisan; (2) our Medicaid
buy-in option for states for people leaving the SSI/SSDI rolls has been
picked up by the Senate as part of reconciliation, although with an income
cap we don't like; and (3) our Medicare demo, which was our least good
idea, seems dead at this point.    Sperling has expressed some interest in
talking up this whole initiative.
I doubt anything from CASA/ADAPT would be ready in time and besides I need
to save up accomplishments for the September meeting with the President.




Elena Kagan
07/06/97 02:01:42 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP
cc:      Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP, Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
bcc:
Subject:         Re: Executive order for employment of disabled

It seems as if you're on track.  I would get Mac Reed involved now (with
an explanation that we've made no final decisions yet); he's more helpful
when he feels as if he's been brought into the process from the start. On
substance: it sounds as if it won't get us much press in the short run,
but may be valuable in the long run -- and that's fine.   You should make
sure with Lancaster et al. that the community will say nice things about
it, rather than rip into us for not doing enough or not doing something
now, etc.  I guess the one question I'd ask is whether we could join the
order with some other action, so that we're no just examining/studying,
but actually doing/changing something. The action could involve federal
employment alone (like the EO) or could relate to employment issues more
generally. On the former, wasn't there some proposal that OMB didn't
like, but that Erskine thought was eminently reasonable involving DOD? On
the latter, do we know where we are on CASA yet? Is there anything else
that makes sense and that we could put together by the end of July? Let
me know.




        Diana Fortuna
        06/27/97 05:28:08 PM

Record Type: Record

To: Elena Kagan/OPD/EOP
cc: Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP
Subject: Executive order for employment of disabled

We just got a new and substantially revised version of this draft
executive order, after advice from DOL.  I just talked it through with
John Lancaster of the President's Committee on Employment of People with
Disabilities, who is shepherding it.  It is now going through one more
round of comments from the appointees with disabilities and DOL before the
attention turns to us. DOL/seth Harris is supposedly pretty positive on
it.  I have talked a bit to Anne Lewis of NEC on this and will talk to her
more to get their perspective.

The current draft is much more benign that the previous one we saw. There
is no "quota" or goal of.employment.  Instead, it has a long preamble on
why this issue is important, a statement that the employment rate of the
disabled should be "as close as possible" to the one for the non-disabled,
and it establishes a federal agency task force, led by DOL, to examine all
agency programs and policies to figure out how to encourage employment of
the disabled. A few agencies are called on to do specific things, most of
which are OK. The task force has to report in a year and then biannually
after that until 2002.



The main problem is I'm not sure what it adds up to. On the other hand,
if it focuses attention on this issue, pleases the community right before
the ADA anniversary, and comes up with a few good ideas, maybe that's OK
-- I'm not sure what our standard for executive orders are.

I can send it to you if you want to see it, but otherwise I am going to
see what additional comments John Lancaster gets and talk to NEe.  I
assume we don't go to Mac ReedjOMB counsel's office to vet this until we
are sure that we like the general idea. The ADA anniversary is July 26,
so we have to get it moving if we are going to do it. Any advice is
welcome.


