RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-JUL-1997 19:10:10.00

SUBJECT:   FYI ... Business Week Article on Document Disclosure Provisions

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
So Much For Smoking Out Big Tobacco's Secrets
The deal may let companies keep documents under wraps

Business Week
July 14, 1997

When Mississippi Attorney General Mike Moore announced the
proposed $368 billion tobacco settlement on June 20, he claimed
that it would force the industry to turn over a treasure trove of
previously secret internal documents. "We wanted to make sure
that every single person, not only in America but this entire
world, knows the truth about what the tobacco industry has
done .... And we are satisfied that we have done that," Moore
exulted.

Critics of the deal now charge that Moore's declaration is an
empty boast. In fact, they say, the pact may actually prevent the
disclosure of documents that would have come to light through
litigation. When the settlement was announced, tobacco foes
immediately pounced on how the pact limits nicotine regulation
and treats company liability. But Minnesota Attorney General
Hubert H. Humphrey III has said that document disclosure is an
issue of equal importance: "This fight was supposed to be about
lies and cover-ups, but this deal allows the and cover-ups to
live on."

The fight over disclosure threatens to create another major
hurdle for the proposed settlement. Alan Morrison, the attorney
analyzing the deal for the review committee chaired by former
Food & Drug Administration Chief David A. Kessler and former
Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, says that as the deal stands,
"the most significant documents will still be withheld ... for
many years, and possibly forever. " And Representative Henry A.
Waxman (D-Calif.) on June 12 introduced a bill that would require
the companies to surrender far more paperwork than is required
under the pact.

The main criticism of the deal's disclosure provisions is that
they let the industry continue shielding incriminating papers
behind attorney-client privilege. Last month, for example, Waxman
revealed that Liggett Group Inc. had used attorney-client
privilege to keep confidential a memorandum in which attorneys
told the company not to market a safer cigarette because' 'it may
incite accelerated tobacco litigation."

"WOEFULLY DEFICIENT."   Tobacco's antagonists have no way of
knowing exactly what information the industry may have hidden.
But Stanton A. Glantz, a professor at the University of


California at San Francisco and a longtime tobacco critic,
believes that companies may have used privilege to avoid
releasing market research, information on plans to recruit
teenagers, studies of the dangers of tobacco, and memos on
political strategy. He says such revelations would be highly
valuable to Congress--especially as members consider how the
industry should be punished and weigh how nicotine should be
regulated.

The tobacco papers can be unsealed under the proposed
settlement--but in each case a panel of three federal judges must
rule on whether the privilege protection should be waived.
Morrison calls that' 'woefully deficient."   Jacksonville (Fla.)
plaintiffs' attorney Norwood S. Wilner, who has more than 100
private personal-injury claims against the industry, says
companies could stall the panel by insisting on line-by-line
review of mountains of paperwork. " I t will take years to get
stuff resolved,"   says Wilner. " I don't have the resources to
deal with [that]."

Wilner, Waxman, and Morrison all want the companies to abandon
any claim to attorney-client privilege, as Liggett did in its
March settlement. But one tobacco lawyer says this demand is
unfair and has never been imposed on an industry
before--' 'nothing close."

Matt Myers, executive vice-president of the Campaign for
Tobacco-Free Kids and a negotiator of the pact, argues that the
agreement furthers disclosure. "This system moves the ball in
terms of document disclosure way ahead of where we would be if we
just continued to pursue the litigation, " he says. But that may
not be enough.

By Mike France in New York, with Gail DeGeorge in Miami and John
Carey in Washington


