RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-JUL-1997 18:36:34.00

SUBJECT:   I saw "Chicago" and "Constitution" and thought of you.

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
If Smoke Clears, Tobacco Deal Still Faces Fire

Some 5th and lOth Amendment experts think the $368 billion
settlement between some states and the cigarette industry may be
challenged as unconstitutional.

Chicago Tribune
Thursday, July 3, 1997
Source: By Judy Peres, Washington Bureau.
Section: NEWS
Parts: 4
Dateline: WASHINGTON

First a skeptical White House has to sign off on the $368 billion
tobacco settlement.

Then Congress can be expected to tinker with the deal announced
recently by state attorneys general, plaintiffs' lawyers and the
tobacco industry.

But if the settlement clears those obstacles and is enacted into
law, it will face a more formidable hurdle: the U.S.
Constitution.

The deal, which would impose limits on cigarette manufacturers'
ability to advertise their products and on smokers' ability to
sue for damages, might well violate the 5th Amendment guarantee
of due process and the lOth Amendment, which says the states have
any powers not given to the federal government under the
Constitution, legal experts said.

"Nobody knows for sure, because it (the accord) hasn't been
contested," said Clifford Douglas of Evanston, a tobacco
litigator. "But it's as sure as the sunrise that (court)
challenges will be made."

Some observers have predicted a challenge to the ad curbs on 1st
Amendment free speech grounds. But the curbs likely would be
contained in consent decrees between the states and the tobacco
companies, not in federal legislation, so the companies would
waive their free speech rights voluntarily.

Douglas and others foresee constitutional challenges to any
legislation that limits an individual's right to sue and be
compensated for damages. The proposed settlement would do this by
banning class actions, putting a ceiling on compensatory damages
and eliminating punitive damages in many cases.


Cass Sunstein, a constitutional law expert at the University of
Chicago, believes there's "no chance cutting off punitive damages
is unconstitutional."

An argument that it's unconstitutional to limit compensatory
damages probably would not succeed, he maintains, but is not
implausible.

 Others, especially those who oppose the settlement for being too
 generous to tobacco companies" would go further. Some lawyers
 argue that any deal that makes it very hard to win a suit is
.inherently unfair and, arguably, violates the due process clause.
 That clause says "no person shall.    . be deprived of life,
 liberty or property without due process of law," and the right to
 sue for damages may be seen as a form of property.

"If an attorney can't seek punitive damages and can't spread the
costs of bringing a case among a number of clients, he's likely
not to take the case," said John Banzhaf, a law professor at
George Washington University and head of Action on Smoking and
Health.

He offered an example: "Suppose someone has lung cancer. As an
attorney, I know from experience he can collect maybe $l
million--that's roughly what a life is worth. The standard
contingency fee would give me about $300,000.

"Lawyers can earn $200 to $300 an hour, so that's l,OOO hours.
But the tobacco industry uses a scorched-earth litigation
policy--they file endless motions, take endless depositions,
appeal everything. They paper you to death. You'd have to spend
far more than l,OOO hours."

In other words, the right to sue would be preserved on paper, but
not in practice.

Scott Williams, a spokesman for the cigarette companies, pointed
out that a ban on punitive damages is not absolute. Anyone who is
injured by future "egregious conduct" of a toba.cco company
retains the right to sue for punitive as well as compensatory
damages. But someone who develops lung cancer, say, in the year
2005 won't qualify, because that injury most likely will have
been caused by exposure to carcinogens that began in the 1970s or
even earlier--that is, by past conduct.

Richard Daynard, a law professor at Northeastern University and
chairman of the Tobacco Products Liability Project in Boston,
believes the proposed settlement, if enacted, might violate
constitutional guarantees of state sovereignty. The lOth
Amendment says all powers not delegated to the federal government
by the Constitution "are reserved to the states.    . or to the
people."

The deal "would essentially be an attempt by Congress to change
the law of civil procedure in every state of the union. Congress
would be telling state courts they can't consolidate ciaims or
certify class actions or award punitive damages," said Daynard.
"That's outrageous as well as unconstitutional."

Lawrence Gostin, a professor of law at Georgetown University,
.
~
    ·

    agrees the deal could be vulnerable to challenges on due-process
    and states-rights grounds.

     "The Supreme Court has been adamant in recent years that Congress
    can't limit the rights of states," said Gostin. "And it closely
    ,scrutinizes decisions to impede the rights of future litigants,
    including the kinds of damages they might get. Congress has no
    power to take away the full rights of potential litigants to sue
    and collect both compensatory and punitive damages."

    Harvard's Laurence Tribe, a leading constitutional scholar,
    disagrees.

    According to Tribe and Sunstein, Congress can bar individual
    suits as long as the ban is part of a package deal that gives
    injured parties a reasonable benefit in return.

    "A cap on (compensatory) damages and elimination of punitive
    damages for past acts are perfectly consistent with the
    Constitution," said Tribe, who helped design some of the state
    suits against the tobacco industry.

    Douglas said the "best recourse" of those who oppose the
    settlement "would be to lobby like hell on Capitol Hill--deal
    with the politics and don't wait till it gets to court."

    But he did not believe the settlement, even if Congress approved
    it as is, would end the stream of litigation against cigarette
    companies.

    "I know first-hand that some of the leading private lawyers in
    the (state suits) and private class actions are already gearing
    up to file thousands of individual lawsuits following enactment
    of legislation by Congress," Douglas said.

    Copyright Chicago Tribune


