 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Elizabeth Drye ( CN=Elizabeth Drye/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JUL-1997 11:58:53.00

 SUBJECT:   draft Q&A

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Not sure if this is what you needed, but hopefully it's a start.




Q:      Can you say any more about the tobacco settlement now that your
staff have had time to review it?

A:      First, let me again commend the attorneys general and others who
were involved in the settlement for their work to advance the cause of
protecting the public health and protecting our children. My
Administration has already put in place a cornerstone on which to build
we fought for, and the court has upheld, the Food and Drug
Administration's authority to regulate tobacco, and I believe that this
development in large part led to the tobacco companies' willingness to
engage in settlement talks.  The settlement proposal now provides an
historic chance to further protect our children and our country from the
dangers of tobacco.  Some of the provisions build on the FDA's rule --
such as the more extensive advertising restrictions and provisions to
reduce smoking in public buildings.   But I have asked my advisors to
subject the settlement to strict scrutiny, to make sure it represents a
clear improvement for the public health.

Q.      Your staff said today that the tobacco settlement does not give
FDA adequate authority to regulate nicotine and that this part of the
settlement would have to be changed.  Is your position that the settlement
is unacceptable without such changes?

A.      I have. asked my advisors to look very carefully at this
question. As I said, the FDA's ability to regulate tobacco products is a
cornerstone in our efforts.   The FDA must be able to respond to
information and better science to require companies to make the products
safer and less addictive where possible.   I will not support legislation
that would impede FDA's ability to fulfill our public health objectives;
if the settlement does so, it will have to be changed.

Q.      Drs. Knoop and Costlier delivered their report on the tobacco
settlement to Secretary Chillily and Bruce Reed earlier today.   That
report calls for public health measures far beyond what the tobacco
companies have agreed to in their settlement with state attorneys general
(for example ... ). You said you would be consulting closely with the
public health community.  Does this mean you won't agree to the settlement
unless it's changed to have substantially stronger public health
provisions?
·

    A:      I am very thankful for the work of Drs. Knoop and Costlier, and
    the over 20 health groups that participated on their commission. They
    have provided a great service. As I have said before, I share some of
    their concerns, particularly with respect to FDA jurisdiction. We will
    certainly be look closely at their commission's report -- it will be very
    helpful in evaluating whether the settlement meets the test I've set of
    improving the public health.


