RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-JUL-1997 23:45:49.00

SUBJECT:   Affidavit of support and means tested benefits

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
You've asked me about the timing and status of the decision on means
tested benefits, as well as the timing of the affidavit of support rule
that Sally Katzen wrote that interesting note about. Here's the wonderful
story:

Means-tested is ready to go.   But there are now 2 holdups to getting these
2 out.

1. DOJ feels very strongly that it should not send out major
interpretations of the welfare law on immigration without first meeting
and "consulting" with Rep. Lamar Smith. There is about .000005% chance
that he would like our interpretation, tell us anything we don't already
know, or change our minds, but DOJ has been very firm on this.   So we are
waiting for this meeting to get scheduled and occur, 'and then to let a
respectable number of days pass before taking our action.

2. On the affidavit of support, a final snag has arisen in the last few
days on the definition of "state means tested benefits" that OLC says was
raised by the Brady Law decision. DOJ and INS met today to iron this out;
I don't know the resolution yet.   I am trading calls with David Ogden to
suggest to him that time is of the essence.

Finally, HHS feels very strongly that means-tested should be announced at
the same time as the affidavit, so there will be one day of attention to
this rather than two.  Therefore they are very reluctant to schedule the
meeting with Smith until they know that the affidavit issue is resolved.

So the schedule is:
1. settle state means tested definition issue in affidavit of support
(punting is a possibility)
2. meet with smith
3. issue both a few days later


