RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:l0-JUL-1997 13:31:27.00

SUBJECT:   URban/race stuff

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached is the revised outline of the urban education/race issues, and an
outline I sent Terry Edmonds last night for the speech. Here is what you
should know about each:

1. NAACP: The speech outline reflects our conversation as well as one I
had right afterwards with Leslie Thornton (COS to Riley and race
initiative contact at ED).  She felt strongly that it was a mistake to
talk about the national tests to this crowd, because they hate it.  She
thought it was ok to talk about standards, but not tests.

I strongly disagreed with that--he can't talk about standards without
talking about tests, and he can't lead much of a national dialogue if he
backs away from his highest priority because it is controversial. Leslie
was concerned that we would be worse off with stories saying that POTUS
got a hostile reception (or filled with quotes from people in the audience
saying how much they dislike the testing idea) than we would with stories
saying that POTUS downplayed his prirority in order to cater to the audien
ceo

In any event, we agreed on the rest of the speech -- talking about what we
have done to create the conditions for preparing kids to meet the
standards and do well on the test. And that we need to do more. We
agreed on the basic points to be made as well -- issues like safety, our
investments in technology, reading tutors, etc.

I framed the Title V announcement as the first step in the "we need to do
more" section. However, as you can see, I'm not sure what to hint at as
the other steps we expect to take. I'm still working on this, and talking
to people at ED. Let me know your thoughts.


2. On the overall framework for the urban/race working group:    I've made
some slight modifications from the version you looked at Tues. evening,
and I've started to identify where the leadership for each effort ought to
be housed (I'll get you more detail on this shortly -- the general rules
are (1) where there is an activity up and running, keep it going under
current form [e.g., Shireman/NEC are taking the lead on the Hispanic
education initiative.   I don't see messing with that;  (2) where there is
new stuff to be done, I should be the presumptive lead/convener; and, (3)
the issue on civil rights enforcement and ed reform -- title VII, Voting
Rights, etc. -- needs to be figured out in light of how you approach the
Administration of Justice issues)

The key issue to get this area moving is to figure out exactly what we are
asking each group to produce, and what the timeline for producing it is.
I'm trying to flesh that out a bit today, and will send it to you later.
I don't expect to nail this down very much, but I think before we meet
with the working group, we need to be able to give them a better idea of


what we want.

Hope this helps.    Any thoughts?

3. Title V update:    (1) Education agreed, after some struggling and with
support from OMB, that they would focus the teacher preparation component
(the "lighthouse" institutions) entirely on urban and poor rural areas,
rather simply making it a priority for the competition (awarding bonus
points in effect) .
(2)We all agreed, after much discussion, that it was ok for ED to keep
this as two separate components -- one on lighthouse institutions, and one
on providing scholarships for people who agree to serve in underserved
areas.   The best argument for doing this is that it works better for urban
systems -- they can play in this competition if they have a good program
for moving paraprofessionals into the classroom, for example, even if they
don't have an institution of higher education that has a prayer of become
a lighthouse teacher training institution. I made Terry Dozier confirm
this with the Council of Greaty CIty Schools before signing off on it.     I
also made them promise that the press materials that are produced (they
will send first draft today, we will naturally control final version),
unlike the specifications we have seen, we not make a reasonable person
wonder why we are trying to recruit teachers from low quality
institutions. I thnk we can do this.

(3) their impact estimates (number of new teachers, etc.) are still a bit
soft, and need to be reworked anyway in light of the urban focus.  I'll
get them soon. Because we have better focused the program, we can show
that we are having a relatively greater impact.

(4) ED's budget proposal is at $60 million for the first year, and
increasing by $10 million each year until it ramps up to $100 in the 5th
year.  Kathy Stack thought this might be too high for OMB to swallow; I
didn't think $10 million per year should be a huge problem. Bruce thinks
we are ok as long as we can talk about a $250 million program, and I will
keep talking to OMB today to work this out.

 (5) We discussed, but didn't resolve, the issue of seeking endorsements
ready to be announced when the President announces the proposal. We do
not expect to get endorsements from the higher education community, since
they want the money to be spread allover the country. e might be able to
get K-12 endorsement, especially from the urban schools. No one has yet
talked to NAACP or the civil rights groups.    I need guidance on this-- it
would be g60d to get endorsements, but if we seek them we run the risk of
being drawn into negotiations at this late date, and of having the
proposal leaked.
Any guidance?
Otherwise ... everything is completly under control!==================== ATTACHMENT
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:     0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D84] MAIL467594099. 116 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF5750435F040000010A02010000000205000000B918000000020000D6ECB638ADA82BBEACE81A
34CC52C250B92FOB3BE69750D2C3644497231BB2585BICA22B79999A354CED937F343D8DAOF6A9
BCF6E2AD4736634711E851C3E0574C7BDD57A154AB962361A2C5C2754B392A535BEIED807D64F5
DDD03617D598397172BCFBF8893B362765323DF5DD964BOA832B46369C36B16E414A7F2859507A
B4D8FA99DBOCDC5456EOB9AF5806DIElAED3C2D151FF7572Cl14BCBD63CB35FDEIF2A15084FE16
E24374BCCF5CE161953DB29DC27D2E2C462902DB7D186AFD589F90F6496DB8F5706AD4337D3708
06E1540530AFDA823BD79EIE26E2E534A570213607C180A152969E216E178236404C8632803B74
                                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
Draft 2
7/9
                               Race and Urban Education Issues


WORK ALREADY UNDERWAY
1. Raising Standards
      Urban Testing Initiative which is identifying approximately 12 urban school systems that
      would sign up for national tests and form network with ED and NSF to share information
      about promising practices and resources to prepare students to meet the standards.
      Urban systemic reform building on ED's 1996 proposed urban initiative (ACE) which
      focused on accountability, choice and excellence through an urban grants program.
      Reconstitution of failing schools focused effort that would stimulate and support efforts
      to turn around failing schools

2. Improving Teaching
     Teacher Recruitment and Preparation initiative proposed under Title V of HEA

3. Providing Safe Places Before and After School
      Community Schools Program in ED's FY 1998 budget
      After School Programs in proposed amendment to Juvenile Justive bill

4. School Construction
      Action needed depends upon outcome of budget reconciliation

5. Expanding Access to Higher Education
     Addressed in decision memo in response to Chaka Fattah proposal

6. Hispanic Education Initiative
      NEC leading effort on this


POTENTIAL AREAS OF NEW WORK
1. Using existing resources and programs (Title 1, Safe and Drug Free Schools,
Technology Literacy Challenge, e-rate, Goals 2000, School-to-Work, Voc. Ed.) to more
effectively support the improvement of urban education, by:
        greater targeting of resources to urban areas through appropriations requests, formula
        changes, or regulatory changes.
        increased flexibility in the use of formula funds to support local improvement strategies.
        better information on effective practices for addressing urban issues with federal program
        funds.
        targeted technical assistance to help small number of districts use program funds and
        R&D to strengthen refonns, with a special emphasis on reading and math standards.
        accessing resources in EZ's/EC's to support education improvement
        targeting funds for National Board for Professional Teaching Standards to provide
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

       support to urban (and rural) teachers preparing for board certification and/or incentives
       for board-certified teaches to teach in high poverty urban (and rural) schools


2. Racial Isolation Among Schools
     not clear what to do on this

3. Civil Rights Enforcement and Education Reform: Working through potential conflicts

       School Takeovers and Voting Rights Act
       High Stakes Testing and Title VI
       Teacher Testing and Title VII

4. School Finance Equity
      possible bully pulpit -- highlight problem, challenge states to do better
                                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

Talking points for California phone calls re: President's testing plan:

1. We understand that negotiations are under way on the issues related to Gov. Wilson's testing
proposal.

2. You may know that President Clinton has proposed national standards and tests in 4th grade
reading and 8th grade math, and has asked every state to participate. Delaine Eastin has already
endorsed this proposal.

3. We have been talking with the California Teachers' Association and the California School
Boards Association in the past day, and they believe that the President's testing initiative can be
incorporated into the compromise proposal they have developed.

4. It would be very helpful to the President if California would participate in this initiative, and
we would appreciate any help you could provide to make this happen.

For more information on the President's testing initiative, call Mike Cohen at 456-5575
                                                                               Hex-Dump Convers\
                                         NAACP Speech
                                        Education Portion


1. Disturbing gap in achievement and attainment between low income and more advantaged,
between black and white [fill in data on trends in student achievement and postsecondary
emollment and completion]

2. One important reason is attitude -- be1iefthat learning is dependent on background and IQ
rather than effort and hard work. This has led to a tyranny oflow expectations; many well
intentioned people, out of compassion, have held lower expectations for students from
disadvantaged and minority backgrounds and, as a result, have sold their future's down the river.

3. That's why Riley and I have worked so hard to raise academic standards; to give every
student the benefit of high expectations and a challenging curriculum. We fought to pass
Goals 2000 and overhaul Title I so that every child, from the poorest inner city school to the
most isolated rural school to the richest suburban school would be taught to the same
expectations.

4. That is why we are fighting right now for national standards in reading and math, and
tests to measure progress. These standards make clear to students, parents and teachers what
every child is expected to learn; make it possible for schools, parents and communities to focus
on preparing students to meet the standards, and the tests make it possible to tell if we are
making progress. In too many states and too many schools the tests they use and the grades they
give paint an inaccurate picture of student achievement, giving parents and students alike a false
sense of achievement and denying them the help they need to succeed in the future.

5. Make no mistake, standards and tests are essential, but alone they are insufficient. As
a nation we must give students and schools the tools they need to reach these standards. And we
must do this for all children, leaving no one behind. Education is it state and local responsibility,
and that is where the primary responsibility for equal educational opportunity rests. But
education is a national priority, and we all must do our part -- parents, community groups, state
and local governments and the federal government.

6. Here is what my Administration has done:
       -- Help local communities renovate and n;pair schools that need it, and build new ones
       where needed. because students can't learn in buildings that are falling down. in disrepair.
       or seriously overcrowded -- will keep working to get Congress to pass a School
       Construction Initiative, even though R's balked in budget agreement

       -- Make sure every student in poor urban and isolated rural school has access to the same
       information that students in the wealthiest suburban communities have -- e-rate

       -- Provide the extra help so that every 8 yr old can read independently and well --
       America Reads
                                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion


             -- Work to keep students and schools safe, disciplined and free of drugs -- [need strong
             value statement about kids needing to go to school wh~e they won't be in fear of their
            'lives, of daily routines such as walking to school or going to bathroom, or of falling
             behind in learning because kids are disruptive. Much of the responsibility here falls with
             parents, who must teach kids right from wrong, and schools, which must have and
             enforce discipline policies] POTUS could talk about Administration efforts re: weapons
             in school, truancy, uniforms.                                                   .

     7. We must do more, especially for urban and poor rural communities where the barriers
     to achievement are the greatest. As a first step, I am announcing today a new initiative to
     help recruit and prepare a diverse group of teachers to teach in urban and rural
     communities. This initiative includes scholarship incentives for people who will commit to
     teach for at least three years in high poverty communities, with a special emphasis on
     recruiting minorities into teaching, and on nontraditional teaching candidates such as
     teachers aides and other paraprofessionals, and mid-career professionals who want to shift
     into teaching. It also includes funds to strengthen the teacher preparation programs, so
     that those who go into teaching will be better prepared to teach students served by urban
     and poor rural schools.

     8. Over the coming months, my Administration will develop additional initiatives to
     strengthen education in urban areas, addressing issues such as ....


     9. Others must do their part as well, if we are to provide the benefits of a world class
     education to all of our students ..... .


