RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:10-JUL-1997 14:37:07.00

SUBJECT:   Tony Campolo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Riqe ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
The Rev. Tony Campolo just gave me this update:  He is working on an event
being organized by "Youth for Christ" on Friday evening, July 18 (same day
as our Girls Nation event). It will include 25-30,000 young people,
mostly high school age, gathering on the Mall as part of a 4-day
conference. Each young person is pledging to serve 3 hours a week for the
next 6 months in their communities. He is sending me some paper on it.
They already had an event in LA in late June with 11,000 young people
there. It includes Christian denominations ranging from Roman Catholic to
Pentacostal. He noted that the Summit didn't recognize that how many
volunteers come from the religious community. He says he is talking to
the Washington Post about the event. He invited Powell, but he's out of
the country. Apparently he has had some communication with the
President's office, because he said he was told the President would just
be returning from his trip and would try to come, but wasn't sure if he
can.

Not sure how relevant all this is   because it's so explicitly religious,
but thought you should know given   the nearness of our event and his
relationship with the President.    Shall I put this in the weekly report?
I should also probably forward to   Steve Silverman and Ann Lewis.

Also, he mentioned that Harris may have resolved the issue of whether his
Mission Year service program for college students can get AmeriCorps
scholarships even though they do some "religious evangelism." He said he
had given up when Harris called him and said they could provide reduced
scholarships to reflect just the time not connected to evangelism. They
are working out the details, but it would be roughly $2,500 instead of
$4,725. He thinks it could happen for the next year of Mission Year.
I've asked Gomperts to give us a heads-up before any announcement by
anyone.


