    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:12-JUL-1997 11:35:09.00

    SUBJECT:   Just got the attached from Vicki Radd ...

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Cynthia A. Rice (. CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    I am doing an update for you on the status of the disability executive
    order today, complete with a draft. Do you want me to forward it to you
    so you can forward to Vicki, or do you want me to send it to you both
    simultaneously?

    Actually, I'll run through the basic situation now:  negotiations with DOL
    and the appointees have just fallen off track.  The EO sets up a task
    force led by DOL to investigate how to improve employment of people with
    disabilities. The disabled appointees have a specific agenda they want
    enacted (e.g., tax credits, major funding for personal assistance
    services, being tough on states that won't give disabled people on welfare
    accommodations so they can work).  Therefore, they want the EO to include
    several bullets that are veiled references to these ideas, to set the
    stage to get them seriously considered.  They also want to include 2
    specific ideas -- taking the Defense Department's computer accommodations
    program government-wide, at a cost of $2-6 million; and having BLS and
    Census devise and implement monthly reporting of the unemployment rate of
    people with disabilities, which may cost money (Tony Coelho has been
    negotiating this with the agencies for some time.) My view of this
    approach is that it is fairly modest for this group; and that meeting the
    appointees' desire for real change will be challenging for DOL.

    However, DOL (Seth Harris and staff) is getting cold feet about the
    specifics, and they just proposed a much vaguer revision -- far enough
    over the line that the disabled appointees regard it as a waste of time.
    DOL is new to disability issues -- Reich never focused on them, but Herman
    is apparently interested -- but they are uncomfortable about being saddled
    with a specific agenda they don't yet know or share.  Seth is going to
    talk to Kitty about this, and I suspect she will want to be very
    cautious.

    I'm not sure what to do next, especially with the ADA 7/25 date looming
     (although not clear what event we have). According to John Lancaster
     (Tony Coelho's good executive director at the President's Committee on
    Employment who is shepherding this through and whom you've met), he and
    Marca Bristo feel it's worth missing the ADA to get this right, but Judy
    Heumann thinks we should keep pushing. Seth feels strongly that it's
    unrealistic to have this settled by ADA.   I am spending part of this
    afternoon doing a compromise draft that we could put into circulation
    through Mac Reed/OMB if you think it is a good idea to keep this moving.
    I assume if we don't get it into circulation this week, we can't be ready
    by the 25th.

    By the way, you had asked me how we get the Defense Dept. CAP thing to
    happen.  It is strictly an OMB question.  Carol Rasco pushed it very


 ineffectively with them.  Convincing Frank or Jack is not easy, so it's
 probably more realistic that Erskine's office would just tell them he
 wants to do ~his and they should find a way.  I will send you a short
 rationale for why this is a good idea.

                 ------ Forwarded by Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP on 07/12/97 10:53 AM




 Victoria Radd
 07/12/97 10:36:37 AM
 Record Type:    Record

 To:      William H. White Jr./WHO/EOP, Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP
 cc:
 Subject:         Disabilities Executive Order


 Ann Lewis told me yesterday that we were working on a possible E.O. in
 anticipation of the ADA signing.  Can either of you please send or e-mail
 me a copy of any draft? If possible, I'd also appreciate knowing where we
 are in the process as well.

 Many thanks,

 V.
'"
     ---
