 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:15-JUL-1997 14:18:30.00

 SUBJECT:   Sylvia's standards meeting today

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Well, on account of the fact that neither of you showed up for it, Sylvia,
 with the consent of all present (Rahm, Doug Ann, . and John Podesta, as well
 as myself) cancelled the meeting.  She will reschedule.

 I did learn more about the point of the meeting:  to discuss what kind of
 fight we might start on the Hill over the tests. As best as I can tell,
 the purposes of this move would be to get press, demonstrate resolve and
 momentum, and help define partisan differences. John asked me to develop
 some options before the next meeting.

 In the event we have to do this quickly, here are my preliminary thoughts:

 1. It would be really helpful to have Hilley and/or Andy Blocker at the
 meeting before we pick some Congressional fights.

 2. Here are several possible vehicles for raising the profile of the
 issue in Congress (I won't go through pro's and con's with respect to
 policy or politics yet) :

 Send up legislation to create an advisory board for the tests

 Send up legislation seeking specific, explicit authority to administer and
 pay for the tests

 Send up legislation providing financial incentives to states or districts
 that administer the tests--if you give the test, we will send $ for
 improving teaching and learning in reading and math, perhaps as a
 supplement to Title 1

 Send up some kind of failing school legislation, that give school
 improvement $ to cities that sign on to the test and helps them take over
 failing schools

 Send up legislation that provides financial incentives for kids who do
 well on the test (e.g., Chakkah Fattah)

 Send up legislation requiring use of the test in order to continue to
 receive Title 1, Goals 2000 or other funds

 Announce that we are going to give the 4th grade reading test in Spanish

 Announce that we are not goint to give the 4th grade reading test in
 Spanish

 Support a Sense of the House Resolution urging support for the tests
"




        3. As a threshold issue, we probably have to decide if we want a fight we
        can clearly win (which may minimze conflict and press attention) or one
        that we can get credit for fighting even if we lose--in which case we need
        to figure out who we want to fight with, the left or the right.

        4. One of my next steps will be to limit this list to those positions that
        I think make sense on policy grounds, or at least to be clear about that
        in any pro's and con's.


