 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:18-JUL-1997 00:27:41.00

 SUBJECT:   9:45 pm draft

 TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Here's the draft radio address.  jc3
 ---------------------- Forwarded by Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP on 07/18/97
 12:27 AM ---------------------------




 Lowell A. Weiss
 07/17/97 09:41:17 PM
 Record Type:    Record

 To:      mawaldman @ aol.com @ inet, Michelle Crisci/WHO/EOP, Jose Cerda
 Ill/OPD/EOP
 cc:
 Subject:         9:45 pm draft

 PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
 YOUTH CRIME GUN INTERDICTION INITIATIVE RADIO ADDRESS
 JULY 18, 1997



         Good morning.  Today I want to talk about the important progress
 we are making in our efforts to get guns out of the hands of violent
 teenagers ..

         My Administration has put in place a community-based strategy to
 confront crime -- relying on more police, tougher punishment, and better
 prevention. This strategy is working.   For the past five years in a row,
 we have seen serious crime drop nationwide. Last year we saw the largest
 one-year decline in violent crime and murder in 35 years.

         Even the juvenile crime rate showed some decline in 1995. But we
 know that juvenile violence is still a huge problem. We know children are
 killing children -- for shoes, for jackets, for turf. We know that too
 many children are drawn to guns and violence as a way of life.

         The facts are plain. The flood of guns onto our streets has
 reached staggering proportions. The number of teenagers committing crimes
 without guns is the same today as it was in the 1970s. But the number of
 crimes teenagers commit with guns has soared by 300%. That is simply
 unacceptable. We must cut off the flow of guns to teens.



         In too many cities, when a gang member is caught committing a
 crime with a smoking gun in his hand, the gun is simply put in the police
 locker and the trail grows cold. So we launched a national initiative to
 trace every gun seized from criminals in 17 cities to find out where these
 guns are coming from and how they find their way onto our streets.

         A year later, the first results are in. We now have a treasure
 trove of vital gun information for investigators nationwide. We know
 where children are getting guns. We know how children are getting guns.
 We know what kinds of guns theyD,re getting.

         It is now clear that many guns are finding their way quickly from
 licensed retail stores to black markets that serve gang members and other
 violent teens. In less than a year, in 17 cities alone, law enforcement
 officials seized nearly 10,000 guns that started on legal shelves and
 ended up in the possession of violent teens.

          Some people argue that the only way kids are getting guns is by
 stealing them from adults. But the reality is even more disturbing: Many
 violent teenagers are buying guns in bulk from shadowy suppliers -- a
 criminal network that channels semiautomatic weapons to the streets.

         Make no mistake: Gun traffickers are behind the surge in deadly
 youth violence. We have learned how they operate. Now we are shutting
 them down.

          In Milwaukee, for example, weD,ve done just that.  Thanks to the
 tracing reports we now have, law enforcement officials noticed an obvious
 pattern: Several guns used in gang-related murders, armed robberies, and
 drive-by shootings had originally been purchased by one particular
 security guard.   Police investigators quickly discovered that the guard
 was· selling brand new semi-automatic weapons from the trunk of his car.
 Police swept in and arrested the guard in April. He pled guilty to serious
 trafficking charges and will be sentenced next month.

         Our gun-tracing initiative has been such a success that we are now
 going to expand our efforts to 10 more cities, including Philadelphia and
 Los Angeles. We will also work with Congress to hire more ATF agents to
 work with local police officers and prosecutors to nail traffickers based
 on the new leads we are generating every day.

         We have a chance to build on our progress by passing a smart,
 balanced juvenile justice bill that does more than just talk tough. We
 need to provide for more prosecutors, tougher penalties, and better
 prevention programs for at-risk juveniles. We should require that every
 new gun has a child-safety lock. And we should prohibit violent teenagers
 from buying guns once they become adults.

         Next week, the Senate will have an opportunity to begin voting on
 a juvenile justice bill that contains some of these provisions. I urge
 them to be comprehensive -- not just to increase penalties but also to
 block childrenD,s access to guns. Anything less will be a juvenile
 justice bill in name only.

         If we are to stop the flow of guns to children, we also must
 continue to perform background checks on gun-buying adults. Background
 checks of gun buyers mandated by the Brady law have already stopped more
 than 250,000 fugitives, felons, and stalkers from buying handguns -- some
 of which would have ende4 up in the arsenals of youth gangs. Although the


    Supreme Court recently struck down portions of Brady law, the overwhelming
    majority of local police officers are continuing to perform background
    checks voluntarily -- because they work.
            In the past year, we have started to crack the code of the black
    market in illegal weapons.  We are tracing the guns, targeting the
    traffickers, and taking more of our children out of harmD,s way. And with
    dedicated prosecutors and tough police, we will spread our success to
    cities across the nation. Together, we will rid our communities of the
    scourge of youth crime.


