 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:21-JUL-1997 14:20:06.00

SUBJECT:

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Books
Liberal Racism
By Jim Sleeper
Viking; 195 pages; $21.95
Mighty White of You
Jim SleeperO,s Liberal Racism.
By Sean Wilentz
J
im Sleeper has made his reputation as a contrarian liberal writer on
racial politics. In his first book, The Closest of Strangers, which was
published in 1990, Sleeper attacked what he saw as a guilt-ridden,
condescending, and hypocritical orthodoxy about race among New York
Cit yO,s well-to-do white liberals. Looking in depth at New York politics
since the 1950s, Sleeper explained how New YorkO,s liberals had come to
blame the hardships of Harlem and Brownsville entirely on racist municipal
bureaucrats, racist landlords, and racist employers, as well as on the
preponderance of the cit yO,s white ethnic middle and working classes (who
were, many liberals presumed, inherently racist) .
It was, Sleeper contended, a simplified view of urban poverty and race
relations, but also a seductive one. Liberal race dogma encouraged whites
living in affluent portions of Manhattan and Brooklyn to romanticize
low-income blacks, elevating themselves (at the expense of other white New
Yorkers) as paragons of social virtue and progressive politics. It also
led many high-minded reformers to develop a knee-jerk sympathy for
D&grass-rootsD8 leaders who excoriated white people.
In truth, Sleeper argued, ritualistic incantations about black
victimization severely underestimated the moral and physical decay of the
inner city, and they slighted the afflictions that some poor blacks
visited on themselves and on their hard-working neighbors and relatives.
In combination with the race-baiting theatrics of figures such as Al
Sharpton, orthodox racial liberalism had poisoned New YorkD,s race
relations, Sleeper claimed, and foreclosed any possibility of an effective
reformist political initiative from below.
Although he was tough on many leading liberal writers and politicians,
Sleeper, who is an editorial board member at Dissent magazine as well as a
longtime Manhattan journalist, remained a self-declared man of the left.
In The Closest of Strangers, he took care to criticize conservatives for
their race-baiting and for their hypocritical promotion of O&colorblindD8
policies that would abandon impoverished blacks to their misery. Still,
SleeperD,s iconoclastic book, like his columns for Newsday and the New
York Daily News, offended many readers, black and white, who quickly
stigmatized him as a closet right-winger, a tool of the Republican
PartyO*and a racist.
Since then, Sleeper has become a little less lonely. Several white liberal
and left pundits, including Todd Gitlin and Michael Tomasky, have assailed
the theory and the practice of multiculturalism in ways that are congruent
with SleeperO,s attacks on liberal racial thinking. Even more significant,
some important left-of-center black professors and intellectuals,


  including Randall Kennedy, Gerald Early, and (the often misunderstood)
 Stanley Crouch have registered their intense discomfort with the prevailing
   terms of racial debate.
  In recent years, these black liberals and social democrats have arrived at
 what might be called a transracial understanding of American culture and
 politics. Influenced by the writings of Ralph Ellison and Albert Murray,
 transracialism is staunchly integrationist. Without denying the harsh
 realities of persisting racial inequality, it promotes a broad
 identification with humanity over narrow racial solidarities. By
 challenging the political and cultural sanctity of o&blacknessoS (and, it
 must be added, of o&whiteness,oS too), and by regarding America as a
 mulattoized culture of multicultural individuals, transracialists
 contradict the melodramatic racialist mystique that began to govern the
 American left during the Black Power enthusiasms of 30 years ago.
 Transracialists have yet to formulate a specific body of policy
 recommendations; so far they have devoted themselves mainly·to elaborating
 a philosophy of politics and culture. But they could well be establishing
 a seat of reason from which such programs cou
 ld arise. In Liberal Racism, Sleeper restates many of the key transracial
 arguments, as well as many of his criticisms of orthodox liberalism, in an
 all-out assault on what he sees as the deep-seated racism of much modern
 o&anti-racistoS thinking.
 Sleeper has pitched Liberal Racism at a much higher level of
 generalization than he did The Closest of Strangers. Not that he has
 forsaken his New York interests. (He devotes, for example, an entire
 chapter of Liberal Racism to what he calls the o&mindless diversityoS and
 the o&disingenuousoS racialist views of the New York Times under the
 regime of Arthur Sulzberger Jr.) But Liberal Racism also assesses national
 political issues such as race-based congressional districting and the
 nationwide spread of Afrocentrism, both of which Sleeper opposes. Although
 he evaluates numerous New York-based writers and activists, Sleeper also
 chastises such figures as Louis Farrakhan, Congresswoman Maxine Waters of
 California, and Martin Luther King Jr.o,s son Dexter for contributing,
 Sleeper says, to the countryo,s racial paranoia. And he includes a chapter
 in praise of Randall Kennedy and the ex-neoconservative sociologist Glenn
 Loury, neither of whom is a New Yorker.
 Unfortunately, although Liberal Racismo,s scope is broad, much of its
 analysis is thin and unpersuasive. The first half of the book touches on
 an assortment of topics, from blacks in academia to urban crime, and tries
·to assemble Sleepero,s opinions into a philosophical whole. But Sleepero,s
 efforts at sweeping cultural criticism are frustrating and scattershot. He
 does begin, usefully, by defining liberal racism as a distinctive
 progressive mind-set, characterized by a patronizing attitude toward
 nonwhites, a belief in the existential primacy of racial differences, and
 a deep psychological discomfort in the presence of blacks. o&Some white
 liberals,oS he smartly observes, o&insulated from honest give-and-take
 with blacks and hobbled by guilt and fear of the unknown, seem so wary of
 such encounters that they construct intricate latticeworks of racial
 rectitude and noble stereotypes to mask their own fears.oS
 Quickly, though, Sleepero,s portrayal of the pathos and tragedy of
 American liberal sO, racial misapprehensions gives way to ad hominem
 polemics that are long on outrage but short on substance. For example,
 Sleeper denounces the law professor Derrick Bell and the
 philosopher-preacher Cornel West as o&skilled race pros,oS o&black
 retainersoS of the liberal racist establishment and o&impresarios of
 racial theateroSo*but he fails to support his charges with anything
 resembling coherent discussions of BellO,s and WestD,s writings and
 political activities.
 Bell and West are certainly vulnerable on various counts, including
 BellO,s tendentious contributions to o&critical race theoryoS and Westo,s


strange public embrace of Farrakhan during the Million Man March. But for
Sleeper, it is sufficient to gesture to snippets from BellO,s and WestD,s
commentaries (and to quote at length from a self-important message that
West has left on his Harvard voice mail) in order to condemn them.
Similarly, Sleeper upbraids the New York TimesD*and, in particular,
Sulzberger, Howell Raines, and Frank RichD*on the basis of in-group
anecdotes and a limited sample of columns and editorials. He thus
undercuts his own best intention, which is to develop a powerful
intellectual and political alternative to those he criticizes.
In the second half of Liberal Racism, Sleeper settles down and writes
informatively about particular stories and the personalities behind them.
 (In other words, he returns to his strengths as a professional
newspaperman.) The results are much more credible. Sleeper makes some
shrewd remarks about the long-term decline of the Roots phenomenon, and
about what he calls author Alex HaleyD,s D&Faustian bargainD8 in
fabricating an uplifting African-American myth. On a more positive note,
in his chapter on Randall Kennedy and Glenn Loury, Sleeper quotes from his
subjects at length. Here, at last, he begins to elaborate a compelling
alternative to current liberal thinking, one that combines stalwart
integrationist principles with a deep concern about the wretched
conditions of millions of black Americans. In these passages, he sounds as
if he considers himself part of a hopeful intellectual and political
trend, and not, as he so often does early in the book, an embittered voice
in the urban wilderness.
Sleeper concludes with a heartfelt plea D&to acknowledge that this
countryD,s redemption has not and will not come through making race the
organizing principle of our polity and civic culture.D8 This is splendid.
Along with several other remarks that appear in Liberal Racism, it
retrieves some of the rugged racial idealism of Martin Luther King Jr. and
the early Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. SleeperD,s book will
have done a service if it stimulates readers to read more thorough and
convincing critiques of liberal thinking, including KennedyD,s excellent,
newly published study, Race, Crime, and the Law. On its own, however,
Liberal Racism, with its blend of bombast and acuity, amounts to an uneven
manifesto.
Jim Sleeper addresses affirmat·ive action and race relations in the
May/June 1995 issue of the New Democrat, writing, D&We have transmuted
racism, not diminished itD8 (www.dlcppi.org/tnd/9505/sleep.htm). To read
more by the new transracial thinkers, try the February 1997 Atlantic
Monthly, in which Gerald Early reviews recent books on integration
(www.theatlantic.com/issues/97feb/integ.htm), or the May 1997 issue, in
which Randall Kennedy writes about D&My Race ProblemD*And OursD8
(www.theatlantic.com/issues/97may/kennedy.htm). SlateD,s D&Strange
BedfellowD8 looks at ClintonD,s race initiative
(www.slate.com/StrangeBedfellow/97-06-21/StrangeBedfellow.asp) .
Sean wilentz is professor of history and director of the program in
American studies at Princeton University.


