 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana FortunajOU=OPDjO=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATEjTIME:22-JUL-1997 12:55:37.00

 SUBJECT:   Summary of Calif. welfare issues

 TO: Elena Kagan       CN=Elena KaganjOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. ReedjOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. RicejOU=OPDjO=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Karen Skelton asked for a paragraph on what's happening in California on
welfare, in preparation for a meeting that Erskine is having tomorrow with
Democratic members of Congress from California, so we threw the following
together:


Recent Action in California on Welfare Reform:
California, which has 22% of the nationD,s welfare recipients, is
struggling to pass a welfare reform
plan that would implement the federal law in that state. It is part of a
battle over the state budget
and a new tax cut just proposed by Governor Pete wilson.

Two weeks ago, Democrats in the legislature passed a fairly tough plan.
Gov. Wilson, however,
immediately vetoed the first of the four bills sent to him, criticizing it
with very strong rhetoric, and
legislative leaders then withdrew the remaining bills.

Key differences are as follows:  The Democratic legislature voted to limit
each period of welfare
receipt to 24 months, but Wilson prefers 12 months for all new
recipients. Democrats oppose
WilsonD,s plan to cut benefits by 15 percent after a family has been on
the rolls for six months.
The DemocratsD, bill would permit mothers with infants to stay at home,
while Wilson wants women
to start looking for a job when their children are 12 weeks old.
Democrats voted for a partial
state takeover of the state general assistance program, but Wilson has
proposed to eliminate
the state requirement that counties provide general assistance.  Democrats
are now negotiating
with the Governor and Republican legislators, but it is not clear when or
whether an agreement
will emerge.

California DemocratsD, Current Concerns on Welfare:
o       Rep. Pete Stark has been a persistent critic of the PresidentD,s
signing of the federal
        welfare law.
o       Rep. Maxine Waters has a bill to exempt grandparents taking care
.,
     of children from the
             welfare lawD,s work requirements. The Administration has advised
     her that we can not
             support her proposal because we oppose weakening the work
     requirements, but we
             are meeting with her to discuss other possibilities for assisting
     grandparent caregivers.
     o       Rep. Lynn Woolsey, who was once on welfare herself, has proposed
     that the child support
             system, which is now state-based, be federalized, with the IRS
     doing the collections.


