RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jonathan Prince ( CN=Jonathan Prince/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-JUL-1997 10:57:01.00

SUBJECT:   Edley and Brownstein

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT: .
For all my ostensible world wide wizardry, it's good old reliable
Lexis-Nexis that delivers the goods.==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ============
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Document ID: C:\WORK\WP\RACE.NXF



                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                 The Boston Globe

                     July 20, 1997, Sunday, Second Edition
SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 907 words

HEADLINE: Clinton's race dialogue turns contentious;
Presidential initiative comes under fire as too little, too late, and delivered
 in the wrong forum

BYLINE: By Ann Scales, Globe staff

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:
   Writer and scholar Henry Louis Gates says there has never been a US presiden
t more comfortable around people of other races than President Clinton.

    But comfort is no shield against criticism. "So far, what has it gotten us?"
 asked Gates, the W.E.B. DuBois professor of the Humanities at Harvard Universi
ty.

   As Clinton wades into a national conversation on race, speaking last week to
 two black organizations for the first time since calling for the dialogue, the
 perilous nature of his undertaking is surfacing.

   John Hope Franklin, the historian he appointed to lead his advisory panel on
 race, caused the first ripple by criticizing the president for using the NAACP
 convention in Pittsburgh for his first speech on race since he announced the i
nitiative in San Diego during a commencement speech at the University of Califo
rnia.

   On Thursday, after speaking to the NAACP, Clinton flew to Chicago for a spee
ch to the National Association of Black Journalists, whose annual meeting ends
today.

   The ripple had turned to waves by the time Clinton was finished with both sp


eeches. Observers, including some of his strongest supporters, said he failed t
o articulate a vision that advanced the conversation. Others criticized him for
 failing to address the issue of affirmative action and for not even using the
term in either speech other than in response to a question from a black journal
ist.

   Gates said he believed Clinton's omission of affirmative action from the spe
eches was intentional. "I think he thinks that the term has an unfortunate nega
tive history. I don't think he's interested in reminding people of the disparit
ies that we have in this country that were caused by race and class. "It's unfo
rtunate, because I think we need more affirmative action, not less affirmative
action," he said.


   But Christopher Edley, a Harvard Law School professor who is a consultant fo
r the president's race initiative, said: "I don't view it as having been an ove
rsight. As much as one tries, one can't talk about everything in every speech."


   Even so, Edley said, "neither of these speeches served to add a great deal 0
n the dialogue track. Neither of the speeches wrestled with the hardest racial
issues dividing us."

   Though the affirmative action issue was not part of his remarks, Clinton str
ongly defended the policy in response to the reporter's question after his Chic
ago speech.

   He said he was "stumped" on how to stem the "shocking consequences" of decli
ning enrollment among minorities in professional schools as a result of such pr
ograms being ended in California.

   He said the Justice Department was reviewing steps it could take to legally
promote "an integrated educational environment in higher education" in states w
here declining enrollments have resulted from ending such programs.

   "It is an urgent matter of concern to me," he said.

   Despite moments in both speeches that were applauded by his black audiences,
 Clinton's usual ease in the company of blacks didn't seem on display in the se
cond speech. He fidgeted during the question-and-answer session with black jour
nalists. Aides said he was tired.

   But as he was preparing to speak to the NAACP, the Associated Press was repo
rting that Franklin was saying that he was not particularly happy with the audi
ence for Clinton's first major speech on race.

   "The white side has been in control of virtually everything, so they're the
ones who need educating on what justice and equality mean," said Franklin, who
accompanied Clinton to Pittsburgh but not Chicago.

   Franklin's sentiment was echoed later in the day by the Rev. Jesse Jackson,
who sat in the front row during Clinton's speech at the journalists' convention


  In an interview, Jackson suggested that "just talking to blacks or whites at
the working-class level is not going to do it. Working-class whites can't even
protect themselves from downsizing and out-sourcing."

  In Clinton's defense, Edley pointed out that the initiative was announced at
the University of California at San Diego, "which can hardly be called a black


 event." He added,_ "We will obviously be pursuing this initiative before audien
ces of every kind."

    Gates, who participated in a panel discussion Friday at the journalists' co
nvention titled, "Shades of Black: One Community, Many Voices, Conflicting Perc
eptions, " said later that Clinton's effort to discuss race would be "simplistic
ally rendered" if each ethnic group is portrayed as a monolith.


   He also said nothing will be accomplished "unless they stop talking about th
e black community like it's a monolith and all of these other ethnic groups lik
e they are a monolith."
   "What are we going to do, join hands and sing 'We Shall Overcome' at the end
 of the year? That ain't going to cut it. Been there, done that," Gates said.


   So far, he added, the initiative seems based "on a civil rights analysis fro
m the 1950s and 1960s, and that world doesn't exist anymore," Gates said. "It's
 not that racism isn't . . . rampant . . . . It's that classism and racism have
been compounded together in a crucible so it's hard to know where one starts an
d where one stops."

   Edley said the race effort has two tracks - a policy track that tightly para
llels the dialogue track. In his first foray, Clinton was strong on policy and
less so on the "historical and moral challenges of integration," Edley said. "W
e moved forward on one, but only reiterated themes on the other."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, HENRY LOUIS GATES

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

LOAD-DATE: July   22, 1997
        CLIENT:   EDLEY
       LIBRARY:   NEWS
          FILE:   CURNWS



YOUR SEARCH REQUEST IS:
 CLINTON AND RACE AND BROWNSTEIN AND AFRICAN

NUMBER OF STORIES FOUND WITH YOUR REQUEST THROUGH:
      LEVEL   1. ..     33

o
                      Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                                Los Angeles Times

                      July 21, 1997, Monday,   Home Edition
SECTION: Part A; Page 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words

HEADLINE: WASHINGTON OUTLOOK;
CLINTON SEEKS DIALOGUE ON RACE, BUT HE MUST GO BEYOND SAME OLD TALK

BYLINE: RONALD BROWNSTEIN

BODY:




   The news flash from last week's first meeting of President Clinton's advisor
y board on race is that America is a racist country. Deeply, broadly racist. Pe
rhaps irredeemably racist.

   Board member Angela Oh, a Los Angeles lawyer, set the tone early on when she
 said the panel should not waste its time documenting the extent of discriminat
ion because it was so widespread. "I don't need the data," she said. "I don't t
hink any of us need the data; we know it's there."

   John Hope Franklin, the prominent African American historian who chairs the
board, then raised the ante. Racism, he said, pervaded American life: "Our whol
e country, our whole practices are suffused with it," he said. "Hardly an aspec
t of American life has escaped the baneful touch of this awful thing called rac
ism.     . Wherever you go, you are going to see this."

   The closest to a dissenting note came from Judith Winston, the general couns
el at the Education Department who was just appointed the panel's executive dir
ector. "Most Americans are not and do not consider themselves racist," she said
, before quickly adding that we have nonetheless "internalized.    . racist con
cepts and stereotypes."

    Racism is America's original sin, the great blot on our egalitarian ideals.
·But it's also possible to read American history as an imperfect, contradictory,
  but persistent effort to overcome it.

   However slowly, the trend line has been to enlarge the circle of freedom. Ev
entually, America did end slavery, overturn state-sponsored segregation and pro
vide equal access to the ballot. Thirty years ago, two-parent black families ea
rned only two-thirds as much as similar white families; today they earn 87% as
much. In 1958, only 4% of whites said they approved of interracial marriage; to
day the figure is 61%, according to the Gallup Poll.

   "It is impossible to live in America in 1997 and not recognize     . an enor
mous amount of progress has taken place," said Linda Chavez, president of the n
eoconservative Center for Equal Opportunity.


   You can argue this round or flat, but mostly you will argue this to impasse.
 Surely America is not a colorblind society; just as surely as it has made gain
s on many fronts. The real point is that this is the wrong argument. Clinton se
t out to open a new dialogue on race. But there's no quicker way to inflame old
 antagonisms than to base the dialogue on the assertion that American society i
s drenched in racism "wherever you go."

   "That's not a dialogue," said one Democrat, "that's a monologue."

   The president once understood this. When Clinton came out of a meeting with
black community leaders in the home of Rep. Maxine Waters (D-Los Angeles) just
days.after the Los Angeles riots in 1992, he didn't talk about a society "suffu
sed" with racism; he talked about the importance of increasing access to credit
 so that more people in South-Central could own their own homes and businesses.
 Throughout the day, his focus was on grass-roots "empowerment" through program
s that linked opportunity and responsibility.

   What Clinton recognized then was that the best way to attack race-related pr
oblems was to focus less on the polarizing divisions of race than on the underl
ying problems themselves. Candidate Clinton emphasized race-neutral programs--s
uch as education or health care reform--that nonetheless offered tangible benef


its to minorities. The aim was to move beyond a ritualized debate over racism a
nd reparation toward practical measures that could help the needy of all races-
-and draw broader public support than an approach that targeted benefits solely
 by race.

   In office. Clinton has only imperfectly implemented this idea. The left comp
lains that he failed to guarantee universal health care or ensure public-servic
e jobs for welfare recipients facing time limits. Conservatives carp at his inc
reasingly reflexive defense of affirmative action. But he can also claim progre
ss in fulfilling his original vision.

   Clinton has increased access to capital for minorities through invigorated e
nforcement of fair-lending and community-reinvestment laws and subsidies for co
mmunity development banks. He's boosted cities with billions of dollars to hire
 more police and launch empowerment zones. He's signed increases in the minimum
 wage and tax relief for the working poor, and this year's budget will provide
increased health care coverage for uninsured children and tax breaks for hiring
 former welfare recipients.

   This agenda may not be equal to the challenge, but it's the right battlefiel
d. In the landmark Bakke affirmative action case~9 years ago, the late Supreme
 Court Justice Harry Blackmun memorably declared, "In order to get beyond racis
m, we must first take account of race." Today's imperative reverses his/logic:
To deal with the problems of race, we must go beyond race. At a time when socie
ty is skeptical of new government initiatives, and federal power is divided bet
ween the parties, the only plausible agenda for racial progress is one that aim
s to help all those already trying to help themselves--white and minority alike


   In contrast, Clinton's advisory panel appears intent on viewing all issues t
hrough the prism of race. But in an America growing ever more diverse, that's a
 blueprint for social division and political irrelevance. with that compass, it
's not hard to imagine the panel producing conventionally liberal recommendatio
ns on issues such as crime and social spending that Clinton quietly disowns.



   The best service Clinton can offer on race is to articulate an agenda that e
ncourages Americans to emphasize their common interests and values--not their r
acial differences and historic grudges. His decision to focus his speech to the
 NAACP last week on the importance of demanding high standards from all student
s marks an important step in that direction.

   But to truly inspire a new dialogue on race, Clinton will need to push furth
er. Jim Sleeper, author of the provocatively titled upcoming book, "Liberal Rac
ism," frames the larger challenge well: "Our best leaders," he writes, "are tho
se who show their neighbors, every day, how to leave subgroup loyalties at the
doors of classrooms, jury rooms, hiring halls and loan offices."

   That's far better advice than anything Clinton's advisory panel has offered
so far.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC-DRAWING: JEFF DANZIGER / For The Times

LANGUAGE: English

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1997

==================   END ATTACHMENT


