          RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

          CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

          CREATION DATE/TIME:23-JUL-1997 14:01:00.00

          SUBJECT:     FYI draft Presidential statement on the ADA anniversary

          TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TEXT:
          I've just more or less signed off on this for the DPC, but thought you
          might be interested.


          THE WHITE HOUSE
          Office of the Press secretary

          For Immediate
          Release                                                            July
          24, 1997


          STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT
          COMMEMORATING THE SEVENTH ANNIVERSARY
          OF THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT


                  O&Saturday, July 26 marks the seventh anniversary of one of our
          nationO,s most significant
          civil rights laws -- the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  This
          landmark law has been opening
          doors and bringing down barriers for 49 million Americans with
          disabilities.  The law, which
          passed with bi-partisan support, prevents discrimination on the basis of
          disability in employment,
          public services, public accommodations, transportation and
          telecommunications.

                  To make the law succeed, my Administration has been reaching out
          to all Americans to
          educate them about their rights and obligations under the law.  That is
          why today I am unveiling a
          public service announcement that stresses the significance of this
          important law and tells listeners
          where to turn for more information.

                  The ADA is a wide ranging law that covers millions of Americans
          with disabilities, from
          people who are deaf or blind, to people with mental or mobility
          impairments.  It not only benefits
          those with permanent disabilities, but also millions of Americans who
          experience temporary
          disabilities, as I did earlier this year.

                     Although I used a wheelchair for only a short period after
"
    injuring my knee, I learned
    how small barriers, such as a step, a curb or a narrow doorway can stand
    in the way of an
    opportunity. It was an experience that taught me, as it has taught
    millions of others, that access
    benefits everyone. While my experience can never truly make me understand
    the discrimination
    people with disabilities face, I nonetheless gained a deeper appreciation
    for why the law is
    needed.

              This Administration has made ADA enforcement a high priority. We
      have emphasized
    . the need for businesses and governments to comply voluntarily, but have
      not hesitated to take
      legal action against those who flout their obligations.

            Across America, barriers in communication, architecture and
    attitude have been
    tumbling. But communities and businesses must do more to ensure that all
    Americans,
    regardless of their disability, can live and learn, work and play along
    side their fellow
    Americans.DS

            Individuals seeking more information about the ADA, can call
    1-800-514-0301 or
    1-800-514-0383  (TDD).


