RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-JUL-1997 16:31:36.00

SUBJECT:     Boys Nation/radio address event memo

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below is OPL's first cut of the event memo, much of which is based on what
I gave them.    I have already told Dan Wexler to fix the first paragraph
 (i.e., don't. describe these as "private sector scholarships", mention the
summit, etc.) Wexler will put your name on the memo along with Maria's.
There are still a lot of typos to be cleaned up, but I thought you would
want to see it at this point. I will plan on attending the briefing; I
hear you mayor may not attend.



July 24, 1997

    1997 BOY'S NATION MEETING AND RADIO ADDRESS TAPING

                                  DATE:             July 25, 1997
                                  LOCATION:         East Room
                                  TIME:             5:35 pm
                                  FROM:             Maria Echaveste

    I.     PURPOSE

You will announce new private sector scholarships to make it possible for
more young people
to participate in the civic life of their communities through service.
You will be joined by the
members of Boys Nation and representatives of supportive civic
organizations as you discuss the
importance of citizen service.


II.        BACKGROUND

As you know, for more than 50 years, the American Legion Auxiliary has
provided a unique
opportunity for teenage boys to learn firsthand how our system of
government works through
the BOyS State and Boys Nation programs. Almost one million teenage boys
have participated
since the first Boys State, and thousands have attended Boys Nation since


it began.

In this weeks radio address, you will announce that over 1,600 high school
students have won
scholarships of at least $1,000 as part of the first year of the National
Service Scholars program.
These scholarships recognize students with outstanding records of
community service, You first
called for this program in a speech at Penn State in May 1996, challenging
communities to raise
at least $500 for their local high schools, which the federal government
would then match.  In the
first year, a host of leading community organizations stepped forward to
raise local scholarships,
including the Kiwanis, Rotary, Lions, Dollars for Scholars, Seventh Day
Adventists, Veterans of
Foreign Wars, the American Legion, Elks, WomenD,s Clubs, Masons,
Soroptomists, and Junior
Leagues. The Miss America Foundation committed to provide scholarships in
every state.
Sallie Mae provided the matching funds for every public high school in
D.C. The Minnesota
state legislature voted to fund the match for all high schools in that
state. Each high school
principal is invited to nominate a junior or senior for the scholarship.
(It is interesting to note,
in the context of Boys Nation, that 70% of the 1,683 scholarship winners
are girls.)

You will urge all 20,000 high schools in the nation to participate next
year. Congress appears
fairly supportive of this program.  The House Appropriations Committee
recently voted to
appropriate the full $10 million cost of taking it nationwide.   (A House
floor amendment then
cut all AmeriCorps programs in half, but the House is expected to reverse
this in conference.)
The Senate did not include it, but appears likely to agree to it in
conference. The Corporation
for National Service found funds internally for the $800,000 cost of this
yearD,s program.  In fact,
it had set aside $3 million for this purpose, which would have funded
6,000 scholarships, but the
program got a late start.

In addition the Boys Nation participants, representatives of civic groups
along with five
scholarship winners will be in the audience. Our hope is that civic
organizations will publicize
this event in their newsletters and drum up even more support for this·
program next year.

You will also talk about how we are continuing to move forward to reach
the goals of the
Philadelphia summit on service. You will announce that service and
religious organizations
have responded positively to your summit challenge that we would provide
50,000 new
AmeriCorps scholarships over the next 5 years to organizations that offer
young people the


chance to serve. Already, 77 organizations have answered that challenge
by offering to
sponsor 10,000 new AmeriCorps members.

Other progress includes: the Vice Presidento,s May announcement of a new
partnership of
civic organizations that will mentor families seeking to leave welfare for
work; Eli Segalo,s Welfare
to Work Partnership that is mobilizing businesses to hire welfare
recipients, your announcement
last month that Kaiser Permanente will commit $100 million to provide
health coverage for uninsured
children in California; and federal agencieso, efforts to implement the
more than 40 commitments
they made at the summit, including mentoring and tutoring and launching
new partnerships with
corporations and nonprofits.

Following your remarks you invite the BOys Nation President, Sterling
Dowling from Orangeburg,
South Carolina and the vice President, Jason Cipriano from,Hamstead, New
Hampshire to the
stage. They will present you with a Boys Nation shirt.

Lastly, one of this years counselors,. Adam Ake (BoyD,s Nation, 1992) , was
the 1997 class honor
graduate at West Point. You met Adam earlier this year when you attended
the West Point
Commencement on May 31.  You pinned on AdamO,s lieutenant bars during a
reception at the
Superintendents house. Adam received extensive media attention based on
the fact that his
father is serving a ten-year prison term in Alaska. Adam won a Rhode
Scholarship as well as a
Truman Scholarship and a Marshall Scholarship. He is the first West Point
cadet to win all three.
He will attend Oxford in the fall.

III.    PARTICIPANTS

        Ron Engel, Director/Coordinator, Boys Nation
        Jack Mercier, Director of Activities, (35 years of service to the
program and was
                counselor to your section in 1963) .
        George Blume, Legislative Director, (27 years service)
        96 Boys Nation Senators (list attached)
        30 American Legion/Boys Nation Staff
        5 Scholarship winners and civic groups to be added

IV.    PRESS PLAN

Closed Press. The ABC, CNN, AP, C-SPAN, CBS, NBC, Mutual, UPI, USA,
American Urban
Radio Network, and Standard News radio networks will carry the address
live to their collective
thousands of stations across the country on Saturday at 10:06 AM EDT.

The White House will also release a photograph to news organizations.

v.     SEQUENCE OF EVENTS



           o         You will be briefed in the Blue Room.

           o         WHCA will announce you into the East Room.

           o         Your proceed to the stage.   On stage will be (to be
added) .

           o         You take a seat and tape the radio address.

        o       After the radio address, the stage participants will exit
the stage and take a seat
                in the front row.

           o         You proceed to the podium and make remarks.

        o       After your remarks you invite the Sterling Dowling, the
Boys Nation President and
                Jason Cipriano, the Boys Nation Vice President to the
stage. They will make
                brief remarks and present you with a BOyS Nation shirt and
a copy of the legislation
                passed during the week.

           o         You proceed to the Blue Room for a receiving line.

        o       After the receiving line, you proceed to the North
Portico for a group photo.

           o         You depart


VI.        REMARKS

           To be provided by speechwriters.


