RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( cN=william R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:25-JUL-1997 18:46:46.00

SUBJECT:   School-University Partnerships in California

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
You had asked me to follow up on Sylvia MatthewsD, question about new
partnerships being developed between University of California campuses and
low-performing schools.   Here is a some more detail and a status report.
I will also fax you a recent news article on this.

The plan of the University of CaliforniaD,s Outreach Task Force, as
amended based on public comment, was approved by the UC Board of Regents
on July 18. One of the specific recommendations made by the task force
was the creation of university-school partnerships along the lines
discussed in recent news articles, with each campus partnering with
several disadvantaged high schools and feeder elementary and middle
schools. The goal of these alliances would be to double the UC attendance
from each participating partner high school.   Key elements of the
partnerships would include high standards, improvements in teaching, use
of technology, and a strong focus on community and parental involvement.
In describing the suggested partnerships, the task force report highlights
some specific examples of existing collaboratives, such as the Monterey
Bay Educational Consortium (MBEC) , which focuses on early literacy,
teacher and administrator training, expansion of technology and
communications, and raising public awareness and support of educational
programs.

The task force report envisions establishing partnerships with 50 high
schools across the UC system, involving an additional 100 middle schools
and 300 elementary schools, with each partnership receiving approximately
$370,000 annually (primarily to support improvements in teaching,
including preparation and recruitment, retention, and professional
development of teachers).

Other major recommendations made by the task force include expansion of
academic development programs which support special academic enrichment
opportunities for disadvantaged students and the adoption of best
practices, as well as the expansion of programs to provide high quality
information to students, families, teachers, and counselors in order to
improve student planning and preparation for college.

While the task force report calls for spending approximately $60 million
each year on additional outreach activities overall, only a small fraction
of that funding is currently available to UC, with the rest of it to be
sought from the federal and state governments, foundations, and the
schools served.  It is very likely that some of the partnerships that grow
out of this initiative could eventually qualify to participate in the
teacher recruitment program contemplated under our new Title V proposal.
Individual UC campuses now have through the end of the year to submit
detailed plans to respond to the reportD,s recommendations.
·


    While the effort in California is primarily in the planning stages now,
    there are some interesting models described in the report.  Please let me
    know if you would like me to follow up on this further.


