RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-JUL-1997 10:12:58.00

SUBJECT:   Talking points on NGA speech

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I've been asked to do talking points on the NGA speech for 2 purposes: a
general release by Communications for their White House at Work series;
and a more pointed set for the Democratic Governors. Below is a quick
effo~t:  basically the indented bullets would be for the Governors, but
would be dropped for a general release.  I've checked the education part
with Mike.   Any comments?


President ClintonD,s Speech before National GovernorsD, Association
July 28, 1997

 Today, President Clinton spoke about two things that the states and the
federal government must work on together to keep us on the right track
continue to move forward on welfare reform, and make sure our children
have the worldD,s best education.

 Working together, the states and the federal government have accomplished
a lot to reform welfare, beginning with President ClintonD,s granting of
waivers to 43 states, through his decision to reform welfare by signing
the welfare law. Now there are 3 million fewer people on welfare than
when the President took office -- 1.2 million fewer since the President
signed the welfare law.

 Fortunately, it appears we are also on course to fix the problems with
the welfare law that President Clinton said he was going to fix.  In the
balanced budget agreement, the President got commitments to restore the
worst cuts in aid to legal immigrants and to restore $1.5 billion for food
stamps.

 While the welfare law gives states the responsibility as well as the
flexibility to make welfare reform succeed, today President Clinton said
he will remain an active partner in assuring that the law achieves its
purpose -- moving people from welfare to work.

 We welcome President ClintonD,s continued leadership on welfare reform.
Although states 'now have primary responsibility to make this work, the
federal government has an important continuing role, and the PresidentD,s
leadership is critical.

 In his speech today, President Clinton pointed out that state strategies
in four key areas make a real difference in whether welfare reform will
succeed:  jobs, child care, transportation, and child support. The
President gave examples of some of the creative strategies that states are
using, as well as some areas of concern.


 The four areas emphasized by the President are the linchpins of any
successful welfare reform effort, and highlighting what the states are
doing, as he did today, is helpful to us all.

 As the President noted, it is critical that states use the savings that
come from declining case loads to reinvest in their welfare reform efforts,
rather than diverting those funds to other uses.

 President Clinton issued a challenge today that all must do their part if
welfare reform is to succeed -- welfare recipients, businesses, the
religious community, civic and non-profit organizations, state
legislatures, local officials, and Governors.

 On education, the President noted that Governors have been the leaders in
educational reform for more than a decade, but he urged more states to
join his effort to adopt national standards and by 1999 to test every 4th
grader in reading and every 8th grader in math to make sure these
standards are met.

 The PresidentD,s national standards are a way to strengthen the efforts
in every one of our states by giving us national and international
benchmarks for judging our own progress.

 Democratic Governors plan to work with the Administration to make our
participation in this critical effort possible.


