 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:3l-JUL-l997 08:48:l8.00

 SUBJECT:   Goodling amendment update

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Here is the summary of yesterday's actions.  I think it would be very good
 if the three of us could get together today and discuss how to proceed in
 light of yesterday's developments.

 l. As you no doubt know, the Labor HHS bill was pulled indefinitely
 because there is no agreement over an abortion amendment. They don't want
 to go to the floor until they get that issue resolved. No one knows when
 that will be, but as of last night at about 8:00, the smart money was on
 no vote until September.

2. We suffered some setbacks over the course of the day, and it is clear
that Goodling and others were working this pretty hard.   Most notable on
the Republican side:
By mid-morning, John Porter had decided to advance a substitute amendment,
that would have prohibited us from using FY98 funds to administer the
tests, though we could use funds to develop and field test.   Substantively
this would have no impact on the work for the fiscal year -- no
adminstration is planned until FY99, but it would have taken some work to
spin this as a victory, or as inconsequential. At least some in the press
and in the states would have seen this as a sign of trouble.   Politically,
by the time Porter decided to do this, he was nervous about the outcome of
a straight up-or-down vote on Goodling, and probably had decided not to
pullout all the stops in his own opposition to Goodling.
Lynne Cheney was calling members during the day in support of the Goodling
amendment.  Lamar Alexander told the governors the test was a bad idea,
because some future Secretary of Eduation, like Marion Barry or Phyllis
Shafly, might screw up the test in the future.    (This is the same
argument Diane ravitch made to POTUS in the Cabinet Room meeting months
ago.  Someone more cynical than I might suspect that Lamar, Diane, Lynn
and Checker are working together again!)
The home-schoolers started calling members during the day -- "flooding
offices with calls" was howit was described to me, though that may have
been a bit of an overstatement based on other conversations I had.
Nonetheless, ~his is serious. This group is notorious for turning out
tons of calls and faxes on issues, and they often do it on education
issues that have at best a remote connection to home-schooling. Aligned
with the far right on most education issues, they are inclined to see the
long arm of the federal government reaching into their home schools almost
every time we try to do something new.
We lost Bob Livingston by mid-day. ,He was originally aligned with John
Porter, at least to the extent that he did not want veto-bait on his
appropriations bills. By mid day he had switched to supporting Goodling.
We think this was basically from far-right pressure back home.   If
Livingston remains on the wrong side of this, it will make it more
difficult for moderate Republicans to stay with us.    I've spoken with


some of our good friends in LA, who also happen to have tremendous access
to Livingston. They are trying to bring him back around.

3. Now for news from the Democratic front:
The Hispanic Caucus is taking a very hard line, and continues to threaten
to vote with Goodling if we don't satisfy their concerns. Here are the
details: After talking with Beccera and Hinojosa, Janet Murguia strongly
urged that we share the letter in draft form with them, before sending it
in final.   I refused at first, but after a second conversation with Janet,
agreed.   (I think I made a mistake on this, though I'm not sure we would
be in any better shape if we had just sent the signed letter as planned) .
In any event. I spoke with both Becerra and Hinajosa after they reviewed
the letter. (The conversation with Becerra took place after the vote was
delayed--more about that below). Both pushed for specific committments to
test LEP kids in Spanish and to alter the test development contract that
will be awarded in the next few weeks so that we can guarantee that the
Hispanic version will be developed right away.   I told them that was
impossible -- we had not made the policy decision to develop a Spanish v
ersion of the test, and could neither make that decision nor commit to
specific implementation steps yesterday afternoon.

Both also were critical of the assurances we provided about testing LEP
kids under Title 1. Hinajosa because he doesn't understand Title 1
testing issues to begin with,and Becerra because he believes we have been
granting waivers to these provisions, and shouldn't trust states and
locals anyway. Not a good sign--that's the option Riley and Smith are
most likely to gravitate to.

Since I talked with Becerra after the vote was posponed, he indicated that
we ought to get this issue resolved before the September vote. While I
made no specific committment to a deadline, I think we have to do that.
If we don't -- one way or another -- the caucus will conclude that we
aren't going to give them what they want. And we don't need to spend
forever dealing with this anyway; we don't gain much by stringing it along.

Finally, on this issue. Both Becerra and Hinajosa shared the draft letter
with MALDEF and other groups, a move that I regarded as a breach of
faith.  It is also not helpful, or fair to the President,  to have the
draft floating around. Now that we may have a month before the vote, I
haven't been able to figure out if we are in worse shape having a draft
float around than we would be if we had the signed copy floating around.
Either way, its not the situation I wanted us to be in.

On the good news front, the AFT really worked th Black Caucus for us.
Andy Blocker says they were doing a good job, and I think they were able
to keep a good number of members on our side.  I will get more specific
details later in the day.


