RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 2-AUG-1997 22:10:30.00

SUBJECT:   National Board for Professional Teaching Standards event

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Christa Robinson ( CN=Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
You sent me a copy of the note Jim Hunt sent gave to the President at the
NGA meeting in which he asked the President to hold a WH reception for the
Board, inclduing the 600 Board teachers who will be invited to this. The
Board will meet Oct 23-2S.in DC.

I think we should do this.  This will give the national board a big boost,
and will be an honor for the board certified teachers.  It's recognition
they deserve.

The President indicated he is   inclined to do it--that's always·an
important clue. This will be    Hunt's final meeting as chair of the Board;
it will mean a lot to Hunt to   get this to happen.  (Both Hunt's staff and
the National Board staff have   been lobbying me on this for a while. )

The President is a big fan of the board, and a big fan of Jim Hunt. Riley
will also support this request--he is also a fan of Hunt and the Board,
and the three of them have a mutual admiration society based on their
early leadership of education reform in the early 80's. Hunt is also
working Erskine on this.

I have a copy of a~ letter the board sent to POTUS for this meeting--just
got it the other day.  I'll put it together with what you sent me and send
to Christa for a scheduling request.

Two other important things:   (1) I don't think we have an obvious policy
announcement to go with this event, so I don't think we should sell this
as a message event. We can try to work on something from the pool of
ideas we have been working on, but I don't have anything specific in
mind.  (2)  Part of Hunt's motivation is to use the event in some fashion
to encourage the business community to contribute to the Board. I don't
know if he is going to ask the President to make a pitch to the business
leaders who would be invited, but I think we need to find out exactly what
Hunt and the Board have in mind, and exactly what is and is not
permissible, before we get too far down the road.


