  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-AUG-1997 09:26:40.00

  SUBJECT:   Re: disabilities eo

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 I was just planning to write you on this. Yes, there is a new deadline --
 the meeting the President will have in early September (the 10th or 12th)
 with outside disability groups.   This is the meeting that grew out of the
 agreement to meet with ADAPT on their unrelated issue of increasing
 home/community-based services in Medicaid and decreasing reliance on
 nursing homes. But Public Liaison wants to broaden it to all the groups
 and issues.

 Here's where we are: under the EO, DOL would chair a task force with all
 the agencies as members on how to improve employment of people with
 disabilities. But DOL increasingly has cold feet about the specificity of
 tasks that the disabled appointees want in the EO. DOL wants the EO to be
 a blank slate on policy so that the task force can start from scratch in
 figuring out what to do, while the appointees want specific charges that
 reflect or at least allude to policies they already believe are the right
 ones (example -- tax credit) .  Another problem (presumably fixable) is
 that other agencies will object to the EO as written, saying they don't
 want DOL to determine their policies.

 I think we need a meeting this week with Seth Harris and maybe Kitty
 Higgins of DOL, John Lancaster of the Presidents' Committee (he may want
 other disabled appointees to come), and us. The purpose would be to see
 whether there is a structure that would work.  I would really like it if
 you could come.  I can't decide where I am on the threshold question --
 whether it's worse to give up on this and make the appointees angry, or
 push to shoehorn this into existence and risk creating a task force that
 is destined to fail.   Do you want to have such a meeting?




  Elena Kagan
  08/03/97 02:25:19 PM
  Record Type:    Record

 To:      Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP
 cc:
 Subject:         disabilities eo

 where are we on this? I did nothing while you were on vacation because
 the ADA deadline disappeared. But we should push this along.  (wasn't
 there some other date that made sense?) Let me know what you need me to
 do, if anything. Thanks.


