            RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

            CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD I )

            CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-AUG-1997 09:36:20.00

            SUBJECT:   Re: weekly

            TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I   )
            READ: UNKNOWN

            CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I   )
            READ: UNKNOWN

            TEXT:
            I am the culprit on the absence of the NY item and the CEA question on
            this week's weekly -- they weren't in quite good enough shape to submit.
            But we'll do them this coming week. And I'm checking on California.




            Elena Kagan
            08/02/97 02:30:34 PM
            Record Type:    Record

            To:      Cynthia A. Rice/OPD/EOP, Diana Fortuna/OPD/EOP
            cc:
            Subject:         weekly

            1. Bruce wasn't so sure he agreed with the HHS performance bonus
            proposal; he said it sounded pretty complicated to him. One of you should
            make sure to hook up with him next week so that we can put an entry into
            the weekly. The paragraph I put in (but then took out) for this week is
            below.

            2. We also still need an answer to the President's other question (on the
            CEA report) and a report on the new New York welfare plan (also, has
            California just come to an agreement?)

            3.  Finally, the child support answer, whether by memo(as Cynthia
            suggested) or weekly entry.    (On thinking about this, I suspect we're not
            ready to write a memo containing a definitive answer and that we should do
            a weekly entry describing a process for looking at this issue -- but
            perhaps I'll see that I'm wrong when I read the memo.)

            Many thanks.

                    welfare -- Proposed High Performance Bonus: You asked last week whether
            we like the formula HHS has proposed to distribute the welfare lawD,s $1
            billion performance bonus fund.  The short answer is that we do.  The
            proposal, which HHS developed after consultations with the NGA and APWA,
            would reward states based on whether welfare recipients are getting jobs,
            how long they keep those jobs, and whether their earnings increase from
            year to year. The proposal also takes account of success in reducing teen
            births. States have raised two concerns about the proposal. First, a few
            state welfare officials -- led by Wisconsin -- have insisted that a simple
            formula based on caseload reduction is preferable, because it gives
.'


     welfare caseworkers a clear goal that they can work towards.  But a
     formula of this kind would not look at what happens to people after they
     leave welfare, thus making no distinction between states that prepare
     people for self-sufficiency and states that simply remove them from the
     rolls.  In addition, a number of states have complained about HHSD,s
     proposal to use unemployment insurance records, instead of welfare agency
     records, to measure performance in employment, job retention, and earnings
     progression. HHS is convinced, however, that the unemployment insurance
     data, which employers themselves provide, will be more objective and more
     accurate.


