 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-AUG-1997 18:35:37.00

 SUBJECT:   Rematch

 TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN;Cynthia A. Rice/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN;Diana Fortuna/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Gingrich: More Welfare
                    Reform On GOP Agenda

                      ALPHARETTA,
                      Georgia
                      (AIIPolitics, August
                      2) -- House
                      Speaker Newt
                      Gingrich says
                      Republicans plan to
                      make a major push
                      this fall to
                      implement
                      welfare-reform measures that President Bill Clinton
                      refused to accept as part of the recently completed
                      balanced-budget deal.

                      In interviews given Saturday while Gingrich was
                      attending an American Legion parade in his suburban
                      Atlanta district, the speaker also said he favors
                      equalizing penalties for people caught selling crack
                      and powder cocaine -- but not by reducing crack
                      penalties as the Clinton administration has proposed.

                      Rather, he indicated he might support increasing the
                      penalties for powder cocaine offenders.

                      "I favor equalizing them, but I'm not sure I'm not for
                      equalizing them up," Gingrich said. "A person who
                      commits the same relative threat to society -- the
                      same number of doses -- should face the same
                      consequences."

                                              Critics say current
                                              sentencing laws are
                                              unfair to those who
                                              handle crack, which
                                              is cheaper than
                                              powder and more
                                              likely to be used by
                                              members of racial
                                              minorities.



                           Attorney General Janet Reno and President Clinton's
                           drug-policy adviser, Barry McCaffrey, have
                           proposed reducing the sentencing disparity for the
                           two forms of cocaine to a 10-1 ratio.

                           Their plan would impose mandatory five-year
                           penalties for selling 25 grams of crack or 10 times as
                           much powdered cocaine, 250 grams. Current law
                           requires five-year sentences for the sale of 5 grams
                           of crack or 500 grams of cocaine, a 100-1 ratio.

                           Exemption for those in welfare-to-work
                           programs

                           Gingrich said that when Republicans return in the fall,
                           they will take up a proposal to exempt individuals in
                           welfare-to-work programs from the $5.15-an-hour
                           minimum wage.

                           That exemption is a major priority of Republican and
                           even some Democratic governors. But GOP
                           negotiators dropped the idea from the recent budget
                           bill because of opposition from Clinton, promoting
                           complaints from GOP governors.

                           "There will be a very big push on welfare reform,"
                           Gingrich said. "We did not fight it out on the budget
                           agreement, but we are going to really ask all the
                           governors in the country to work with us to pass a
                           welfare-reform implementation act which we think
                           the president has to sign."

                           "The bureaucrats and the unions are trying to destroy
                           welfare reform. We cannot allow that to happen."

                           'We are moving in the right direction'

                           Also, Gingrich said he would prefer that President
                           Clinton not use the line-item veto on any provisions
                           of the balanced-budget agreement. He said the
                           Clinton team did not raise that prospect during
                           negotiations, so "I think it would be helpful for them
                           not to exercise it."

                           "But I am not going to get into a fight about it. This
      is
                           his right. We gave it to him deliberately."

                           Just two weeks after a small group of restless
                           Republicans tried to topple him, Gingrich said House
                           Republicans are now unified.

                           "For our team, there are sometimes frustrations, but
                           we are moving in the right direction and that is
                           good. "

                           Asked to assess the political lessons of the past
                           month, he said, "If you are patient and you work
                           hard, you win."



                      CNN White House Correspondent John King
                      contributed to this report.


