RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( CN=william R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-AUG-1997 21:23:47.00

SUBJECT:   Re: Request for VP event/announcement ideas for September

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena--

Here are some ideas; please let me know if you are going to pass any of
these along; as you will see, some of these I would rather have the POTUS
do.

The Education Department and the National Institute for Literacy have both
expressed interest in having the POTUS release some data on adult literacy
rates (by state and congressional district)  on National Literacy Day,
which is Sept. 8. The Department has submi~ted a scheduling request for
an event that would tie those data in to family literacy provisions in
America Reads.  Carolyn Staley at the National Institute for Literacy
would like to try to use this to develop an additional component of
America Reads that is explicitly focused on adult (rather than child
literacy).  I don't foresee that happening, but the data could still make
either a decent POTUS radio address (on the Saturday just prior to Sept.
8, the last at Martha's vineyard) or for a VP event on Sept. 8.   I don't
really see this as "the" POTUS event for back to school week because it
isn't K-12 focused enough, and the overall data on adult literacy has
already been released, although not by subdivision.

In addition, at least a couple of the things I e-mailed you and Bruce
about last night might be appropriate if the POTUS doesn't do them,
especially the grants announcements:

1.   Announce $40 million in new charter schools grants (Jon Schnur with
OVP is very involved with charters so this would be easy for VP to do;
however, I think it's really important for the President to do a charter
event soon if we are going to get state legislatures going on this again,
and for this event the news piece is easy).

2. Possibly announce technology literacy grants (still need to check on
timing of this)

3. Release math strategy (addresses falloff in TIMSS scores after 4th
grade)  (but personally I would prefer for the POTUS to do this, in part
because it has been developed in response to a POTUS directive and that
has been the general expectation for the working group; moreover, this
doesn't have to go out the week of Sept. 8; we have a lot of flexibility
on when to release this)


