     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: William R. Kincaid (      CN~William   R.   Kincaid/OU~OPD/O~EOP     [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-AUG-1997 19:57:13.00

     SUBJECT:   Higher Ed Act Title III

     TO: Elena Kagan (   CN~Elena Kagan/OU~OPD/O~EOP @       EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed (   CN~Bruce   N.   Reed/OU~OPD/O~EOP   @ EOP   [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Ananias Blocker III (   CN~Ananias     Blocker    III/OU~WHO/O~EOP   @ EOP   [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Michael Cohen (   CN~Michael      Cohen/OU~OPD/O~EOP @   EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Bruce and Elena--

     The Education Department is preparing to submit the portion of the Higher
     Ed Act reauthorization that deals with aid for improving postsecondary
     institutions such as Historically Black Colleges and Universities
     (HBCUs) .  Currently the law allows for assistance to both HBCUs and other
     institutions that serve traditionally under-represented populations, such
     as Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSls) and Tribal Colleges and
     Universities.   However, as the law is currently structured, HSI's and
     Tribal Colleges are bunched in with other kinds of needy institutions,
     whereas HBCUs have their own separate section of the law. Ultimately a
     much smaller share of HSls (25%--about $10.8 million per year, going to 37
     institutions) and Tribal colleges actually receive aid compared with HBCUs
     (100% -- I think -- of 98 institutions, receiving $110 million per
     year). At the same time, the educational challenges facing Hispanics and
     Native Americans are certainly compelling, and by some measures (like
     dropout and college-going rates) at least as daunting as those facing
     African Americans.

     The Department's proposal, as announced in testimony by Secretary Riley,
     would create two new sections within the program, one for HSls and one for
     Tribal Colleges. This is something that has ·been sought by Hispanic
     groups, in particular.   The proposal would also substantially increase
     the authorization levels for both HBCUs and for HSI's and Tribal
     Colleges.

     In discussions with the staff of the Congressional Black Caucus, and now
     in a letter to the POTUS from former Congressman Bill Gray and Henry
     Ponder on behalf of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in
     Higher Education, it has been made clear that many in the black community
     are strongly opposed to this change.   The biggest issue, it seems, is
     (especially in the tight budgetary environment) that they are concerned
     that HBCUs would now have to more directly compete with HSls and Tribal
     Colleges for money, and will wind up with less than they have had in the
     past. Two other arguments have been made by opponents.   The first is
     that, by giving HSls and Tribal Colleges the more prominent set-aside,
     they will place all such assistance (including that to HBCUs) at risk to
     legal (Adarand) challenges, because the HBCU provisions are more strongly
     rooted in a unique historical background and mission for these
.'
     institutions.  I have asked the counsel's office to look into this issue,
     and folks at ED are as well, but at first blush I'm a little skeptical
     given that HSI's already had their own line-item. The other concern
     raised is that the changes would repeal certain targeting provisions and
     open up non-needy institutions such as UCLA to the Title III program,
     something which the Department feels isn't true, because even institutions
     with 25% Hispanic enrollment (the basic criterion for being an HSI) would
     have to meet other targeting provisions applicable to all schools that
     receive aid under Title I I I . The Black Caucus has asked ED to delay
     sending the bill up so the CBC can work something out with the Hispanic
     Caucus.

     Despite the concerns raised,  the Secretary is conscious that he has
     already publicly indicated the path the Administration expects to take on
     this and, in general, continues to feel that establishing the new
     provisisions for HSls and Tribal Colleges is the right way to go.
     However, we have slowed down the expected timeframe for transmitting the
     legislation a little to allow for additional analysis of the issues raised
     and for a meeting next Tuesday at ED involving the Secretary, Mike Smith,
     and others to carefully review Hill strategy.  The bill remains under
     review by both DOJ and OMB for clearance purposes (OMB will require
     special sign-off because the bill includes specific authorization levels
     for each of the types of institutions assisted, as well as an overall
     increase.from FY 98 budget levels (from about $205 million to $275
     million; this will be a critical part of a successful Hill strategy on the
     measure) .

     The letter to POTUS requests a meeting with Bruce and Gene Sperling to
     discuss these issues. They argue that the needs of Latino students can be
     met without such a signifiant impact on HBCUs.    I will need some guidance
     from Bruce on whether this is something he wants to be involved with, or
     whether he would prefer that Riley and/or Mike Smith, perhaps together
     with Cohen, should handle this.    One complicating factor is the Bruce is
     scheduled to leave town (the 19th) about the time Cohen gets back,
     although Mike C. will be in town the latter part of next week and could
     attend a meeting here if necessary. Another complicating factor is that t
     he Department feels that it has tried to be responsive to a general effort
     that the Administration overall has been making to insure that Hispanics
     are getting a fair shake from education programs.   I did check today with
     Riley's scheduler, who said that the Secretary had not met with Gray or
     Ponder anytime recently, certainly not on this issue. In any event,
     everyone seems pretty clear that a meeting, not a reply letter (especially
     from the POTUS), is the correct next step.

     Cathy has a copy of the Ponder/Gray letter, but I will re-fax over to you
     both, along with an ED-provided summary and proposed authorization levels,
     and then I will red-dot over a copy of the legislation in the a.m.

     Thanks.
'


