RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-AUG-1997 09:15:32.00

SUBJECT:   Update on service activities for Erskine meeting today

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena   ~agan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @   EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Below is an update on the administration's recent activities on service
this is basically what we used for the radio address on the high school
scholars.  I will also attach at the bottom a more detailed document I
gave to America's Promise to update them on federal agency commitments.
The other thing I should get you prior to your meeting with Erskine is an
update on what is happening with America's Promise itself.

Recent Administration Actions on Service

The National Service Scholars Program:  President Clinton announced ,today
in his weekly radio address that more than 1,600 high school students have
won scholarships of at least $1,000 in the first year of the National
Service Scholars Program. The college scholarships recognize outstanding c
ommunity service.

The President proposed the program last year in an address at Penn State
University, challenging communities to raise at least $500 for their local
high schools, which the federal government would then match.  High school
principals nominate the junior or senior with a strong commitment to
community service to receive scholarships.

The $500 federal match is provided by the Corporation for National
Service, which launched the program this spring in partnership with the
CitizensO, Scholarship Foundation of America. The deadline to apply for
the program was June 30, and 1,683 high schools submitted nominees.
Awards will be sent to scholarship winners in early August.

The program has proved extremely popular, with a host of leading community
organizations stepping forward to raise local scholarships and secure the
federal match. The most frequent local
contributors include: Kiwanis, Rotary, Lions, Dollars for Scholars,
Seventh Day Adventists, Veterans of Foreign Wars, the American Legion,
Elks, WomenO,s Clubs, the Masons, Soroptomists, Junior Leagues, Optimists,
Jaycees, Quota International, Sertoma, Parent Teacher Associations, and
Chambers of Commerce.  The Miss America Foundation committed to providing
matching scholarships in every state; Sallie Mae provided the matching
funds for every public high school in the District of Columbia; and the
Minnesota state legislature voted to fund the match for all high schools
in that state.

When he announced the initiative at Penn State, President Clinton said,
O&I want every principal in America to be able to stand up before a


graduating class and announce the name of a National Service Scholar. We
should make service to the community a part of every high school in
America and a part of life of every dedicated citizen in the United
States.oB Noting the success of the first year effort, the President
today challenged schools and communities to award scholarships to many
more students next" year, with the goal of instituting the program in all
high schools.  The Presidento,s FY 199B budget includes $10 million for
the National Service Scholars Program, enough to take the program
nation-wide.

AmeriCorps Scholarships:        The President also announced that service
and religious organizations have responded positively to his summit
challenge that the Administration would provide 50,000 new AmeriCorps
scholarships over the next 5 years to organizations that offer young peopl
e the chance to serve. The response has been even stronger than expected,
as 77 organizations have answered that challenge by offering to sponsor
10,000 new AmeriCorps members.   The Corporation expects to make the first
yearo,s awards this summer.

Other Recent Actions: The Administration continues to use partnerships and
citizen service to reach its key policy goals. For example, in May, the
Vice President announced a new partnership of civic organizations that
will mentor families seeking to leave welfare for work.  Also in May, the
Welfare to Work Partnership announced an expansion of its efforts to
mobilize businesses to hire welfare recipients, so those parents can move
into the economic mainstream and improve their childreno,s future.   In
June, the President announced that Kaiser Permanente will commit $100
million to provide health coverage for uninsured children in California,
complementing the Administrationo,s efforts to enact new legislation on
childreno,s health coverage.

In addition, Federal agencies are following through on the more than 40
commitments they made at the Philadelphia summit, including mentoring,
tutoring, and launching new partnerships with corporations and
nonprofits. Among other progress, the Corporation for National Service is
taking the lead to meet the Summito,s goal of engaging an additional 2
million young people in community service.  In June, HHS Secretary Shalala
launched a new partnership with the Girl Scouts, to teach girls about the
dangers of substance abuse and other risky behaviors, featuring a new
patch that Girl Scouts can earn by completing the program.   In September,
Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman will convene a National Summit on Food
Recovery, to develop a national strategy to increase gleaning efforts by
one-third by the year 2000.  In May, the Department of Justice convened a
new public/private Mentoring Alliance to promote the Slimmito,s mentoring
goal, disseminate information about best practices, and determine how best
to link volunteers with the children who need them.

==================== ATTACHMENT 1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D49]MAIL43214381D.216 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF575043BA0400000l0A020l000000020500000050300000000200003540BD8B8CD9C5F250D7FO
E2E21AOFD396061BDF081797869l0l49F1AAB73D426FB902DD87A4AAFB146EBE8B6F878324B176
90CCE3BF443057028l925D3C02B55l9CD6380B6DB420BC8173E74539436BA963C4FA7AC7786777
E639A2FEB3F1EE24645342D1D07AE653AAA5F4A01A6F9El18F1E3D23DE97B25AD99ECEAFBOB172
EOFF6D5C5090F488A5063C373B3FDEF8B8AF72BA93622939ACAE4EFD7l6E1C798EC4A6257C50D9
2C31C378B4A001B8989D4F75247496A1EB193331E8B18CD15llFFC45868467431FDOE83BF42570

The federal government is following through on the commitments it made to the Presidents'
Summit, and is continuing to launch new initiatives and partnerships to reach the Summit's
goals. The White House has convened an interagency group to focus on this issue and ensure
agency follow-up. The White House has asked all agencies to develop milestones that show
how they intend to reach their commitments. While we only have partial information from
agencies at this time, the following are highlights of progress to date.

      At the Summit, President Clinton announced a major expansion of the AmeriCorps
       program through "Challenge Scholarships," whereby the Corporation would make
       available 50,000 additional scholarships over the next five years. The response has been
       even stronger than expected: the Corporation has now received applications from 77
       service and religious organizations for 10,000 scholarships. The Corporation expects to
       make the first year's awards this summer.               .

     More than 1,600 high school students have won scholarships of at least $1,000 in the first
      year of the National Service Scholars Program. The college scholarships recognize
      outstanding community service. The President proposed the program last year in an
      address at Penn State University, challenging communities to raise at least $500 for their
      local high schools, which the federal government would then match. High school
      principals nominate the junior or senior with a strong commitment to community service
      to receive scholarships. A host of leading community organizations have stepped
      forward to raise local scholarships and secure the federal match, including the Kiwanis,
      Rotary, Lions, Dollars for Scholars, Seventh Day Adventists, Veterans of Foreign Wars,
      the American Legion, Elks, Women's Clubs, the Masons, Soroptomists, Junior Leagues,
      Optimists, Jaycees, Quota International, Sertoma, Parent Teacher Associations, and
      Chambers of Commerce. The Miss America Foundation committed to providing
      matching scholarships in every state; Sallie Mae provided the matching funds for every
      public high school in the District of Columbia; and the Minnesota state legislature voted
      to fund the match for all high schools in that state. The Corporation hopes to work with
      America's Promise to expand this program next year. Its goal is for every high school in
      America to have a National Service Scholar.

     The Administration continues to use partnerships and citizen service to reach its key
      policy goals. For example, in May, the Vice President announced a new partnership
      of civic organizations that will mentor families seeking to leave welfare for work.
      Also in May, the Welfare to Work Partnership announced an expansion ofits
      efforts to mobilize businesses to hire welfare recipients, so those parents can move
      into the economic mainstream and improve their children's future. In June, the
      President announced that Kaiser Permanente will commit $100 million to provide
      health coverage for uninsured children in California, complementing the
      Administration's efforts to enact new legislation on children's health coverage.

   The Administration is working with the National Association of Partners in Education to
    meet its goal of adopting or establishing partnerships with an additional 500 schools by
    the year 2000. Prior to the Summit, federal agencies had partnerships with
    approximately 1,500 schools across the country. The Social Security Administration and
    the Department of Transportation have already established new partnerships since the
    Summit; while the Department of Health and Human Services is working with the
    organization "Everybody Wins" to adopt more schools. In addition, this summer the
    Labor Department is operating a new four-week summer academic enrichment program
    for D.C. public school students in partnership with the National Council of Negro
    Women.

   The Corporation for National Service is taking the lead on a strategy to meet the
    Summit's goal of engaging an additional 2 million young people in service. In August, it
    will convene a national strategic planning session in Washington in partnership with
    America's Promise and Do Something, with participation from the youth community,
    faith groups, the education community, and Summit commitment makers in this area.
    The Corporation will place an AmeriCorps*VISTA member in every public high school
    in D.C. to serve as the service-learning coordinator. Finally, the Partnering Initiative
    co-sponsored by the Corporation is working this summer to launch "partner schools" in
    the fall -- schools with model service-Ieaming programs.

   The Corporation and its State Commissions on National and Community Service are
    taking lead roles in organizing many of the community and state summits in the months
    following the Summit gathering in Philadelphia.

   In June, HHS Secretary Shalala launched a new partnership between the Girl Scouts of
    America and the Department's Girl Power! public education campaign. This national
    program will teach Girl Scouts about the dangers of substance abuse and other risky
    behaviors. It features a new patch that Girl Scouts can earn by completing the program.
    HHS has also launched its Playcorps commitment with Nike, which trains college
    students to coach and mentor kids in underserved areas in recreation leagues.

   In September, USDA Secretary Dan Glickman will convene his department's National
    Summit on Food Recovery, to develop a national strategy to increase gleaning efforts by
    one-third by the year 2000.

   In May, the Department of Justice and the Corporation for National Service held the first
    meeting of a new public/private Mentoring Alliance that will promote the mentoring goal
    of the Summit. Members include Big BrotherslBig Sisters, One to One, Boys and Girls
    Clubs of America, Save the Children, and federal agencies. Plans include a
    teleconference in September on effective practices, a national 800 number to link mentors
    with opportunities, and deVelopment of best practices materials. In addition, DOJ has
    followed through on its commitment to more than double the number of sites for its
    Juvenile Mentoring Program (JUMP).

   This month, the Department of Justice followed through on its commitment to expand its
    Drug Education for Youth (DEFY) program. DOJ gave out grants to 26 DEFY summer
    camp sites that are now serving 900 children. DEFY promotes positive life choices for
    children between the ages of 9 and 12. After the summer program, the children will have
    mentors from the local U.S. Attorney's office, police department, or university.

   In June, the Attorney General kicked off the Department of Justice's new Youth Network
    in Baltimore, to provide a forum for young people and community organizations to
    exchange ideas on juvenile violence and delinquency prevention.

   The Administration is working toward its goal of using national service as a strategy in
    the President's proposed America Reads program, the national literacy campaign to
    ensure that every child can read well and independently by the third grade. At this
    time, the Senate has appropriated $20 million for the Corporation for National Service to
    fund AmeriCorps tutor coordinators to help recruit, organize, and manage
    volunteers who will tutor children. While awaiting congressional action, the
    Corporation is launching a "Seniors in Schools" initiative, with nine pilot sites and
    support for 8,700 school-based Senior Corps programs. In September, the Corporation
    will deploy the DC Reads Initiative, with AmeriCorps, Senior Corps, and federal
    work-study students tutoring in 18 of the lowest performing public elementary schoolS in
    D.C. In addition, the Corporation and the Department of Education have recruited over
    600 colleges and universities to dedicate work study students as reading tutors. This
    summer, AmeriCorps members are helping 8,000 pre-K to 3rd grade students with
    reading as part of 20 "Summer Reads" programs.

   The Department of Education now has 380,000 tutors and learning partners reading with
    children this summer, a significant increase over last summer's 300,000 and is well on its
    way to its goal of 450,000. The program's goal is to get 1.5 million children reading by
    the end of the summer.

   In May, Transportation Secretary Rodney Slater launched his department's new effort, the
    Garrett A. Morgan Technology & Transportation Futures Program, in Cleveland, Ohio, at
    the Garrett A. Morgan Middle School. With its industry and labor partners, the
    Department updated the school's computer lab, established a tutoring and mentoring
    program, and sponsored transportation career days for the students. To date, DOT has
    heard from over 200 partners who want to join its effort to reach one million students by
    the year 2000. The program's goal is to give one million students better math, science,
    and technology skills and information about careers in technology and transportation.

   The President remains deeply committed to the goals established in Philadelphia. He
    continues to deliver the Summit's message before audiences, such as the Business
    Roundtable and the Conference of Mayors in June, and the Welfare to Work
    Partnership'S businesses in May. The Administration will continue to incorporate
    service and the Summit's goals into its ongoing policy development and initiatives in
    areas such as children's health, education, welfare-to-work, and public safety.


