RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( CN=william R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-AUG-1997 15:15:01.00

SUBJECT:   names

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Late yesterday Maria Echaveste called looking for some suggested attendees
for a constituency group meeting for next week.  They were looking for
some education folks (I think they plan to invite 4 total) -- other
attendees are expected to be Asian -American leaders and state and local
elected officials. Because it's late in the day, I went ahead and sent
her the list below, but told her that I also wanted to clear with you.
Please let me know if you have any concerns or strong preferences among
the folks I've listed.  I've intentionally tried to find some folks
involved with areas that we know the President's interested in.  I'm still
looking to identify someone who is involved with a good program for
removing ineffective teachers from the classroom, but the people at ED who
would have the names (I just know cities) are mostly out this week.

1. Frank Petruzielo
Superintendent, Broward County (Ft. Lauderdale) Schools, FL

Leads one of the urban districts that signed up for the test recently;
unable to attend the event here.  Has an initiative underway to identify
and improve failing schools, something we need to get a stronger focus on.


2. Tony Alvarado
Superintendent
Community School District No. 2
New York City

Highly respected school reformer, especially in the area of teacher
professional development.


3. Robert Moses
Founder and President
The Algebra Project
Cambridge, MA

A civil rights organizer during the 60's, since the mid '80s has developed
and run the Algebra Project, the goal of which is to have every student in
the project complete a college preparatory math curriculum by high school,
include Algebra 1 by 8th or 9th grade and either pre-Calculus or Calculus
by 12th grade.  The Algebra project serves over 40,000 traditionally
underserved middle school students at 22 urban and rural sites in 13
states across the South, the West Coast, Midwest and Northeast. Doing very


           extraordinary things with kids in Mississsippi and elsewhere.


          5. Milo Cutter
          Founder of City Academy charter school
          St. Paul, Minnesota
          She is an NEA member who stuck her neck out to start the nation's first
          charter school -- the only one to exist when the President was elected in
          1992.   Very articulate on the role of charter schools.


          6. Kevin ____ (getting last name from Jon Schnur)
          Neighborhood House Charter School
          Started a charter school in Dorchester section of Boston. Very outspoken
          advocate for the need to educate young black kids. Recent newspaper story
          focused on outings that this school organizes for its students.


          7. Arturo Pacheco
          Dean of University of Texas-EI Paso School of Education
          Excellent spokesperson for the importance of effective teacher education
          from an institution recognized for strong links between the arts and
          sciences faculty, the education school, and the .local community. Keynote
          speaker at recent ED-sponsored conference on teacher preparation.


          8. Sarah Kass
          City on a Hill Charter School in Boston
          Young, articulate founder and teacher for a charter school focused on
          civics and democracy.


          9. Augusta Kappner
          President
          Bank Street College
          Gussie was Assistant Secretary for Vocational Education until she left to
          become President of Bank Street, a teachers' college in New York City.
          Very active with America Reads.
          212-875-4597


          10. Eduardo Padron
          President
          Miami-Dade Community College
          Active member of America Reads Steering Committee.   Miami-Dade is the
          largest community college in the country.
          305-237-3404


