       RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.    ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

       CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-AUG-1997 16:35:09.00

       SUBJECT:     Electronic Funds Transfer 1999

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Gene B. Sperling ( CN=Gene B. Sperling/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Charles R. Marr ( CN=Charles R. Marr/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP     OPD 1
       READ: UNKNOWN

       CC: Ellen S. Seidman ( CN=Ellen S. Seidman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       Michael A. Fitzpatrick ( CN=Michael A. Fitzpatrick/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       Introduction

       The Administration has an opportunity this Fall to provide 10 million
       "unbanked" Americans with access to regulated, insured financial
       institutions. This September, Treasury will be putting forth new
       regulations to implement Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) 1999. Under this
       new law, all federal benefits must be delivered electronically to
       recipients. To access these electronic funds, recipients need a financial
       service institution.  In order to insure that those individuals who lack
       bank accounts can access their funds, Treasury is developing a plan to
       link insured financial institutions with unregulated alternative financial
       providers such as check cashing operations.  However, many community
       groups, the AARP, unions, and certain Democratic Senators such as Paul
       Sarbanes are very concerned about allowing what they call "fringe bankers"
       from serving as the conduit for Electronic Benefits Transfers (EBT).
       Chiefly, because such institutions are non-insured and unregulated, charge
       higher fees than insured institutions, and do not provide full banking
       services.


       Background



 The Omnibus Consolidated Rescission and Appropriations Act of 1996
 mandates that, as of 1/1/99, all federal payments must be made by
 electronic funds transfer. This includes all payments to businesses, as
 well as all direct federal payments to individuals under benefits programs
 such as Social Security, Supplemental Security (SSI) , Veterans (VA),
 Railroad Retirement (RR) , etc. Only federal income tax refunds are
 statutorily exempt, although the Secretary of the Treasury has the
 authority to grant waivers for other individuals or types of payments.

 The near elimination of printed government checks is intended both to cut
 costs to the federal government and to reduce fraud.   Treasury issued
 roughly 850 million payments in 1996. Of these, about 450 million were
 electronic and about 400 million were by printed check. About 80 million
 of those checks were tax refunds, leaving the remaining 320 million checks
 to be converted to EFT under the new law. Because the cost of each EFT
 (less than 2 cents) is less than 5% of the cost of printing and mailing a c
 heck, .converting from checks to EFT is expected t save roughly $100
 million per year.

 Treasury's program to implement the new law for payments of all types is
 called EFT-99. A large part of this task will be conversion of all direct
 federal benefit payments to EFT.  In a few weeks, Treasury is expected to
 issue regulations for comment for this conversion. Under the law, these
 regulations must ensure that individuals have access to their funds at
 "reasonable cost" and with the same consumer protection provided to other
 hodlers of bank.accounts.

 The Unbanked

 Roughly ten million individuals who received federal benefit payments are
 "unbanked": they do not have accounts at depository institutions. Of
 these individuals, 8 million are Social Security beneficiaries, while 2
 million recieve benefits under other federal programs.  (This is out of a
 total 44 million individuals who receive Social Security benefits, 6.6
 million who receive SSI, and 26 million who receive veterans benefits.)
 Currently, these individuals often cash their monthly checks at grocery
 stores, check cashers, money transfer agents, etc.:  clearly they cannot
 receive payments by direct deposit unless they obtain bank accounts.
 Detailed information about the unbanked and their financial practices is
 lacking. Treasury states that their reasons for not having accounts are
 various, but may include the cost of maintaining a bank account, a prior
 bad experience in dealing with banks, or lack of a convenient banking
 location.

 In May, Treasury officials stated that they intend to use the new law to
 bring unbanked benefit recipients into the banking system. To serve
 unbanked benefits recipients, Treasury has proposed that banks offer a new
 type of account, called Direct Deposit Two.  It would be limited to debit
 card access at automated teller machines and point of sale terminals.
 There would be no minimum balance requirement, monthly statement , or
 check books, thereby eliminating overdraft promblems and other expenses
 associated with conventional bank accounts.  In addition,   the banks would
 not pay any interest on these accounts and would receive the benefit of
 the monthly "float" of deposits.  This is a bare-bones option which
 Treasury believes could serve these ten million unbanked .recipients.

 This raises the question: What charges will the benefit recipients be
 reuqired to pay? Treasury's existing pilot programs for EFT are
 suggestive.  In the Direct Payment Card program conducted Houston,


 approximately 22,000 individuals were issued electronic access cards.
 Clients are charged $3 monthly and receive one free ATM withdrawal per
 month. Subsequent ATM withdrawals cost 95 cents each, and point-of-sale
 (POS) transaction fees are set by the merchant.  Printed statements are
 optional at $1.00 per month. The average client performs 2.7 ATM
 transactions and 2.0 POS transactions per month.

 The fee structure is significant concern.  In several ways it could
 mitigate or counteract any posible advantage of EFT for the benefit
 recipient.  First, the fact an individual may receive only one free ATM
 withdrawal per month may encourage him/her to make fewer, larger cash
 withdrawals at each trip to ATM. This may expose him/her to an enhanced
 risk of loss, theft, or robbery. Second, the individual is presumably
 subject to ATM surcharge fees if he/she withdraws cash from an ATM that is
 not operated by his/her bank.   If the local bank ATMs are in an unsafe
 location and the recipient choses to visit another bank's ATMs, he/she
 could be paying a surcharge for every cash withdrawal. This is in
 addition to any monthly charges and per-withdrawal fees charged by her own
 bank. Third, the recipient may have to choose between paying ATM
 surcharges or traveling to a distant or inconvenient location. ATM
 charges could add up significantly:  the NY Times recently estimated that
 the average ATM user now pays $155 in ATM fees each year.  Since the
 average Social Security benefit is approximately $700 per month, ATM fees
 could draw off a significant portion of an individual's benefits.

 In response to Treasury's proposal, community groups and others have
 suggested through design changes to EFT 99:

 1. Only federally regulated and insured, depository institutions should be
 permitted to be the conduits for federal payments.  this would not mean
 that recipients could not access their funds through an ATM or POS device
 at an alternative financial provider such as a money transmitter or a
 finance company -- just that they would never be required to go to that
 alternative provider to access their money.

 2. Recipients who do not voluntarily participate in electronic transfer
 program must be provided individual accounts at insured, depository
 institutions, which are affordable, reasonably accessible, include basic
 consumer protections and provided access to essential banking services.
 These accounts must provide least-cost access to their federal
 entitlement; encourage savings; and foster financial relationships between
 the unbanked federal recipients and the mainstream financial institutions.

 3. Treasury's use of "authorized agents" as alternative conduits of
 federal payments should be limited to those individuals and entities who
 have a fiduciary duty to the recipient.

 Recommendation

 Treasury has asked to brief you on this issue.  I believe EFT 99 has the
 potential to be the Admininstration's most important economic development
 issue of the next six months.   I recommend we set up a meeting with
 Treasury before they issue the regulations in September.
",


