RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Andrew J. Mayock ( CN=Andrew J. Mayock/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ WHO 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-AUG-1997 16:34:45.00

SUBJECT:   Paper for Brainstorming

TO: David S. Beaubaire ( CN=David S. Beaubaire/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Emil E. Parker ( CN=Emil E. Parker/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Katherine Hubbard ( CN=Katherine Hubbard/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: James T. Edmonds ( CN=James T. Edmonds/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert B. Johnson ( CN=Robert B. Johnson/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Mickey Ibarra ( CN=Mickey Ibarra/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Richard Socarides ( CN=Richard Socarides/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Walker ( CN=Ann F. Walker/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ellen M. Lovell ( CN=Ellen M. Lovell/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thurgood Marshall Jr ( CN=Thurgood Marshall Jr/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Robert N. Weiner ( CN=Robert N. Weiner/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Richard L. Hayes ( CN=Richard L. Hayes/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bob J. Nash ( CN=Bob J. Nash/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Kevin S. Moran ( CN=Kevin S. Moran/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Judith_Winston   Judith Winston @ ed.gov @ inet   [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ananias Blocker III ( CN=Ananias Blocker III/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion




NOTE TO MEMBERS OF THE ADVISORY BOARD

       Re: Upcoming Schedule and Plans for Developing the Advisory Board Work Plan

        I want to follow-up on our recent conversations and provide you with some ideas on
paper for proceeding between now and the next meeting of the Advisory Board. I have spoken
with each member of the Board in general terms about this suggested framework and schedule,
and I believe everyone is in agreement with the general structure that I outlined in my telephone
conversations with you, and which is described below. I am anxious to receive your comments
and ideas, both about the suggested structure for the subcommittees and the work of the
subcommittees, and about any other matters related to the work plan for the Advisory Board.

       As we discussed, I believe it would be useful for the Advisory Board to work in
subcommittees between now and the next meeting, which I have suggested would be in
mid-September. Subcommittee members could meet primarily through conference calls,
although they certainly could meet in person if needed.

       The President has set out five major goals for the Race Initiative and will be seeking the
advice of the Advisory Board on how to achieve each ofthem:

              To articulate the President's vision of a just, unified America

              To help educate all Americans about the facts of race in this country

              To promote a constructive dialogue in which we confront the difficult issues of
               race

              To encourage leadership at the federal, state, local, community and individual
               levels to help bridge racial divides; and

              To identify and develop solutions in critical areas such as education, economic
               opportunity, the administration of justice, housing, crime and health care.

       The Board's work plan will outline the process it will use to ensure it has all of the data
and support it needs to advise the President fully and knowledgeably in each of the areas on
which the Board's advice is sought. The subcommittees could be organized roughly around the
five major goals or the three major activity themes of the Initiative, recognizing that there is
overlap between the goals and the themes. The three activity themes and the areas they might
                                                 2                 Hex-Dump Conversion

cover are:

       A. Study -- This includes identifying the demographic data the Board wants to collect
       and use in support of anyone of the five goals (i.e., determining the most effective ways
       to use demographic data as one of the many ways of providing race-related information
       that will educate, increase understanding, and dispel demographic myths and stereotypes),
       identifying what kind of data would be most effective to use (e.g., sector data --
       education, economic opportunity, etc.; geographic data; class data), and how best to use
       it. It also could include developing a framework or criteria for identifying "best
       practices" in communities, companies, and other settings, and developing ideas for
       establishing a clearinghouse or other means to make this information readily available.

       B. Dialogue -- This includes the challenge of outreach and having a national
       conversation about race, including organizing town meetings, developing parallel
       vehicles (e.g., conferences) for reaching other audiences, developing networks of leaders
       across and within communities, identifying the most effective way to reach people with
       the demographic data, and building partnerships with corporate, sports, or entertainment
       organizations. It also includes identifying the focus and ideas for kits and other materials
       to distribute to communities, churches, schools, and other organizations. In addition, the
       work of this subcommittee could include developing a communication and media plan
       for outreach, or this work could be part of a separate subcommittee. A critical challenge
       of the dialogue theme or activity is how to guide and measure effectiveness and to build
       on whatever the measure of success is.

       C. Action -- This is the policy and program development component of the Initiative.
       It includes identifying ways to be a catalyst for the development of community
       improvement programs; determining whether to issue publications that would be
       educational, informative, and/or thought-provoking; identifying opportunities for federal,
       state, or local initiatives. It also could include developing a possible outline for the
       President's Report to the Nation, and determining what activities the Advisory Board
       could or should become engaged in that would fill in and support the framework for the
       President's Report.

         I know that each of you fully appreciate that each of the goals and activity themes present
a major challenge, especially in light of the time frame the President has set out for himself and
the Board. Many ofthe people I have talked with during the last two weeks tend to advance
immediately beyond the discussion of racial reconciliation to that of policy and program
development aimed at effectively addressing the barriers confronting racial and ethnic minorities
in this country, e.g., adequate funding for inner city schools; enhanced affirmative action
strategies in the education and employment spheres. Others question how realistic, appropriate
or wise, it is to move forward with recommendations for significant policy and program
development without first attempting to build more of a consensus in the country about race and
racial reconciliation. The Board's work plan must somehow balance these approaches and
                                                                    U   D               agement System
                                                                    nex- umpC onverslOn
                                                                                     .
                                                   3

concerns -- that is, the need to educate and promote a deeper understanding of the common bonds
and values among racial groups and the history of race relations (across multiple racial groups)
and the need to push forward on the policy and program development and action front.

        In each of these areas, one useful activity would be to begin to identify organizations and
experts that already have information, are engaged in outreach, and have developed programs and
policy proposals so that the Board does not spend its time duplicating existing and valuable work
of others.

       If the Board is in general agreement on this framework (organizing a work plan through
subcommittees based on the goals and themes outlined above) and the timetable (meet as
subcommittees during August and early September with a full Board meeting in mid- to
late-September), my staffwill review the schedules of the Board members and check the
availability of meeting space, and I will then contact you immediately to finalize the date of the
next meeting.

       I will be out of the office until Wednesday, when we will be in our new quarters. I will
contact each of you then with the address, phone and fax numbers, as well as my e-mail address.

        If you want to talk about any of the ideas in this note, please feel free to give me a call.
Also, feel free to send comments by fax or e-mail once we have provided you with that
information. I look forward to talking with you soon.




                                               Judith A. Winston
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion
                                      The President's Vision

The President has expressed his vision of race relations in a number of speeches over the past
few months (UCSD, NAACP, NABJ, Urban League) and over the past few years (National
Archives, Austin and Memphis speeches). A critical part of the race initiative is pulling this
vision together in order to clearly and succinctly frame the initiative, the President's report and
his activities on this issue during the rest of his term. Please review the excerpt below. With
these themes in mind, consider which themes to highlight and how they fit together in
constructing a vision.

The Coming America - Demographic Trends: We know what we will look like, but what
will we be like? The state of Hawaii has no majority racial or ethnic group. It is a wonderful
place of exuberance and friendship and patriotism. Within the next three years, here in
California no single race or ethnic group will make up a majority of the state's population.
Already, five of our largest school districts draw students from over 100 different racial and
ethnic groups. A half-century from now, when your own grandchildren are in college, there will
be no majority race in America. Can we be one America respecting, even celebrating, our
differences, but embracing even more what we have in common? Can we define what it means
to be an American, not just in terms of the hyphen showing our ethnic origins but in terms of our
primary allegiance to the values America stands for and values we really live by. Our hearts
long to answer yes, but our history reminds us that it will be hard. The ideals that bind us
together are as old as our nation, but so are the forces that pull us apart. Our founders sought to
form a more perfect union; the humility and hope of that phrase is the story of America and it is
our mission today. (UCSD)

The Economic Asset of Diversity: "Now, in a global economy, in a global society where we're
being closer together, it is a huge asset for us that we have people from everywhere else. We
just announced an initiative on Africa, on promoting economic development in Africa ... [S]everal
African countries grew at seven percent or greater last year and are doing the same thing again
this year. And more than half the countries on the continent are democracies. Now, we can all
understand that. But why are we in a good position to do well there? Because of you [NAACP
audience]. Because of you. Why are we in good position to unite all of Latin America with us
in a common economic group early in the next century? Because of the Hispanic Americans, all
the Latinos. Why are we in a good position to avoid having Asia become a separate economic
block and a destabilizing force in the world? In no small measure because of all Asian
Americans in this country. Why do we have some hope of being a major force for peace in the
Middle East? Because of all the Jewish Americans here and the increasingly active and
constructive Arab American community here. In other words, it's a good deal that there are so
many of us who are so different from each other." (NAACP)

The United America Amid World RaciallEthnic Strife: "You pick up the newspaper any
given day and you find people killing each other halfway around the world because of their racial
and ethnic and religious differences. The Hutus and Tutsis in Rwanda and Burundi. The
Catholics and the Protestants in Ireland. My people still argue over what happened 600 years
ago. The Muslims, the Croats, the Serbs in Bosnia. The Jews and the Arabs in the Middle
                                                                     Hex-Dump Conversion

East. And here we are with our long history of black-white issues rooted in slavery, with the
appropriation of a lot of Mexican Americans after the war with Mexico into our country, and
then with wave upon wave, upon wave of immigrants." (NAACP)

Build One America Based on Respect: "Our third imperative is perhaps the most difficult of
all. We must build one American community based on respect for one another and our shared
values. We must begin with a candid conversation on the state of race relations today and the
implications of Americans of so many different races living and working together as we
approach a new century. We must be honest with each other. We have talked at each other and
about each other for a long time. It's high time we all began talking with each other. Over the
coming year I want to lead the American people in a great and unprecedented conversation about
race." (UCSD)

Responsibility: "Beyond opportunity, we must demand responsibility from every American. Our
strength as a society depends upon both -- upon people taking responsibility for themselves and
their families, teaching their children good values, working hard and obeying the law, and giving
back to those around us." UCSD
                                                                        Hex-Dump Conversion
                                      Measures of Success

We need to develop measures of success for the year. We can do this by asking ourselves, 'At
the end of the year, for the initiative to be a success, what have we accomplished?' Among
other issues, consider our resources (and their limits), the timeframe (ten months), the President's
vision and the comprehensiveness of this issue. In this context, we must decide what the major
issues are and what our measures of success are and how we achieve them.

On which priorities should we focus? What are the measures of success within these areas?
How do we achieve those measures of success?

Please consider the answers to these questions within the framework of the following areas:

   1. Public education/communication about race;
   2. National conversation and development of committed leadership;
   3. Identification, development, and dissemination of solutions.


