RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( cN;william R. Kincaid/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-AUG-1997 13:35:59.00

SUBJECT:   HEA Title III

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Yesterday I participated in a meeting with Secretary Riley to discuss how
to move forward on the Administration's proposal for reauthorizing Title
III (institutional aid) of the Higher Ed Act and how to respond to the
letter from Bill Gray and Henry Ponder with regard to the treatment of
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI's). Basically, this was the strategy
that folks agreed on:

1. Pending final DOJ clearance, the legal and policy issues that Gray and
Ponder raise can be satisfactorily addressed and changes made with respect
to HSI's and Tribal Colleges are the right way to go.

2. ED will go back to Ken Apfel and ask for 5-10 million more in the
authorization level (though still quite a bit short of the initially
proposed level) to avoid getting hit for cutting some of the specific
subsections and losing the ability to assemble a coalition.  (Riley went
over the numbers personally and deliberately, and fully agreed that it was
necessary) ..

3. Hold a series of small meetings with HBCU leaders (Gray and Ponder) and
then (separately) with Hispanic Institution leaders, urging them both to
work collaboratively, to take the long view, and to avoid fights that can
be exploited by opponents of any assistance.  This message is especially
important for the HBCUs to hear given the growing Hispanic presence in the
country.

4. Hold similar meetings with key black caucus and Hispanic caucus
leaders, with largely the same message.

5. There was discussion about subsequently holding joint black/Hispanic
meetings, but less certainty about that.

6. They will hold off on sending up the bill until the meetings have been
held.

There is openness to White House participation in these meetings, but for
now nobody seems to be pushing for it.

I thought all this sounded pretty sensible, but said that I would run it
by you (and also with folks in NEC) .   Please let me know if this approach
seems ok to you, and I will connect with NEC. Also, do I need to run this
by Andy Blocker and/or Maria Echaveste?

Thanks.


