    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

    CREATION DATE/TIME:15-AUG-1997 12:06:31.00

    SUBJECT:   Talking points on SSI kids fyi

    TO: Elena Kagan       CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    CC: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    Here are talking points Larry Haas prepared on the Pear story on SSI kids,
    FYI. The basic news is we are not running higher than expected, as Pear
    suggests, and we have softened this by grandfathering Medicaid and other
    things.

    Talking Points

    New York Times Article on 5SI ChildrenD,s Regulations

    August 15, 1997


    Main Points

     As the New York Times noted today, 95,000 children are no longer eligible
    for SSI benefits under the Social Security AdministrationD,s regulations.

       The 95,000 is about half of the 180,000 cases that SSA has reviewed as
    of August 2, 1997

       SSA still needs to review "another 85,000 cases.

       The initial reviews should be completed by early October.

     Those SSA regulations are designed to implement last yearO,s welfare
    reform law.

     While these early figures suggest that SSAD,s initial estimate that
    135,000 children would lose their benefits may be exceeded, you have to
    remember:

       SSA cautions that this early data is not representative and should not
    be used for projections.

       Moreover, a portion of these children will appeal their cases and be
    found eligible once their cases have gone through SSAD,s normal appeals
    process.

     To minimize the adverse effects of the law (and its regulations), the
    Administration convinced Congress in the recent balanced budget law to
    retain Medicaid coverage for those disabled children who are kicked off
    the S5I rolls.



-- Without such action, many of these children would have lost Medicaid as
well.



Background

 Last yearO,s welfare law, enacted on August 22, 1996, tightened the
eligibility standards for childhood disability benefits in the
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program.

   The legislation could have been much worse.

   Initial Republican proposals in early 1995 would have eliminated cash
benefits for 80 percent of future applicants, replacing the cash with
State block grants to provide services at much reduced funding levels.

         -- In the final bill, the Administration managed to maintain the
SSI childhood disability program as a cash benefit program for all those
children found eligible.

 SSA released regulations on February 6, 1997, to implement the new law.

-- These regulations were prepared by SSA under the supervision of
then-commissioner Shirley Chater.

-- They were reviewed by OMB and the DPC as part of the normal regulatory
review process.

 Soon thereafter, SSA notified 264,000 children of the nearly 1 million
children receiving SSI benefits that they might be affected by the new law
and that their cases would be reviewed.

 At the time the regulations were issued, SSA estimated that 135,000
children would have their benefits terminated as a result of the tighter
eligibility standards.

 SSAD,s regulations adhered to its reading of Congressional intent, but
also provided several new procedures (that the law did not specify) to
ensure continued eligibility for severely disabled children.

-- SSA estimated that, without these new procedures, approximately 190,000
children would lose benefits.

 As the New York Times noted today, 95,000 children have been found no
longer eligible as a result of initial determinations.

-- About 180,000 cases have been reviewed as of August 2, 1997, with
another 85,000 cases still to be reviewed.

-- The initial reviews should be completed by early October.

 While the majority of cases involve mental impairments, it is too early
to definitively classify the nature of the disabilities of the children
being effected.

   However, SSA is monitoring the results of these redeterminations.

   No children who are mentally retarded as that term is clinically
·
    defined are losing benefits.  [I advised press office not to make this
    point; not sure it's true, and it antagonizes the community.)

    -- Children with mild learning disabilities and attention deficit disorder
    appear to be the types of children most affected.


