 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Robert M. Shireman ( CN=Robert M. Shireman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:22-AUG-1997 15:21:49.00

 SUBJECT:   Chaka Fattah memo to POTUS

 TO: KAGAN_E ( KAGAN E   @   Al   @   CD   @   LNGTWY [ UNKNOWN]   )   (OPD)
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Kenneth S. Apfel ( CN=Kenneth S. Apfel/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Mike Smith    Mike Smith @ ed.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN]               }
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Maureen_McLaughlin ( Maureen_McLaughlin @ ed.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN]            )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: William R: Kincaid ( CN=William R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP@ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 cc: S. A. Noe ( CN=S. A. Noe/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 cc: Jonathan A. Kaplan ( CN=Jonathan A. Kaplan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 cc: pauline_abernathy ( pauline_abernathy @ ed.gov @ inet [ UNKNOWN]          )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 cc: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Kathryn B. Stack ( CN=Kathryn B. Stack/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 I expect to be finalizing this memo with Gene on Tuesday.  I need any
 edits and official positions for recommendations by Monday night.  [Note:
 There are a few blanks for Education to fill in] .

 ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
 ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

 TEXT:
 Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D44]MAIL404065336.216 to ASCII,
  The following is a HEX DUMP:

  FF575043A90FOOOOOI0A020100000002050000005D98000000020000AE56AF4D008055A38E5E91
  1882204745BC410B0079640BDI0E9B5DD183334967FF6117E3ACD322DB3DD09806CAOAA70E9548
  8239F41A875325BDOB156D71D7F6AD6A667CA97DF6CD66DB2E4EC04EAIB67FBBA3500B8522EF96
  28D2B86FD6D21D3D19B7A53ED187AABC13E907B70BE19B32928AIE93815E8F7BE8972BDOIDD62F
  F02F3F7507C185163DF54C7898176C86BE47983E928217011DC27BEE8DB31A864A4601DF084204
  4165F5D4997F870F89B251C38F7F9FBABABB50DIF673AOCDA4D049Bl321A686AF97DOIE2D2E5B5
 '058372D3A6BB47D719BCBACD85AAED70EFF5EC9A4C8E49A04256CBB375756ED14A22D2654E6798
 A438339BC5E24EE6ADDOC5160E3BECA48CD2706ED1487C9FC80B779A947DCD5E91FOF7BD22D24B
  090CEFBID2E3FIED231CBICFB6425A4A72BA7EBA5C641FE030135C108769D27015B068EB7BFC98
 B60218E8FDC40BEB212F6C5DBF65BIIIIBC7494CB92AA5DB117215CE6A9C12CF3F30A9E21F9BEA
                                                                      Hex-Dump Conversion




                        [DRAFT SPERLING MEMO TO POTUS 8/22]


                                            OVERVIEW

        Your advisors (NEC, DPC, OMB, and Education) have reviewed and analyzed
Congressman Fattah's "21st Century Scholars Act." We are in agreement that the idea has
enormous appeal, but that due to budget, efficiency, and implementation problems, we do not
recommend adopting its central element: a "guarantee" of a future Pell Grant. (Congressman
Fattah is aware of the problems that have arisen in our analysis).

        We agree, however, that the Fattah legislation points out two critical needs: (1)
low-income families need to know more, earlier, about the financial aid that is available for
college; and, (2) students at high-poverty schools need more academic support, mentoring and
other encouragement to attend college, starting before the high school years. This memo lays
out two options for addressing each need:

Options for getting out the word about Federal aid:

       1. A creative national campaign celebrating the universal availability of college through the
       education tax cuts, Pell Grant increases, and student loan improvements, with a
       concentrated effort aimed at high-poverty schools and low-income families.

       2. A national campaign as in option A, but with a gimmick aimed at the poorest
       schools: a promise of at least $21,000 in grants or loans over five years (an amount that
       everyone is already eligible for in loans, assuming the programs remain in effect).

Options for bringing early intervention services to more high-poverty middle and junior-high school
students:

       A   An extension of current TRIO programs such as Upward Bound and Talent Search,
       which are administered by community groups and colleges.

       B.   Promoting partnerships between colleges and high-poverty schools, through both
       new Federal grants and allowing colleges to spend funds they currently administer in a
       revolving loan fund (the Federal Perkins Loan program).
                                                                 Hex-Dump Conversion
       Recommendations: On the information campaign, I think the "guarantee" continues to
have appeal, so I prefer option 2 as an approach that would increase the effectiveness of the
information campaign in poor areas, and allow us to capitalize on the interest in the Fattah bill.
[OMB strongly feels that the promise is not necessary for the campaign to be effective and that it
adds administrative complexity. DPC thinks that a promise to an existing entitlement does not
add enough to be worth the effort. Education? .. J.. On the early intervention program, all of
your advisors recommend the school-college partnerships as the best approach.


                                       INTRODUCITON

        A number of private programs have had success in improving educational outcomes for
impoverished youth by guaranteeing -- at an early age -- that the money will be there for college
if they choose to go. . These programs are based on the theory that middle- and upper-class
families benefit enormously from the family and school expedation that they will be graduating
from high school and attending college. At high-poverty schools, where dropout rates are high
and few parents have college degrees, these expectations are absent. These early intervention
programs aim to change those expedations. Many of the programs stress that, while the
financial aid is an important hook for the child and family, additional mentoring, tutoring, and
other support services are a key to success.

        Rep. Chaka Fattah (D-Penn.) has introduced legislation to establish a large-scale,
national effort of this type. He would guarantee a maximum Pell Grant to all of the children
graduating from high-poverty elementary schools (75 poverty). The "21st Century Scholars
Ad' would provide these students with:

   an entitlement to four years of the maximum Pell Grant at the time the promise is made or at
    the time the student attends college, whichever amount is higher;

   an annual notice from the Department of Education reminding the student and family of the
    future availability of the college aid; and,

   automatic eligibijityfor services under current (TRIO) early intervention, mentoring,
    counseling and other services.

    The Education Department estimates that the Fattah legislation would apply to 7,300 schools
with about 500,000 sixth graders (approximately 15 of the national total). Assuming
inflation-based increases in the maximum Pell Grant, each of these students in the sixth grade in
1998-99 would be promised a total of almost $14,000 in aid over four years.

    The Department estimates that on average, this type of program could increase college

                                                2
                                                                   Hex-Dump Conversion
participation rates by this population by about 8 percent, meaning that just over half of the
students would use all or a portion of the promised aid. (Without this program, 45 percent of
these students would be expected to enroll in some type of postsecondary education within two
years of graduating from high schaaP Just under half of those students would be expected to
still be enrolled by the fourth year of college. 2 With a successful early intervention program, the
Education Department estimates that college enrollment rates for this population could be
increased so that they matched the enrollment rates for students at schools with 31-50 percent
low-income students -- an increase of 8 percentage points, to 53 percent.)

    While this increase in enrollment may seem low, college is only one of the intended
outcomes of early intervention programs. They also seek to promote high school completion,
job readiness, and lower incidence of drug abuse and delinquent behavior.

    Rep. Fattah introduced his bill on February 13. As of July 17, he had 93 cosponsors,
including seven Republicans (Christopher Shays, Ken Calvert, J.e. Watts, Jr., Richard Baker, Joe
Scarborough, David McIntosh, and James Greenwood). On June 5, he testified before the
House Education and the Workforce Committee's postsecondary subcommittee and received a
warm reception from both sides of the aisle. The House hopes to move a bill reauthorizing the
Higher Education Act by the end of this year. No companion bill has been introduced in the
Senate.

    An article in the Chronide ofHigher Education on July 11 noted the bipartisan support for
the concepts in Rep. Fattah's bill, but also cited specific concerns that:

   it does not provide for the support services (tutoring, mentoring, etc.) that are needed for the
    proposal to be successful;

   it may guarantee help to too many non-needy students; and,

   it is a new entitlement, which many would oppose solely on that basis.


                                                    ANALYSIS

    There are a number of issues and concerns to consider with respect to the Fattah legislation:



1        21 percent at four-year colleges, 19 percent at less-than-4-year public institutions (mostly community
colleges), and 5 percent at less-than-4-year private institutions (mostly proprietary trade schools).
2            83 percent would be retained in the second year, 67 percent in the third year, and 48 percent in the
fourth year, based on data from the Beginning .Postsecondary Survey.

                                                          3
1. Inefficient targeting and higher-than-expected cost           Hex-Dump Conversion

    Supporters have argued that virtually any student at a high-poverty school probably would
have qualified for a full Pell Grant anyway, even without the guarantee -- therefore, the program
only costs money if it is successful in encouraging youth to go to college. The data do not bear
this out: more than half of the cost of this program would be for students who would have gone
to college anyway but wouldn't have gotten as much aid as the guarantee is providing. It
appears that many families who are poor when their children are in middle school, improve their
financial situation somewhat by the time their children graduate from high school. In addition,
the students who go to college are more likely to be from the relatively higher income families.
The Education Department estimates that the outlays associated with the first cohort of sixth
graders would be $2.45 billion. These outlays (which begin in the 2005-6 school year and are
spread over the following three years) would be composed of:

   $761 million, or 31 ,for Pell Grant amounts that would have been spent anyway on these
    students who would have gone to college anyway;

   $370 million, or 15 , for students who attend college because of the promised aid (students
    induced by the program); and,

   $1,320 million, or 54 , for additional aid provided to students who would have gone to
    college anyway but would not have been eligible for the full $3,000 (or would not have
    received a Pell Grant at all).

    The added cost, therefore, from this first group of sixth graders, is $1.7 billion over four
years. (Viewed on an annual budget basis rather than by cohort, as each of the first four
cohorts get phased in, the added annual outlays will increase to $1.7 billion by the fourth year
after the first group graduates high school and attends college, then will increase each year
roughly by inflation.) More than three times as much additional money is spent on students
who already would have attended college than is spent on those who attend college because of
the aid

2. Need for additional support services

    Research has shown that mentoring, counseling, tutoring and support services are essential to
prevent students from dropping out of school and to increase their academic preparation and
aspirations that lead to college. Rep. Fattah's proposal does not expand the availability of early
intervention services (it simply makes participants eligible for the few programs we fund now).
But without those services, the early Pell Grant promise probably will not have a significant
impact. The I Have a Dream program estimates that the support services for each new cohort,
provided primarily by volunteers, cost about $150,000 for a coordinator and other expenses.

                                                 4
For the 7,300 high-poverty schools, the cost of this type of progflHff-~PfJ&'ffl'쬲wvices would
be $1 billion (per year). Education thinks this estimate is low.

3. The issue of a new entitlement

    The Fattah legislation is written as an entitlement, and in order to comply with the budget
agreement, the proposal would at least need to remain on the mandatory side of the budget. 3
As an entitlement, the proposal could be portrayed as (1) another potential area of runaway
spending, and (2) a gimmick to provide promises now for spending that is outside the 5-year
budget window.

4. Inequities and perverse incentives

    As with empowerment zones and any other effort to draw a line around a "very" poor area,
there will be some apparent inequities. A school with 76 percent poverty will get the benefit,
while a 73 percent poverty school nearby will be denied it. In addition, school populations
change, so a school may be part of the program one year, then be denied the next.

    In addition, there would be inequities among students at a school: Most sixth graders attend
a different school within 1-3 years. At most of the higher-poverty junior high and high schools,
not all of the students will have come from the highest-poverty elementary schools. There could
be some odd incentives as well. If a student who attends a particular school for one part of one
year can get a promise of at least $14,000 in financial aid, someone will find a way to game the
system. It may even create incentives for further concentration of poverty in order to provide
the Pell Grant promise to poor students who had attended a school with a lower concentration of
poverty.

5. Entitlement without Accountability

    Some of your advisors object to providing expanded college aid without demanding more
from students (and schools) before they reach college. The Fattah proposal does not require
any particular level of achievement or high-skill curriculum. Indeed, it does not even require
high school graduation (since Pell Grants are available to non-high school graduates for job
training and remedial courses in some circumstances).




    The "promise" of aid would count as budget authority in the year that the promise is made, even if the student
never uses the promised aid If the program was on the discretionary side, this BA would need to be counted
within the Function 500 limits. Given that much of the BA will never result it outlays, this would not be a priority
use of the scarce funds.

                                                          5
                                            OFIIONS
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
         We attempted to develop approaches to the 21st Century Scholars Act that would patch
up the various problems and improve targeting, but were not able to find a satisfactory approach.
  In the meantime, Congressman Fattah has become aware of some of the difficulties associated
with his approach, and has suggested alternatives that look more broadly at the grants and loans
that students are currently eligible for. He also agrees that additional early intervention efforts
are critical to the success of any plan.
         Below we provide two options for getting information out to more families about the
availability of Federal financial aid, and two options for expanding early intervention in middle
and junior-high schools.

Options for spreading the word about Mandai aid for college

        1. A NATIONAL CAMPAIGN Low-income students often receive far more financial aid
than just a Pell Grant. Indeed, everyone, regardless of income, qualifies for $17,125 or more in
Federal loans over four years of full-time college attendance. In addition, many colleges would
include supplemental grants, state grants, work-study, and other assistance in the total financial
aid package for a low-income student. Therefore, a campaign that focuses on a Pell Grant
guarantee actually understates the amount of aid that a child at a high-poverty school could
expect if they were to go to college.

        This argues for a creative campaign for informing all families, but particularly low-income
families, of the package of financial aid for which they would qualify. Many have long argued
that we should recruit people to college with the same vigor that we recruit for the armed forces:
everyone should know that "you already qualify for at least $17,000 in aid to go to college. ~ This
campaign could include:

      Producing PSAs and/or paid media touting the availability of aid for college, linked to an
       expansion of the current toll-free information line.

      Providing free user-friendly computer programs that provide sample financial aid
       packages based on the user's income. These could be provided through schools as well
       as kiosks that could be set up in employment and social services offices.

      Training AmeriCorps and/or others for a concentrated sweep of high schools and/or
       middle schools in poor areas to provide high-tech presentations on the availability of
       college aid.

      Naming a steering committee of a diverse group of celebrities and role models who


                                                6
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion
       commit to reaching out to encourage college attendance.

      Securing a commitment of funds and activity by corporations and/or foundations. (For
       example, the electronics industry is interested in doing more to get students, especially
       minorities, into computer fields).                       .

      Identifying families that would qualify for Pell Grants and other aid through the IRS,
       social service offices, or other sources. Mail them a simple postcard that invites them to
       call or write to get more information about college opportunity. Provide a method for
       hooking up interested families with counselors at colleges. (In other words, recruit them
       in the same way that some of the trade schools do).
       [EDUCATION: HOW MUCH SHOULD BE SET ASIDE FOR THIS? IS mERE
       ALREADY AUTHORITY FOR mi

       Arguments for option 1:

              An education effort has never really been tried.    That's where we should start.

              Particularly with the successes in the budget agreement, the Federal government
               already has a strong financial aid system, particularly for the poor. We should
               spread the news rather than undermining our win with the message that aid is not
               secure enough.

              The campaign could begin without any additional Congressional action.

       Arguments against option 1:

              A guarantee sends a stronger message. (The poor are skeptical about the staying
               power of Federal programs. If it's not an iron-clad guarantee, it may not have
               the desired impact.)

        2. A NATIONAL CAMPAIGN WITH A PROMISE FOR THE POOR. Instead of
focusing solely on Pell Grants, this option would tum the Fattah idea into essentially a packaging
of the current Pell Grant and student loan programs (Congressman Fattah has suggested this
approach in conversations I have had with him). Students at the middle and junior high schools
that feed into the 2100 poorest high schools would be identified as "21st Century Scholars" and
provided with a promise of at least $21,000 in college aid over five years.

       Cost This approach has minimal budget impact because any student, regardless of
income, is already eligible for at least $22,625 in loans for five years of full-time college


                                                 7
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion
attendance -- and the loan programs are already entitlements. The only budget implication is
that these students will be guaranteed that they will not be affected by any elimination of the loan
programs or reduction in loan limits 5-10 years down the road. That does not result in
significant increased outlays other than the extension of the loan programs for these students
beyond the current authorization. [EDUCATION: WHAT INCREASE WOULD THE
INDUCEMENT EFFECT CAUSE?]

       Number of students: [NEED ED's ANALYSIS] 2100 high schools represent about 14 of
all of the high schools in the country, so this approach would cover roughly the same number of
students as the original Fattah legislation (15 of students in 6th grade). By starting from the
poorest high schools, and working back to [ABOUT HOW MANY?] feeder schools, it
improves the ability to follow the students through their school years ..

       Arguments for option 2:
              It allows for a simple message to poor students: you have $21,000 at your
               disposal for college, if you get through high school successfully.

              The aid is iron-clad guaranteed, allowing us to tell families that they can absolutely
               count on the help.                  -

       Arguments against option 2:

              This detracts from our message that we have opened up college opportunity to aIL
                 The $21,000 promise creates the impression that this aid is only available to
               these students, when in fact everyone is eligible for at least that much.

              The promise would need to be tracked administratively (just in case), even though
               it will likely never need to be invoked.

              This would require statutory authority, and any fight on the issue could
               undermine our message that the aid will be available for those who need it.

Options fOr expanding early intervention

       A EXTENSION OF TRIO.           The Education Department already spends $500 million
(FY 1997) for intervention efforts to help disadvantaged individuals prepare for and succeed in
college. The largest program, Upward Bound, provides grants to community groups and
colleges for programs that provide high school students with academic enrichment, summer
college experience, and other services. The program, serving 44,700 students, has a high cost --
$4,000 per participant. But the investment pays off: preliminary results from a scientific


                                                 8
(random assignment) evaluation show [need to fill in].               Hex-Dump Conversion

        This option proposes an investment of $200 million to provide services to approximately
50,000 students in FY 1999, ramping up to $300 million in FY 2000 and $400 million in
FY200l, serving 100,000 students. Current Upward Bound programs that propose to reach
further down into middle and junior high schools would receive a priority in funding.

       Arguments for option A:

              Extends a proven program, giving us greater confidence that there will be positive
               results.

              The group representing current TRIO program, a strong lobby, would support
               the significant increase in funding (as long as its membership is favored in
               receiving the grants).


       Arguments against option A:

              The Federal government covers 97 of the cost of Upward Bound programs.
               Extending that approach eliminates the possibility of leveraging more of a
               contribution from colleges.

              Upward Bound only works with selected disadvantaged students. By starting in
               middle school, it is critical to focus on all children. This whole-school or
               whole-cohort approach requires different strategies than those used by the current
               Upward Bound grantees.

              The budget is very tight in FY 1999. Any new investment reduces the pot of
               funds available for existing programs (such as Pell Grants) or other new initiatives.

       B. SCHOOL-COLLEGE PARTNERSHIPS. This option adopts the view that colleges
should be doing more to connect with students at high-poverty schools no later than the middle
school years. Through partnerships with those schools, colleges can encourage students (and
their families) to choose a demanding academic program, while the college provides academic
enrichment and intensive mentoring, tutoring and other support services.

      College involvement is critical because they have the tools, the expertise, and the stability
to commit to a long-term project, and to provide the monitoring needed to ensure its success.
They know what academic preparation they need from schools, so are in a good position to


                                                 9
                                                                       Hex-Dump Conversion
work with high-poverty schools to improve and supplement their curriculum, to prepare students
for success in college. While in some cases mentoring might be provided by undergraduate
students, universities also can tap alumni, businesses, and other community resources to get
serious commitments of time for the effort. Finally, it is critical that there always be a full-time,
serious and energetic coordinator running the' efforts.

        Stronger school-college partnerships would not only serve to promote college-going, they
could also help to bring higher standards to impoverished schools. (This is also a perfect
complement to America Reads: while the reading tutoring effort starts with parents of young
children and works through the early elementary years to lift up student achievement in reading,
this partnership would reach down from the university level, and help to pull those same children
along into high hopes and high achievement in all subject areas.)

        Under this approach, the Federal government would encourage and partially fund
partnerships between colleges and high-poverty schools or school districts. These would consist
of:

      Partners:  Each partnership would at least include a high-poverty high school, its feeder
       schools, and a degree-granting institution of higher education. Most would also include
       businesses and/or a community groups which may provide supplemental funds and/or
       may be a source of mentors and other assistance for the children.

       [HOW SHOULD WE IDENTIFY HIGH-POVERTY SCHOOLS/DISTRICTS?
       SHOULD IT BE FLEXIBLE, PURSUANT TO REGS?]

      An Academic Pian:     The school would agree to offer a curriculum that prepares students
       for college.

      Support Services:   The college would agree to provide structured, long-term supplemental
       academic enrichment, mentoring, tutoring, and other assistance to all students starting not
       later than the eight grade.

      Financial Aid information and bonus. The partnership would provide financial aid
       counseling, and could provide financial incentives for students to stick with the program,
       take the right classes and/or to get good grades. (In some existing programs, colleges
       guarantee admittance and aid if students reach certain goals in high school).

       Funding. This option would aim for $400 million in funding through (1) aiming to get
colleges to use $250 million of the Perkins Loan revolving funds for this purpose, and (2) asking
for another $150 million in the FY 1999 Budget for areas that do not have significant Perkins


                                                 10
                                                                            Hex-Dump Conversion

funds. If the partnership cost an average of $400,000 [EDUCATION WANT TO TAKE A
STAB AT ANOTHER NUMBER? Upward Bound is $300,000 per project, but only serves 74
participants each], this would fund 1000 partnerships.

        Using the Perkins Loan funds.    2700 institutions of higher education [need break-down
by sector]4 currently administer a total of $6.5 billion in Perkins Loan revolving funds.   These
funds have built up from Federal contributions and matching funds over the past 40 years.
Each year, about $750 million is repaid by students. Colleges put in another $250 million in
matching funds, making $1 billion available for lending again. With the expansion of loan
limits and eligibility in the Direct and Guaranteed programs over the past few years, Perkins has
diminished in importance (the other programs are 30 times larger), but political inertia has kept it
alive. Your budgets have alternately proposed cutting or straight-lining any new Federal
contributions (for FY 1998 you proposed level funding at $158 million). In the past several
years, some of the colleges have floated the idea that the program could end if they could keep
the money to spend in other ways. [ED: HOW MANY STUDENTS WHO GET PERKINS
HAVE NOT MAXED OUT ON STAFFORD? HOW STRONG IS OUR CLAIM THAT IT
ISN'T ALL NEEDED?]

        Under this option, colleges would be allowedto spend these funds to create or expand
early intervention partnerships with schools. The Education Department expects that many
would choose to do so, because (1) the program is not as needed as it used to be, (2) it is
expensive to administer (the colleges pay for collection of the loans), and (3) the colleges give lip
service to early intervention and this would give them the opportunity to put money where their
mouths are.

        Like the work-study component of America Reads, you would challenge colleges to
participate, while also providing a way for them to more easily pay for it. We could start with a
steering committee of college presidents who pave the way and encourage their colleagues to sign
on. If we got colleges with half of the funds (much is concentrated in some of the large
universities) to commit half of that to early intervention, that would represent a $250 million
investment.

       Additional appropriations.   Using the Perkins funds is not sufficient because they are not
evenly distributed across the country -- the older, larger, more elite state and private universities
have the bulk of it. The southwest and areas that rely more on lower-cost state and community
colleges would be under-served if we do not create an alternative pot of funds to make grants to
them for the same purpose.

       Arguments for option B:

       4[Describe distribution by schools and in tenns of dollars.]

                                                        11
                                                                    ,
                                                                  Hex-Dump Conversion

              Guarantees the provision of mentoring, counseling and support services that many
               say are critical to the success of early intervention programs.

              Provides colleges with a way of partnering with high-poverty schools in a way
                                      that may be less threatening, and ultimately more
                                      productive, than explicit school reform efforts.

              Given the tight appropriations, may be more likely to be adopted than option A

       Argument against option B:

              Using the Perkins Loan fund invites opposition by that program's supporters
               (including the contractors who collect the loans).

                                    RECOMMENDATIONS

        [On the information campaign, I think the "guarantee" continues to have appeal, so I
prefer option 2 as an approach that would increase the effectiveness of the information campaign
in poor areas, and allow us to capitalize on the interest in the Fattah bill.] [OMB strongly feels
that the promise is not necessary for the campaign to be effective and that it adds administrative
complexity. DPC thinks that a promise to an existing entitlement does not add enough to be
worth the effort. Education? .. ]. On the early intervention program, all of your advisors
recommend the school-college partnerships as the best approach.




                                                12


