RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Jeremy D. Benami ( BENAMI_J      (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME:18-0CT-1996 14:29:38.26

SUBJECT: final forty quarters

TO: Elena Kagan                                 KAGAN E      (WHO)
READ:18-0CT"1996 16:36:39.08

TO: Diana M. Fortuna                            FORTUNA D      (OPD)
READ:18-0CT-1996 14:30:00.54

TO: Stephen C. Warnath                          WARNATH S      (OPD)
READ:18-0CT-1996 14:35:06.57

TO: Emily Bromberg                              BROMBERG E      (WHO)
READ:18-0CT-1996 14:31:57.31

TEXT:
FYI attached is the final version of forty quarters material that
USDA received last night.
This is the version they are sending out! Without question marks,
we hope!
================~=== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE: 18-0CT-1996 14:28:00.00

ATT BODYPART TYPE:p

ATT CREATOR: Jeremy D. Benami

TEXT:



PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN
SUBJECT:        FSP
o
-Verification of Noncitizen Eligibility
TO:             Regional Administrators
                All Regions

        This memorandum provides guidance to State agencies in
implementing section 402 of the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996.  Please transmit
this information to your State agencies immediately.
        Section 402 generally limits the eligibility of legal
immigrants for the Food Stamp Program, but section 402(a} (2) (B)
provides an exception for legal immigrants who have worked or can
be credited with 40 quarters of qualified work.   The law
provides that quarters worked by a parent or a spouse can be
credited to the individual in determining the number of
qualifying quarters.
        Implementing this requirement will be challenging for the
Social Security Administration (SSA) which is the primary source
of verification of quarters worked, eligibility workers, and the
individual immigrants. While some immigrants may already have 40
quarters clearly established in their Social Security records,
others may have been employed in jobs covered by Social Security


but earnings may not have been appropriately reported.    Many
immigrants, particularly migrant workers, may have difficulty
obtaining verification of employment, and SSA will have to work
with them to establish quarters.   Finally, the definition of a
"quarter" of work may cause some confusion as "quarters" are
credited on the basis of annual earnings rather than on months
worked.
        This memorandum and the attached procedures provide guidance
to State agencies in administering the 40 quarters determination.
This procedure has been developed in cooperation with SSA, and we
are drafting regulations to address 40 quarter verification be
based on the procedures outlined in this memorandum.   Until
regulations are published, FCS and SSA strongly encourage State
agencies to follow these procedures.    Quality control review
will be based on these certification procedures as well.
        Verification of 40 quarters information for most applicants
and current recipients will primarily be accomplished by an
automated system SSA is developing to provide State agencies with

individual quarters of coverage information overnight through
batch processing.  SSA expects that system to be operational in
January.  Pending the implementation of the automated system, FCS
and SSA have developed an interim procedure for processing
households with immigrant members.
o
        This procedure (attached) authorizes certification pending
verification (CPV) for immigrants who have been in the country
long enough to acquire 40 quarters of coverage and who state that
they have met the work requirement.   For individuals who meet
this requirement, the individual's attestation to 40 quarters is
sufficient. No further documentation of earnings is required at
application pending SSA verification.   Those individuals who do
not have enough quarters of their own may also attest at
application to quarters earned through the work of a parent or
spouse.
        Within 3 months after the month in which the SSA
verification system is operational, the State agency shall submit
the required information for each CPV individual to SSA.   SSA
will report back the number of quarters that can be credited to
the individual and applicable family members.
        If SSA's existing records cannot verify that an individual
has 40 quarters,  SSA will work with the individual to determine
whether quarters can be established.   Individuals in this
situation should be advised of this option and that they will be
allowed to participate for 6 more months provided SSA certifies
that they are working to clarify their records.   The individual
will be required to provide a document from SSA indicating that
the number of quarters is under review.   SSA is developing a
document to meet this requirement.
        If SSA verification finally indicates that an individual
does not have 40 qualifying quarters, the State agency shall
establish an inadvertent household error claim for the
overissuance.
        We hope that these procedures will go a long way toward
easing these difficulties and ensuring.that the law is
implemented in a fair and effective manner.   Please let us know
if you have any questions.

                                                               Yvette S. Jackson


                                                                 Deputy Administrater
                                                                 Feed Stamp Pregram
Attachments
cc:     Feed Stamp Pregram Directer
        All Regiens
o
Certificatien pending Verificatien Precedures
Fer Legal Immigrants

The fellewing precedures are fer legal immigrants whe believe
that they have a werk histery that meets the ferty quarters
exemptien in the law.   These precedures need net be fellewed fer
these legal immigrants whe qualify fer ether exemptiens in the
law (refugees, asylees, depertees, .or applicants with a claim te
eligibility based en military service.)
Secend para -- In .order te determine eligibility based en secial
security ceverage, the state sheuld ascertain the applicant's
understanding as te the fellewing:
         1.      Hew many years has the applicant, the applicant's
speuse, .or the applicant's parents· (befere the
applicant turned 18) lived in this ceunty.
         (If the answer te questien 1 is less than 10 years, the
State agency dees net need te ask questien 2) .
         2.      In hew many .of the years reperted in answer te questien
1, did the applicant, the applicant's speuse, .or the
applicant's parent earn meney threugh werk.
         (Te determine whether the applicant's earnings were
sufficient te establish "quarters .of ceverage" in these
years, the State agency may wish te refer te the
attached chart.)
If the answer te the questien 2 is 10 years .or mere,    the State
agency shall verify, frem INS decuments,    the date .of entry inte
the ceuntry .of the applicant, speuse and/er parent.    If the dates
are censistent with having 10 .or mere years .of werk, ne further
decumentatien is required at this time; the State agency shall
include the immigrant in the heuseheld pending verificatien frem
SSA.   The State agency shall inferm these recipients that a claim
will be established fer any benefits te which they were net
entitled.   The State agency shall keep a recerd .of each
individual certified pending verificatien frem SSA.
If the dates .of entry are incensistent with having 10 .or mere
years .of werk, the State agency shall determine the applicant
ineligible.   The State agency shall then inferm the applicant .of
his .or her fair hearing rights.
The applicant shall alse previde, fer purpeses .of future

verificatien, the full name, Secial Security Number, date .of
birth, and sex .of each individual (self, parent .or speuse) whese
werk histery is relevant te the determinatien .of eligibility.
In additien, the applicant shall previde a release ferm signed by
each such individual (cepy attached) giving SSA permissien te
release infermatien en that individual te the state agency and/er
the applicant.   This ferm shall be retained in the case file te
decument the individual's censent.
SSA is drafting an addendum te the current Cemputer Matching and
Privacy Pretectien Act agreement between SSA and each state
agency.  In accerdance with that revised agreement, and within
three menths after the menth in which the SSA verificatien system
becemes eperatienal, the state agency will send the identifying


information provided by the applicant to SSA for overnight
processing. ' In its response, SSA will provide information about
qualifying quarters of work.   If the immigrant believes the
information from SSA is inaccurate or incomplete, the State
agency shall refer the applicant to SSA for review.   SSA will
g,ive the individual a document indicating that the number of
quarters is under review. An immigrant who provides the state
agency with this document can continue to receive benefits for
six months from the date of SSA's initial response or until SSA
has completed its review, whichever is earlier.



==================   END ATTACHMENT   1   ==================


