      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:26-AUG-1997 14:33:27.00

      SUBJECT:     Upcoming disability meeting with POTUS (including adapt)

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Sarah A. Bianchi ( CN=Sarah A. Bianchi/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      Attached FYI is Bill White's first cut at what the September 10 meeting
      with the President and the disability community would look like. This is
      the meeting that was once thought of as the "ADAPT meeting" but public
      liaison is broadening to disability issues generally. I am trying to get
      us ready to have something constructive to say on personal assistance
      services (ADAPT's issue). Wish me luck.

      To broaden the agenda, Bill has added 3 topics:  the ADA, IDEA, and health
      care. ·On the first two, I assume this would amount to us agreeing with
      each other that these are critical civil rights laws, and congratulating
      each other on our support of them. But I need to make sure that's all
      that would happen. On health, I leave it to Chris and Bill to figure out
      what they have in mind -- not clear to me, though.

      I also told Bill that we might consider adding employment to the agenda,
      since we have actually done something on this lately (the "ticket"
      proposal now pending and the Medicaid option enacted in reconciliation),
      even though it's not everything the community wants, and it seems unlikely
      our executive order would be ready.

      S81 kids has also wandered onto the agenda so we have to be ready on that.

      Other reactions?

      PROPOSED SEQUENCE OF EVENTS

      o       The President will enter the Roosevelt Room, walk around the room
      and greet the participants. The President take his seat in the middle of
      the table.

      o          The President will make opening remarks.

      o       The President will turn to Justin Dart, who will make remarks and
      outline the issues to be discussed:

      l.         The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
                 2.     The Individuals with Disabilities Act (IDEA).
                 3;     Personal Assistant Services (our favorite!).
                 4.     Health Care.

      o       Justin will then moderate the issue discussion, calling upon 2-3
      people to make presentations on each topic.



o       The President will make remarks (from prepared talking points)
after each topic is presented.

o       After the discussion, Justin will thank the President.

o       The President will make closing remarks and depart.


PROPOSED PARTICIPANTS
(NOTE:  IO,ve consulted with Tony Coelho, Justin, Fred Fay, Becky, Diana
Fortuna and some of the appointees regarding advice on the attached
lists. I still need to talk to Marca Bristo, who is on vacation.    IO,ve
tried to make sure we have reps from all parts of the disability community
including: blind, deaf, parents, civil rights, independent living
movement, physical and mental disabilities, and youth.  I also have two
slots for our friends from ADAPT. There is one person of color. six
women, eight men. Needless to say, the phone is ringing off the hook with
people who MUST be at the meeting.)

The Honorable Tony L. Coelho
Coelho Associates
New York, New York

Original House sponsor of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the
landmark civil rights legislation for people with disabilities.  Probably
the closest advisor to the President on disability issues.  Person with
epilepsy.

Mr. Justin Dart
Justice for All
Washington, DC

The statesman of the disability rights movement. Five previous
Presidential appointments in the area of disability policy. Pioneer of
ADA. Wheelchair user.   Topic: Will act as moderator and provide opening
remarks that will get meeting started properly.

Dr. Frederick A. Fay
Concord, Massachusetts

Pioneer of disability rights movement. Has reverential respect of entire
disability community. Operates largest disability community computer
network. Person with severe physical disability.  (Via speaker phone.)
Topic: The ADA and FDR Memorial.

Mr. Paul Marchand
Chairperson of Consortium of Citizens with Disabilities (CCD)
Washington, DC

Unifier. Profoundly respected within the community.   Decades as leading
Washington advocate. Chair of CCD, an umbrella organization representing
125 disability organizations. Director of government affairs for the ARC,
formerly known as the Association for Retarded Children. Topic: SSI kids.

Ms. Gina McDonald
President - National Council of Independent Living
Salina, Kansas

Executive Director of Kansas Association for Independent Living.
 ,
                                                                             Page 3 of4


presidentially appointed member of the National Council on Disability.
Widely respected. Hearing disability. Topic: Personal Assistant Services.

Ms. Becky L. Ogle
Justice for All
Bethesda, Maryland

One of the best grassroots disability rights organizers in the country.
National advocate for the PresidentO.s health care program in 0+94.
Wheelchair user.  Topic: Health Care.

Mr. Mike Oxford
ADAPT of Kansas
Topeka, Kansas

Executive Director of the Topeka Independent Living Resource Center.
National leader of ADAPT.  Physical disability.  Topic: Personal Assistant
Services.

Mr. Bob Kafka
ADAPT (Americans Disabled for Attendant Programs Today)
Austin, Texas

National leader/strategist of ADAPT. Adamant advocate for publicly funded
personal care assistance that will allow people with disabilities to get
out of nursing homes and participate in their communities.   Has been
arrested 30-40 times demonstrating for disability rights. Wheelchair
user. Topic: Personal Assistant Services.

Ms. Nancy J. Diehl
Director - Parent Training & Information Center in Tennessee
Greenville, Tennessee

Parent of a child with a disability. One of the nationO,s most articulate
and respected parent advocates. Topic: IDEA.

Mr. Paul Edwards
President - American Council of the Blind
Miami, Florida

Person with blindness.   One of the nationO,s leading advocates for the
blind. Topic: ADA.

Ms. Debbie Robinson
Treasurer - Speaking for Ourselves
Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania

National leader of people first movement for the rights of people labeled
mentally retarded. Articulate.   Presidentially appointed member of the
National Council on Disability. African-American. Person with mental
retardation. Topic: ADA

Mr. John Harper
Student
Jacksonville, Illinois

Youth leader, 15 years old.  Person with deafness. Frequent spokesperson
for the National Association of the Deaf.  Topic: IDEA

Ms. Judy Heumann
,..
Assistant Secretary for Special Education and Rehabilitation Services -
Department of Education
Washington, DC

One of the PresidentO,s highest-ranking appointee with a disability.
Founder of the independent living movement. Point person on the recent
Reauthorization of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA). Wheelchair user.


Ms. Marca Bristo
Chairperson - National Council on Disability
Chicago, Illinois

Pioneer of the independent and disability rights movement.  Presidential
appointee.   President of Access Living of Metropolitan Chicago.
Wheelchair user.


