RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-SEP-1997 11:54:32.00

SUBJ~CT:   race issues new and pending

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
1. What do you think of a race and technology project? Finding some
symbolic but tangible ways to make sure that all of America has access to
the potentials fo new technologies. There is some stuff going on in
wiring urban schools that it might be worth highlighting.

2.   Hate crimes conference continues to move along.  The issues to be
resolved will be exactly what's in the substantive announcement, when in
the event the President should speak, who should be there, and where it
occurs.   Ann Lewis had a meeting where not much happened. And she seemed
satisfied. The substantive announcement seems like it will be the package
we talked about in the meeting with Ogden-- the only dispute will be about
the legislation expanding the categories of crimes to include gender.
Ogden is still working to find a compromise that works for the groups and
law enforcement. We may need to intervene. The issue on attendees will
be that this will likely become a high profile forum for the leading civil
rights leaders and the commission to attend. we should make sure that
validators are in place, and this is a clear win.  It should be. Marsha
Scott came to a meeting to discuss who are the appropriate group
representatives to attend (evidently her schtick). I'm inclined to leave
the bulk of that to her and Richard S.
The current thinking on place was the new jewish center in DC. We should
probably have a meeting late this week, early next to stay on top of this.

3.   Have you started to get the reports from agencies' civil rights
divisions? I volunteered to do whatever work you wanted, and I'm happy to
go through their suggestions and 'orgainze them. I suspect a special
emphasis on the EEOC and when we get their memo I think we should do some
meetings with various folks from over there to put together a plan.

Welcome back.   Tom


