RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Alice E. Shuffield ( CN;Alice E. Shuffield/OU;OMB/O;EOP [ OMB 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-SEP-1997 14:15:50.00

SUBJECT:   Testimony on Oklahoma City Bombing Memorial

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Welcome back!

Please see Craig's e-mail below regarding our position in tomorrow on the
OK City Bombing bill.   I faxed you a draft of tomorrow's testimony and
will check in with you this afternoon for your response.

Thanks
---"------------------ Forwarded by Alice E. Shuffield/OMB/EOP on 09/08/97
01:25 PM ---------------------------




J C. Crutchfield
09/07/97 10:26:39 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Alice E. Shuffield/OMB/EOP, Ronald M. Cogswell/OMB/EOP
cc:      Janet E. Irwin/OMB/EOP
Subject:         Testimony on Oklahoma City Bombing Memorial

A heads up about Park Service testimony for Tuesday's hearing in the House
on Sen. Nickles' bill to establish an Oklahoma City Bombing Memorial as
part of the National Park System.

When the bill came up in the Senate this summer, NPS wanted to recommend
amendments designating the site as an "affiliated area" instead of the
bill's proposal to establish a government corporation to manage the site
as a National Park System unit. WHLA and DPC both argued against a
position that suggested less than full support for a new NPS unit, so the
testimony was modified to support the bill with vague references to
possible amendments.

The bill passed the Senate and appears ready to slide through the House
and be enrolled. The problem is not establishing a new NPS unit; even the
Park Service is now resigned to that. The problem is that it is totally
inappropriate and a terrible precedent to establish a government
corporation to manage a national park.   It greatly reduces accountability
within the Executive Branch, abuses the concept of a government
corporation for purposes unsupported by existing Administration criteria,
and undermines the entire concept of an integrated Federal management of
the National Park System.    This has ramifications far beyond the
short-term political optics of this issue.

I recognize the concern that the Administration not be viewed as opposing
'j.



      the memorial and I will recommend marking up the testimony to support
      straightforward designation of the site as an NPS unit,   It is very
      important, however, that we cite concerns with the government corporation
      proposal. The House Resources Committee minority staff and environmental
      groups, such as National Parks and Conservation Association have belatedly
      realized that this approach could be the start down a slippery slope
      toward local control over the management of Federal parks. That is
      probably why Chairmen Young and Hansen are planning quick action,
      including subcommittee markup after the hearing on Tuesday. They realize
      they can use a popular issue to establish a precedent for divesting
      Federal authority, which they have so far failed to do through more
      straightforward means (such as the "park closure" bills last Congress).

      The more I think about this issue, the more concerned I become.
      Unfortunately, we have to clear the testimony by COB Monday, and OMB has
      not even received it yet from Interior. we will have to move fast, ergo
      this notice.


