     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( cN;william R. Kincaid/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:17-SEP-1997 13:48:37.00

     SUBJECT:   GOP OPENS NEW CAMPAIGN TO ATTRACT MINORITY VOTERS

     TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN;Thomas L. Freedman/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     fyi
     ---------------------- Forwarded by William R. Kincaid/OPD/EOP on 09/17/97
     01:47 PM ---------------------------



             TANDEN N @ A1
             09/16/97 08:08:00 PM
     Record Type: Record

     To: Thomas D. Janenda, Michael Cohen, William R. Kincaid, Tanya E. Martin
     cc:
     Subject: GOP OPENS NEW CAMPAIGN TO ATTRACT MINORITY VOTERS

     Date: 09/16/97 Time: 16:30
     GGOP opens new campaign to attract minority voters

         WASHINGTON (AP)   Focusing on concern over education, Republican
     leaders opened a new drive Tuesday to attract blacks, Hispanics and
     other minority voters to their party.
         They expressed confidence that their plan to offer parents a
     choice of private over public schools will be key to breaking the
     grip the Democratic Party has held on minority voters since the
     Great Depression.
         House Speaker Newt Gingrich asserted that changing trends are
     beginning to favor Republican candidates in minority congressional
     districts across the country.
         "Parents deserve the right to choose," Gingrich told the
     opening meeting of The New Majority Council, which was created by
     the Republican National Committee as part of a $1 million campaign
     to attract minority voters to the GOP.
         Gingrich and other speakers asserted that large majorities of
     minority voters express support for the GOP plan to have the
     government provide tax-free education savings accounts and issue
     vouchers parents could use to send their children to private rather
     than public schools.
         Critics contend such a plan would only help a few children with
     the most motivated parents while dealing another blow to the public
     schools, especially in big cities.
         Gingrich and Republican Party Chairman Jim Nicholson said party
     leaders will fan out across the country in the coming months using
     pitches for school choice, an invigorated fight to rid communities


     of drugs, lower taxes and a simpler tax system, and the removal of
     barriers to small business ownership as the means to attract new
     GOP voters.
         --I think we will reshape the political map of the country,"
     Gingrich said.
         Nicholson said that if the effort goes well Republicans could
     find themselves leading --a new civil rights movement in the 21st
     century" based on such --new civil rights"     as quality education,
     decent jobs, drug-free neighborhoods, improved public housing and
     equality under the law.
         --For too long liberals and Democrats have taken the minority
     vote for granted, " Nichols'on said. - -More and more black
     Americans, Hispanic-Americans, Asian-Americans and others are
     coming to realize that the Republican party is an enthusiastically
     open party, an aggressively inclusive party."
         But voting records show' that the job of moving voters into the
     Republican camp is a formidable one.
         In the 1996 presidential election President Clinton won 84
     percent of black votes and 72 percent of the Hispanic vote.
         The GOP has tried repeatedly over the years to expand its share
     of minority voters.
         Gingrich asserted that the opportunity to do that is much
     greater now --because the failure of the old order in society is so
     much clearer. ' ,
         --Does a state have a right to compel a child to attend a bad
     public school?"   he asked rhetorically.
         One questioner asked whether blacks would feel comfortable in a
     party in which David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader who made
     unsuccessful runs for the u.s. Senate and governor, has been
     elected chairman of the Republican Executive Committee in a'
     Louisiana parish.
         --We're a party of inclusion, " Gingrich replied.
         And Nicholson said: --We welcome people to this party as long as
     they are willing to adopt our agenda and not their own."
     APNP-09-16-97 1631EDT


