               RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

               CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

               CREATION DATE/TIME:22-SEP-1997 14:50:56.00

               SUBJECT:   new idea

               TO: Jerold R. Mande    CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP @ EOP [ OSTP 1 )
               READ: UNKNOWN

               TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
               READ: UNKNOWN

               TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP   @   EOP .[ OPD 1 )
               READ: UNKNOWN

               TEXT:
               India targeting youth to boost coffee consumption

               By Hari Ramachandran

               BANGALORE, India, Sept 21 (Reuter) - India's coffee growers, worried that
               demand is not
               growing as fast as production, are banking on a time-tested slogan: Catch
               them young.

               Seeking steady growth, the state-run Coffee Board is seeking new places to
               sell the brew and plans
               to target younger consumers.

               India's domestic coffee consumption is confined mainly to the
               coffee-producing southern states.
               Efforts to promote the drink in the north, where tea is the staple
               beverage, have met with limited
               success.

               "Allover the world, the younger group considers coffee as a fashion
               drink. In India, it is considered
               an old man's drink, " Coffee Board chairman Philipose Matthai told Reuters
               in a recent interview.

               "We are planning to target the younger group."

               Matthai said the board, with the help of the industry, planned to set up
               coffee vending machines at
               airports and other public places and promote the use of instant coffee.

               The Indian Institute of Management in the southern city of Bangalore has
               been asked to make a
               detailed study on how to improve consumption.

               Coffee growers, faced with the prospect of rising production, are worried
               by a lack of growth in
               domestic consumption.

               India's coffee output in 1997/98 (October-September) is forecast to rise
               to 210,000 tonnes from
               190,000 tonnes in 1996/97. It exported about 170,000 tonnes in 1996/97
               (April-March) .
"




    Domestic per capita consumption of coffee is at a very low 65 grams, 'and
    total consumption has
    been stagnant for the past 15 years, industry officials say.

    "If coffee consumption is increased by one or two grams per capita we
    will be able to consume the
    entire production within the country itself at a decent price, " Matthai
    said.

    "The scope is enormous, considering the size of our population, " R.D.
    Vadera, president of the
    united Planters Association of Southern India (UPASI), said at a recent
    planters conference.

    India has dismantled 50-year-old controls over the coffee trade under
    economic reforms initiated in
    1991. Growers are now free to market their produce locally and abroad
    without surrendering it to
    the Coffee Board as in the past.

    Matthai said the board had also started a training programme in the
    southern parts of the country on
    how to make a good cup of coffee. "That has caught on very fast allover
    and we will be extending
    it to Delhi and Bombay, " he said.

     Coffee was a popular winter drink and the sector should take advantage of
     the northern Indian
     winter to promote it, Matthai said.

     Members of the Coffee Board, who include planters and industry officials,
     had in the past not shown
     interest in increasing domestic consumption, he added.

     Heavy dependence on exports is often cited as a major reason for
     consumption stagnating in the
     domestic market.

     Planters, uneducated in marketing methods, needed to realise that a
     sustained supply of good quality
     coffee at affordable prices was crucial to the success of the industry,
     Matthai said.

    J.H. Mehta, divisional vice-president of Hindustan Lever Limited, said
    domestic coffee consumption
    would not grow unless the commodity could be supplied at affordable
    prices.

    Domestic coffee prices have more than doubled to touch 200 rupees per kg
    ($5.50) over the past
    year before stabilising around 185 rupees per kg. In 1994, coffee cost
    around 80 rupees a kg.

     Traders blame the domestic price rise on high global prices. Industry
     officials say something drastic
     -- which could include imports -- is needed to check prices and boost
     consumption.

     "Indian prices are actually ruling higher than international prices
,I




     because there is a one-way ticket --
     you can export but you cannot import,"   Mehta said.


