          RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

          CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]

          CREATION DATE/TIME:23-SEP-1997 12:35:47.00

          SUBJECT:   Draft talking points for McCurry on NYTimes article on service summit

          TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD]   )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N, Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ]   )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO]
          READ: UNKNOWN

          CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
          READ: UNKNOWN

          TEXT:
          Josh Silverman asked me to prepare something in case McCurry needs it on
          the slightly negative article in today's Times on the service summit.  I
          tried to strike a balance between taking responsibility for what Powell is
          doing and distancing ourselves a bit.

          Talking Points on President sO, Summit Followup
          September 23, 1997

           The President remains committed to the goals of the Presidentso, Summit
          for Americao,s Future in April in Philadelphia.  The Summito,s goals for
          children (a caring adult, a safe place, a healthy start, a marketable
          skill, and a chance to serve) are key goals for the Administration.

           Administration officials are briefed regularly by officials from
          Americao,s Promise, the 50l(c) (3) non-profit organization chaired by
          General Powell that is charged with following up on the summit.
          Americao,s Promise is working with over 150 cities and states on follow-up
          o&mini-summitso8 around the country and is evaluating a large number of
          new commitments from organizations that have been made since the summit
          itself.  In addition, we understand that the organization is developing a
          tracking system for existing commitments. [Note:    The Administration does
          not run Americao; s Promise. Since it is a 501 (c) (3), we are prohibited by
          law from sitting on its board or influencing its operations.]

          In addition to the important work by the corporate and nonprofit sectors
          and individual citizens, the Administration is continuing its focus on
          citizen service and children,  The federal government continues to move
          forward to reach the summito,s goals.

           Service and religious organizations have responded positively to the
          Presidento,s summit challenge that we would provide 50,000 new AmeriCorps
          scholarships over the next 5 years to organizations that offer young
          people the chance to serve. The response has been even stronger than
          expected, with 77 organizations answering that challenge by offering to
          sponsor 10,000 new AmeriCorps members.

           This summer, the Administration awarded National Service Scholarships to
          over 1,600 high school students with outstanding records of community
          service.  In the first year of this program, a host of leading community


organizations stepped forward to raise the local match for scholarships,
including the Kiwanis, Rotary, Lions, Veterans of Foreign Wars, the
American Legion, Elks, and WomenO,s Clubs. Each high school principal was
invited to nominate a junior or senior for the scholarship. Next year, we
hope that all 20,000 high schools in the nation will participate.

 The Balanced Budget Act included a major investment in children's health
care, which will give many' more children the "healthy start" that the
Summit recognized as so important.

 Since May, the Vice President has been leading the Coalition to Sustain
Success, a new partnership of civic organizations that is working with
state and local government to mentor families seeking to leave welfare for
work.

 The Welfare to Work Partnership is mobilizing businesses to hire welfare
recipients, so that those parents can move into the economic mainstream
and improve their childrenO,s future.
 Federal agencies are following through on the more than 40 commitments
they made at the summit, which included mentoring and tutoring and
launching new partnerships with corporations and nonprofits.  They are
also continuing to launch new initiatives and partnerships to reach the
summitO,s goals.

Among other progress, the Corporation for National Service is taking the
lead to meet the SummitO,s goal of engaging an additional 2 million young
people in community service. In June, HHS Secretary Shalala launched a
new partnership with the Girl Scouts, to teach girls about the dangers of
substance abuse and other risky behaviors, featuring a new patch that Girl
Scouts can earn by completing the program. This month, the Vice President
and Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman convened a National Summit on Food
Recovery, to develop a national strategy to increase gleaning efforts by
one-third by the year 2000.  In May, the Department of Justice convened a
new public/private Mentoring Alliance to promote the SummitO,s mentoring
goal, disseminate information about best practices, and determine how best
to link volunteers with the children who need them.

Since April, the President has continued to speak about the importance of
service and volunteerism to audiences, including the Business Roundtable,
the Conference of Mayors, and the Welfare-to-Work Partnership, and in his
radio address. He has stressed the importance of reaching the goals of
the Summit in order to give more children what they need to grow up to be
productive citizens.
