 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Chin-Chin Ip ( CN=Chin-Chin Ip/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1

 CREATION DATE/TIME:23-SEP-1997 12:13:13.00

 SUBJECT:   please Comment: Family Planning language in Conference letter

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Richard J. Turman ( CN=Richard J. Turman/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Joshua Gotbaum ( CN=Joshua Gotbaum/OU=OMB/O=EOP @ EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 Chin-Chin Ip ( CN=Chin-Chin Ip/OU=OMB/O=EOP [ OMB 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Yesterday, we in OMB's health division worked with HHS staff to draft some
 Family Planning language to be included into an L/HHS Conference letter.
 Josh Gotbaum seemed fine with the following language, but asked us to find
 out DPC's views of the language:

 "The Administration prefers the Senate language and Senate funding level
 of $203 million for the Title X Family Planning program, both of which are
 the same as the President's request."

 As currently drafted, the above statement supports the Senate-passed
 language (because it is the same as the President's Budget), and does not
 refer to the House language in order to avoid drawing attention to it.
 The other alternatives are to say something like "The Administration
 prefers the Senate language, but would not object to the House language,"
 or to say nothing at all.  Please let us know if you would support our
 approach, or if you would prefer another alternative.  The draft letter is
 headed into clearance today, so if you could let us know by COB, that
 would be helpful.  Thanks.

 Refresher -- what is contained in the House and Senate bills
 The Senate did not make any changes to the Family Planning funding level
 nor the language, but the House passed two amendments, one of which
 reduced funding by $9 million and another (the Castle-Porter amendment)
 which placed two requirements on Title X family planning clinics, the
 first of which is already required under current law:

 Requires clinics to encourage family participation in the decision of
 minors to seek family planning services
 Requires clinics to counsel minors on how to resist attempts to coerce
 minors into engaging in sexual activities

 ---------------------- Forwarded by Chin-Chin Ip/OMB/EOP on 09/23/97 10:00
 AM ---------------------------


 JOSHUA
 GOTBAUM
 09/22/97 11:41:55 PM


 Record Type:       Non-Record

 To:      Chin-Chin Ip/OMB/EOP
 cc:      richard j. turman/omb/eop, corey g. lee/omb/eop, matthew vaeth/omb/eop
 bcc:
 Subject:         Re: DECISION NEEDED: Family Planning language in
 Conference letter

 Seems OK to me.    Does HHS or DPC have a different view?




 Chin-Chin Ip
 09/22/97 09:24:06 PM
 Record Type:    Record

 To:      Joshua Gotbaum/OMB/EOP@EOP
 cc:      Richard J. Turman/OMB/EOP@EOP, Corey G. Lee/OMB/EOP@EOP, Matthew
 Vaeth/OMB/EOP@EOP
 Subject:         DECISION NEEDED: Family Planning language in Conference letter

 Earlier this afternoon, we sent some draft language to BRD for inclusion
 into a L/HHS Conference Letter. The letter is scheduled to go to the 2nd
 floor for clearance tomorrow. The Family Planning language that we
 submitted is tentative, pending guidance from you:

 "The Administration prefers the Senate language and Senate funding level
 of $203 million for the Title X Family Planning program, both of which are
 the same as the President's request."

 The above language supports the Senate funding level and the Senate
 language because they are the same as the President's Budget. The funding
 level is not in question, but a decision regarding the Family Planning
 language needs to be made.  The Senate did not make any changes to the
 Family Planning language found in the President's Budget. However,' the
 House adopted the Castle-Porter amendment, which the Administration said
 in the House SAP that it preferred to an earlier Istook amendment.

 Three Options

 We seek your guidance as to which of the 3 possible stances the
 Administration wants to take towards the proposed Family Planning language:

 1)  Support the Senate language only, and do not refer to the House
 language in order to avoid drawing attention to it.

 "The Administration prefers the Senate language ... "  ** Our
 recommendation, which           HHS/ASMP staff concurred with

 2)  Support the Senate language, but also remain neutral towards the House
 language.

 "The Administration prefers the Senate language, but would not object to
 the House       language."

 3)   Say nothing

 What does the House language do?
,.


     The Castle-Porter amendment places two requirements on Title X Family
     Planning clinics, the first of which is already required under current law:

     Requires clinics to encourage family participation in the decision of
     minors to seek family planning services
     Requires clinics to counsel minors on how to resist attempts to coerce
     minors into engaging in sexual activities

     Given that the first requirement is already written into current law, the
     Administration's support of the amendment really hinges on whether it
     agrees with the second requirement.

     What was already said

     The House SAP supported the idea that clinics should encourage minors to
     discuss health care needs with their families, but the SAP presented the
     idea as an alternative to the possibility that clinics would be mandated
     to seek parental consent for contraceptive services (emphasis added):

     "The Administration supports efforts to encourage minors to discuss their
     health care needs with their families.  However, the Administration is
     concerned about a potential amendment on the House Floor requiririg
     parental consent for minors to receive contraceptive health services in
     Title X Family Planning clinics. Mandating parental consent for
     contraceptive services could discourage sexually active minors from
     seeking health care and reproductive counseling services and, thus, lead
     to even more unwarranted pregnancies, more abortions, and more sexually
     transmitted diseases, including HIV, among our NationD,s youth.   As an
     alternative, the Administration prefers the amendment made in order in the
     rule that requires clinics to certify that they encourage family
     participation in the decision of minors to seek family planning services
     and that they provide counseling to minors on resisting attempts to coerce
     minors into engaging in sexual activities. The Administration does not
     support two likely amendments that would decrease funding for the Title X
     Family Planning program below the request of $203 million."

     The Senate SAP echoed the two main points of the House SAP (emphasis
     added) :

     "The Administration supports efforts to encourage minors to discuss their
     health care needs with their families.  However, it would oppose a
     potential amendment on the Senate floor requiring parental consent for
     minors to receive reproductive health services in Title X Family Planning
     clinics. Mandating parental consent could discourage sexually active
     minors from seeking health care and reproductive counseling services and
     thus lead to more unwarranted pregnancies, more abortions and more
     sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV, among our nationD,s youth."

     Recommendation

     We have included Option #1 in the draft SAP.  If you prefer another option
     or more text describing why the Administration prefers #1, please let us
     know (or make changes to the SAP when it comes by).  Thanks.


