RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg ( KONIGSBERG_C)        (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-JAN-1996 19:53:14.66

SUBJECT: ITEM VETO--COMMENTS BY MONDAY, 2PM

TO: Charles S. Konigsberg                     KONIGSBERG C )          (OMB)
READ:26-JAN-1996 19:56:53.90

TO: Charles E. Kieffer                        KIEFFER C )       (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 12:13:24.11

TO: Lisa Kountoupes                           KOUNTOUPES_L)           (OMB)
READ:30-JAN-1996 10:02:33.46

TO: Robert G. Damus                           DAMUS R         (OMB)
READ:27-JAN-1996 23:11:23.26

TO: Joseph Minarik                            MINARIK J )       (OMB)
READ:30-JAN-1996 10:57:58.44

TO: Barry B. Anderson                         ANDERSON B )       (OMB)
READ:26-JAN-1996 20:10:28.30

TO: James J. Jukes                            JUKES J )       (OMB)
READ:28-JAN-1996 15:10:15.38

TO: Jill M. Blickstein                        BLICKSTEIN J )          (OMB)
READ:28-JAN-1996 22:01:55.01

TO: James C. Murr                             MURR J      (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 08:03:00.24

TO: Jacob J. Lew                              LEW J      (OMB)
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E )       (WHO)
READ:29-JAN-1996 08:42:52.10

TO: Patrick J. Griffin                        GRIFFIN P )       (WHO)
READ: NOT READ

TO: Barbara C. Chow                           CHOW B )    (WHO)
READ:30-JAN-1996 10:07:59.57

TO: Paul J. Weinstein, Jr                     WEINSTEIN P )       (OPD)
READ:29-JAN-1996 09:21:14.87

TO: John C. Angell                            ANGELL J )       (WHO)
READ:29-JAN-1996 09:38:08.91

TO: Martha Foley                              FOLEY M )       (WHO)
READ:29-JAN-1996 09:32:36.99

TO: Robert E. Litan                           LITAN R )       (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 07:56:16.51

TO: T J Glauthier                             GLAUTHIER T )       (OMB)


READ:31-JAN-1996 10:15:51.46

TO: Gordon Adams                            ADAMS G      (OMB)
READ: NOT READ

TO: Kenneth S. Apfel                        APFEL K      (OMB)
READ:27-JAN-1996 11:08:53.04

TO: Nancy-Ann E. Min                        MIN N     (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 09:33:19.65

TO: Stacey L. Rubin                         RUBIN S      (WHO)
READ:29-JAN-1996 08:21:18.23

TO: Laura D. Tyson                          TYSON L ) Autoforward to: Thomas O'Donnel
READ: NOT READ

TO: Dena B. Weinstein                       WEINSTEIN D        (WHO)
READ:28-JAN-1996 16:17:25.94

TO: Betty I. Bradshaw                       BRADSHAW B        (OMB)
READ:29-JAN-1996 10:48:52.72

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT COURIER
        I have prepared the attached line
o
-item veto legislative
language, in case a decision is made to include line
o
-item veto in
bill language reflecting our January 18 budget offer.
        If it is included, this would be the first time we have
released specific legislative language on line
o
-item veto.
        The attached legislative language reflects the proposed
changes to the House
o
-passed bill which you have previously seen,
and which we shared informally with Senate staff.
        I would note that the attached language uses the term
"cancel" with respect to direct spending and targeted tax
benefits, rath~r than "suspend."   We had originally proposed the
term "suspend" to Senate staff, but when we learned that they
intend to use "cancel" we proposed a definition of "cancel,"
which is included in this draft.
        Since this reflects all of our previous work, I don't
anticipate any additional changes to the attached language, but
if you have any new comments, please let me know by 2pm Monday.
Thanks.
        I'll also send this as a word perfect file, since the
margins got messed up converting this into an e
o
-mail ...

PRINTER FONT 10 POINT COURIER
Subtitle     - Line
o
-item Veto Authority



SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the "Line Item Veto Act of 1996".

SEC. 2. LINE ITEM VETO AUTHORITY.

    (a) IN GENERAL.-
o
-Notwithstanding the provisions of part B of
title X of The Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of
1974, and subject to the provisions of this section, the President
may rescind in whole or in part any discretionary budget authority
provided in an appropriation act, cancel any new direct spending, or
cancel any targeted tax benefit which is subject to the terms of this
Act if the President--
         (1) determines that--
             (A) such rescission or cancellation would help reduce
the Federal budget deficit;
             (B) such rescission or cancellation will not impair any
  essential Government functions; and
             (C) such rescission or cancellation will not harm the
        national interest; and
         (2) notifies the Congress of such rescission or cancellation by
a      special message riot later than twenty calendar days (not
including         Sundays) after the date of enactment of an
appropriation or                authorization Act providing such budget
authority or a revenue or          other Act containing a targeted tax
benefit or new direct spending.


    (b) DEFICIT REDUCTION.-
o
-In each special message, the President may
also propose to reduce the appropriate discretionary spending limit set
forth in section 601(a) (2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 by an
amount that does not exceed the total amount of discretionary budget
authority rescinded by that message.
      (c) SEPARATE MESSAGES.--(1) The President shall submit a separate
special message for each appropriation Act, for each authorization Act,
and for each revenue or other Act under this section.
          (2) In the case of any such special message that message shall
specify--
               (A) the amount of budget authority which he proposes to be
   rescinded, the direct spending to be cancelled, or the targeted
tax benefit to be cancelled;
               (B) any account, department, or establishment of the
          Government to which such budget authority is available for
          obligation, or which has jurisdiction over the direct spending
or            targeted tax benefit affected, and the specific project or
        governmental functions involved;
              (C) the reasons why the budget authority should be
rescinded,             or the direct spending or targeted tax benefit
should be                     cancelled;
               (D) to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated fiscal,
          economic, and budgetary effect of the proposed rescission or
o
TOP EVEN
DRAFT     NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION
         cancellation; and


              (E) all facts, circumstances, and considerations relating to
  or bearing upon the proposed rescission or cancellation and the
decision to effect the proposed rescission or cancellation and to
the maximum extent practicable, the estimated effect of the
proposed rescission or cancellation upon the objects, purposes,
and programs for which the budget authority, direct spending, or
tax benefit is provided.
     (d) SPECIAL RULE FOR FISCAL YEAR 1996 APPROPRIATION MEASURES.--
Notwithstanding subsection (a) (2), in the case of any unobligated
discretionary budget authority provided by any appropriation Act for
fiscal year 1996, the President may rescind all or part of that
discretionary budget authority under the terms of this Act if the
President notifies the Congress of such rescission by a special message
not later than twenty calendar days (not including Sundays) after the
date of enactment of this Act.
     (e) Amendments to the Budget Enforcement Act.--
           (1) Section 251(a) (7) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency
Deficit        Control Act of 1985 is amended by inserting in the second
sentence,         following "within 5 calendar days after the enactment of
any                discretionary appropriations," the following:  "or
following a              special message rescinding any amount of
discretionary spending             pursuant to the Line Item Veto Act of
1995 or after a disapproval           bill relating thereto is enacted,".
           (2) Section 252(d) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit
Control Act of 1985 is amended by inserting in the second sentence,
following "within 5 calendar days after the enactment of any
direct spending or receipts legislation enacted after the date of
enactment of this section," the following:    "or following a
special message cancelling any new direct spending or targeted tax
benefit pursuant to the Line Item Veto Act of 1995 or after a
disapproval bill relating thereto is enacted,".


SEC. 3. LINE ITEM VETO EFFECTIVE UNLESS DISAPPROVED.

    (a) (1) Discretionary Budget Authority.-
o
-Any amount of discretionary
budget authority rescinded under this Act as set forth in a special
message by the President shall not be made available unless, during the
period described in subsection (b), a disapproval bill making available
all or part of the amount rescinded is enacted into law.

     (2) New Direct Spending and Targeted Tax Benefits.--
            (A) Any provision of law which provides new direct spending or
provides a targeted tax benefit which has been cancelled under this
Act, as set forth in a special message by the President, shall take
effect only if a disapproval bill restoring that provision is enacted
into law during the period described in subsection (b).
           (B) In the case of a cancellation of a targeted tax benefit, the
Internal Revenue Service is authorized and directed to take
appropriate enforcement actions against individuals or entities
seeking to use a targeted tax benefit that has been cancelled.

TOP ODD
DRAFT -- NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION

    (b) The period referred to in subsection (a) is--
        (1) a congressional review period of twenty calendar days
    of session, beginning on the first calendar day of session after


     the date of submission of the special message, during which
     Congress must complete action on the disapproval bill and present
such       bill to the President for approval or disapproval;
         (2) after the period provided in paragraph (1), an
     additional ten days (not including Sundays) during which the
     President may exercise his authority to sign or veto the
     disapproval bill; and
         (3) if the President vetoes the disapproval bill during the
period      provided in paragraph (2), an additional five calendar days
of session      after the date of the veto, provided for congressional
review.

    (c) If a special message is transmitted by the President under
this Act and the last session of the Congress adjourns sine die
before the expiration of the period described in subsection (b), the
rescission or cancellation, as the case may be, shall not take effect.
The message shall be deemed to have been retransmitted on the first
calendar day of session in February of the succeeding Congress and the
review period referred to in subsection (b) (with respect to such
message) shall run beginning after such first day.

SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

    As used in this Act:

           (1) The term "direct spending" means--
              (A) budget authority provided by law other than
appropriation              Acts;
                 (B) entitlement authority as defined in section 3(9) of the
  Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974; and
                 (C) the food stamp program.

        (2) (A) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term
"targeted tax benefit" means any revenue
o
-losing tax provision which is
identified by the President as--
              (i) a provision which provides a Federal tax
  deduction, credit, exclusion, or preference to a particular
taxpayer or limited group of taxpayers, or
              (ii) a transitional rule or other provision which provides
  special treatment to a particular taxpayer or limited group of
taxpayers, or any portion of a provision that has substantially
the same effect.
         (B) A provision shall be treated as not described in
subparagraph       (A) (i) if the President determines that--
              (i) all persons engaged in the same type of activity
receive           the same treatment under the provision,
              (ii) all persons owning the same type of property, or
issuing           the same type of investment, receive the same treatment
under               the provision, or
              (iii) any difference in the treatment of persons is based
  solely on--

                   (I) in the case of entities, the size or type of the
       entities involved,
                   (II) in the case of individuals, their filing status,
                   (III) the amount involved, or
                   (IV) a generally
o


-available election made by
taxpayers.
         (C) A provision shall be treated as not described in
subparagraph        (A) (ii) if the President determines that it provides
for the retention         of prior law with respect to all binding contracts
in existence on the         date of first public notice that a change in law
is actively being            considered by a committee of either House of
Congress. either House of         Congress. or a conference committee.
         (D) For purposes of subparagraph (A). a provision is "revenue-
losing" when the Secretary of the Treasury determines that the
provision. when compared to the rest of the bill if the provision were
not included. reduces governmental receipts for anyone of the four
following periods--
              (1) the first fiscal year for which the most recent budget
  has been submitted by the President;
              (2) the fiscal year immediately preceding the first fiscal
  year for which the most recent budget has been submitted by the
President;
              (3) the period comprised of the first fiscal year for which
  the most recent budget has been submitted by the President and the
four immediately succeeding fiscal years; or
                 (4) the period comprised of the five fiscal years
immediately             succeeding the period described in paragraph (3).

           (3) The term "disapproval bill" means a bill or joint resolution
which only disapproves. in whole. rescissions of discretionary budget
authority or only disapproves cancellations of new direct spending or
of targeted tax benefits in a special message transmitted by the
President under this Act and--
               (A) which does not have a preamble;
               (B) (i) in the case of a special message regarding
          rescissions. the matter after the enacting clause of which
          is as follows: "That Congress disapproves each rescission of
          discretionary budget authority of the President as submitted
          by the President in a special message on         ". the blank
          space being filled in with the appropriate date and the
          public law to which the message relates; and
                  (ii) in the case of a special message regarding
cancellations              of new direct spending. the matter after the
enacting clause of               which is as follows:  "That Congress
disapproves each cancellation              of new direct spending as
submitted by the President in                       a special message on
____ ". the blank space being filled in                  with the
appropriate date and the public law to which the message
relates; and
               (iii) in the case of a special message regarding
cancellations              of targeted tax benefits. the matter after the
enacting clause of              which is as follows: "That Congress
disapproves each cancellation              of targeted tax benefits as
submitted by the President in a                   special message on
-:-_ _ _ ". the blank space being filled in with            the appropriate
date and the public law to which the message                  relates; and


             (C) the title of which is as follows: "A bill disapproving
  the recommendations submitted by the President on        ". the
blank space being filled in with the date of submission of the
relevant special message and the public law to which the message
relates.
         (4) The term "calendar days of session" shall mean only


     those days on which both Houses of Congress are in session.
         (5) The term "appropriation Act" means any general or
     special appropriation Act, or any Act or joint resolution
     making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations.
   (6) The term "cancel" means--
              (A) with respect to "new direct spending," withholding the
authority to obligate the United States pertaining thereto, and
suspension of legal entitlement to claim any benefits or payments
deriving therefrom; and
              (B) with respect to "targeted tax benefits," the suspension
of       legal entitlement to claim any Federal tax deduction, credit,
   exclusion, preference or other tax benefit deriving therefrom.

SEC. 5. CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF LINE ITEM VETOES.

    (a) TRANSMISSION OF MESSAGES TO HOUSE AND SENATE.--
         (1) Each special message transmitted under this Act shall
    be transmitted to the House of Representatives and the Senate on
    the same day, and shall be delivered to the Clerk of the House
    of Representatives if the House is not in session, and to the
    Secretary of the Senate if the Senate is not in session. Each
    special message so transmitted shall be referred to the
    appropriate committees of the House of Representatives and the
    Senate. Each such message shall be printed as a document of each
    House.
         (2) Any special message transmitted under this Act shall be
    printed in the first issue of the Federal Register published
    after such transmittal.

    (b) INTRODUCTION OF DISAPPROVAL BILLS.-
o
-The procedures set forth in
subsection (c) shall apply to any disapproval bill introduced in the
House of Representatives not later than the third calendar day of
session beginning on the day after the date of submission of a special
message by the President under section 2.

    (c) CONSIDERATION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.--(l) The
committee of the House of Representatives to which a disapproval bill is
referred shall report it without amendment, and with or without
recommendation, not later than the seventh calendar day of session after
the date of its introduction. If the committee fails to report the bill
within that period, it is in order to move that the House discharge the
committee from further consideration of the bill. A motion to discharge
may be made only by an individual favoring the bill (but only at a time
or place designated by the Speaker in the legislative schedule of the
day after the calendar day on which the Member offering the motion
announces to the House his intention to do so and the form of the
motion).  The motion is highly privileged. Debate thereon shall be
limited to not more than one hour, the time to be divided in the House

equally between a proponent and an opponent. The previous question shall
be considered as ordered on the motion to its adoption without
intervening motion. A motion to reconsider the' vote by which the motion
is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.

     (2) After a disapproval bill is reported or the committee has been
discharged from further consideration, it is in order to move that the
House resolve into the Committee of the Whole House on the State of the
Union for consideration of the bill.    If the bill is reported by a


committee, it shall not be considered in the House until the first
calendar day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) on which
the report of that committee has been available to the Members of the
House. All points of order against the bill and against consideration
of
the bill are waived. The motion is highly privileged. A motion to
reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to
shall not be in order. During consideration of the bill in the Committee
of the
Whole, the first reading of the bill shall be dispensed with.  General
debate shall proceed, shall be confined to the bill, and shall not
exceed two hours equally divided and controlled by a proponent and an
opponent of the bill.  One motion to rise shall be in order. No
amendment to the bill is in order, except any Member may move to strike
the disapproval of any rescission or rescissions of budget authority, or
the disapproval of any cancellation of new direct spending or targeted
tax benefits, as applicable, if supported by one
o
-fifth of the Members of
the Committee of the Whole (a quorum being present). At the conclusion
of the consideration of the bill for amendment, the Committee shall rise
and report the bill to the House. The previous question shall be
considered as ordered on the bill and amendments thereto to final
passage without intervening motion. A motion to reconsider the vote on
passage of the bill shall not be in order.

     (3) Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the
application of the rules of the House of Representatives to the
procedure relating to a bill described in subsection (b) shall be
decided without debate.

    (4) It shall not be in order to consider more than one bill
described in subsection (b) or more than one motion to discharge
described in paragraph (1) with respect to a particular special
message.

    (5) Consideration of any disapproval bill under this subsection is
governed by the rules of the House of Representatives except to the
extent specifically provided by the provisions of this Act.

     (d) CONSIDERATION IN THE SENATE.--
         (1) Any disapproval bill received in the Senate from the House
shall be considered in the Senate pursuant to the provisions of this
Act.
         (2) Debate in the Senate on any disapproval bill and debatable
motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not
more than ten hours. The time shall be equally divided between, and
controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their
designees.                                                   .
         (3) Debate in the Senate on any debatable motions or appeal

    in connection with such bill shall be limited to one hour, to be
    equally divided between, and controlled by the mover and the
    manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager of the
    bill is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in
    opposition thereto shall be controlled by the minority leader or
    his designee. such leaders, or either of them, may, from the
    time under their control on the passage of the bill, allot
    additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any
    debatable motion or appeal.


         (4) A motion to further limit debate is not debatable. A
    motion to recommit (except a motion to recommit with
    instructions to report back within a specified number of days
    not to exceed one, not counting any day on which the Senate is
    not in session) is not in order.

     (e) CONSIDERATION IN CONFERENCE--
           (1) In the case of any disagreement between the two Houses of
Congress with respect to a disapproval bill passed by both Houses,
conferees shall be promptly appointed and a conference promptly
convened.   If the committee of conference makes and files a report
with respect to the bill not later than two calendar days before the
expiration of the 20 calendar days of session period set forth in this
section for congressional consideration, the conference report on the
bill shall be highly privileged for consideration in both Houses until
the expiration of the 20
o
-day period. Notwithstanding any other rule
in either House concerning the printing of conference reports in the
Record or concerning any delay in the consideration of such reports,
such report shall be acted on by both Houses not later than the
expiration of such 20
o
-day period.
         (2) Debate in the House of Representatives on the conference
report on any disapproval bill shall be limited to not more than one
hour equally divided and controlled by a proponent and an opponent.
A motion to further limit debate is not debatable. A motion to
recommit the conference report is not in order, and it is not in order
to move to reconsider the vote by which the conference report is
agreed to or disagreed to.
         (3) The conference report on the disapproval bill shall be
highly       privileged for consideration in the Senate. Debate in the
Senate on       any conference report on a disapproval bill shall be
limited to no          more than 2 hours equally divided and controlled by
the majority            leader and the minority leader or their designees.
         (4) Complete congressional consideration of the disapproval bill
and any conference report thereon shall not exceed the expiration of
the 20 calendar days of session provided for this purpose as set forth
in this section.
    (f) POINTS OF ORDER.--
         (1) It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any
    disapproval bill that relates to any matter other than the
rescission       of budget authority or cancellation of the provision of
law                 transmitted by the President under this Act.
         (2) It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any

    amendment to a disapproval bill.
        (3) Paragraphs (1) and (2) may be waived or suspended in
    the Senate only by a vote of three
o
-fifths of the members duly
    chosen and sworn.

SEC. 6. REPORTS OF THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE.

    Beginning on January 6, 1997, and at one
o
-year intervals
thereafter, the Comptroller General shall submit a report to each


House of Congress which provides the following information:
         (1) A list of each proposed Presidential rescission of
    discretionary budget authority and cancellation of new direct
spending      or of a targeted tax benefit submitted through special
messages for        the fiscal year ending during the preceding calendar
year, together        with their dollar value, and an indication of
whether each rescission       of discretionary budget authority or
cancellation of new direct            spending or of a targeted tax
benefit was accepted or rejected by          Congress.
         (2) The total number of proposed Presidential rescissions
    of discretionary budget authority and cancellations of new direct
spending or of a targeted tax benefit submitted through special
messages for the fiscal year ending during the preceding calendar
year, together with their total dollar value."
         (3) The total number of Presidential rescissions of
    discretionary budget authority or cancellations of new direct
spending      or of a targeted tax benefit submitted through special
messages for        the fiscal year ending during the preceding calendar
year and approved      by Congress, together with their total dollar
value.
         (4) A list of rescissions of discretionary budget authority or
cancellations of new direct spending or of a targeted tax benefit
initiated by Congress for the fiscal year ending during the preceding
calendar year, together with their dollar value, and an indication of
whether each such rescission was accepted or rejected by Congress.
         (5) The total number of rescissions of discretionary budget
authority or cancellations of new direct spending or of a targeted tax
benefit initiated and accepted by Congress for the fiscal year ending
during the preceding calendar year, together with their total dollar
value.

         (6) A summary of the information provided by paragraphs (2),
     (3) and (5) for each of the ten fiscal years ending before the
    fiscal year during this calendar year.
SEC. 7. ADVISORY REPORT ON TARGETED TAX BENEFITS.
     (a) IN GENERAL.-
o
-Any report accompanying a bill or joint resolution
or a joint explanatory statement accompanying a conference report in
which there is any Federal income tax benefit shall include a report by
the Joint Committee on Taxation of whether it contains any targeted tax
benefit and an identification of each such benefit.

    (b) LEGISLATION SUBJECT TO POINT OF ORDER.-
o
-It shall not be in order
in the Senate or the House of Representatives to consider any bill,
joint resolution, or conference report that is not in compliance with
subsection (a).

SEC. 8. JUDICIAL REVIEW.

    (a) EXPEDITED REVIEW.--
        (1) Any Member of Congress may bring an action, in the
    United States District Court for the District of Columbia, for
    declaratory judgment and injunctive relief on the ground that
    any provision of this Act violates the Constitution.
        (2) A copy of any complaint in an action brought under
    paragrap~ (1) shall be promptly delivered to the Secretary of
    the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives, and


    each House of Congress shall have the right to intervene in such
    action.
Nothing in this section or in any other law shall infringe upon
the right of the House of Representatives to intervene in an action
brought under paragraph (1) without the necessity of adopting a
resolution to authorize such intervention.

    (b) APPEAL TO SUPREME COURT.-
o
-Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, any order of the United States District Court for
the District of Columbia which is issued pursuant to an action
brought under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) shall be reviewable by
appeal directly to the Supreme Court of the United States. Any such
appeal shall be taken by a notice of appeal filed within 10 days
after such order is entered; and the jurisdictional statement shall
be filed within 30 days after such order is entered. No stay of an
order issued pursuant to an action brought under paragraph (1) of
subsection (a) shall be issued by a single Justice of the Supreme
Court.
         (c) EXPEDITED CONSIDERATION.-
o
-It shall be the duty of the
District Court for the District of Columbia and the Supreme Court of
the United States to advance on the docket and to expedite to the
greatest possible extent the disposition of any matter brought under
subsection (a).
         (d) SEVERABILITY.-
o
-If any provision of this Act, an amendment made
by this Act, or the application of such provision or amendment, is held
to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act, the amendments made
by this Act, and the application of the provisions of this Act shall not
be affected thereby.


