RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-SEP-1997 15:04:45.00

SUBJECT:   Professor Rebecca Blank

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Bruce, you asked me what we know about the welfare views of Professor
Rebecca Blank, who is expected to join the Counsel of Economic Advisers.
My intern wrote up this summary of what she found on Lexis/Nexu:

I. According to an April 1997 Atlantic Monthly review by Theda Skocpol,
the following is a brief summary of Professor Rebecca Blank's book
entitled It Takes a Nation: A New Agenda for Fighting Poverty:

        "Listening to the [Republican] public statements about the poor,
and about the nature and history of u.S. antipoverty efforts, I became
increasingly angry," Blank writes in her preface. Originally, the purpose
of her book was to influence the 1996 welfare debate; however, she now
assigns the book the purpose of bringing cool social science expertise to
a politically overheated debate. She calls for spending on the poor, more
intensive social services, and open ended assistance.
        Blank's reforms resemble the welfare changes President Clinton
sponsored in 1994. She favors three tiers of federal-state programs:
1)      Short term help (i.e. car repairs or rental assistance) to those
who needs a little help in finding and holding jobs.
        2)      Job training and ongoing support for low-wage workers.
3)      Intensive, behaviorally tailored service programs offering
closely supervised assistance to adults who have trouble holding jobs and
raising kids on their own.


II. In the same Atlantic Monthly review, Skocpol gives the following
commentary of Professor Blank's book:

1)       Blank's three-tier welfare scheme is "pure pie in the sky." Her
calls for spending on the poor, more intensive social services, and open
ended assistance are D&completely out of sync with fiscal and political
realities.DB The weakness of Blank's book lies in "its failure of
political analysis and imagination."

2)      Blank dismisses broad social programs as politically unfeasible,
although her own ideas are equally so.  She has a hard time weaning
herself from the old welfare programs; she still wants to go back and play
with the Personal Responsibility Act of 1996. Americans, however, are
unwilling to accept elaborate benefits or services restricted to some very
poor parents when so many working families are struggling with low wages,
dwindling health benefits, and inadequate child care.
'.
     3)      Blank suffers from O&a crimped sense of political realism. OS We
     have seen from past observation the futility of liberals' strategy of
     appealing to statistical analyses as opposed to political stances.

     4)      Due to Blank's failure to analyze what went wrong politically
     for welfare in the past, (that is, a welfare program originally created as
     mothers' pensions lost its legitimacy in a time of racial conflict,
     declining wages, and widespread female entry into the wage-labor market),
     she cannot project feasible strategies for the future.

     III. Professor Blank has made the following public statements to various
     members of the press:

     1) In a January 1997 National Journal article by Julie Kosterlitz:
             "We have a very, flexible job rich economy. If you ask what's the
     impact of having these new [welfare recipients] in the labor market, the
     answer is not much ... [Getting a job is only half the battle]; the first
     and foremost problem is the type of jobs people get, which will not give
     them the self-sufficiency to support their kids."

     2) In a July 1996 Plain Dealer article by Greg Munno, Blank responds to
     studies citing that the job market will not be able to absorb the influx
     of welfare recipient workers:
             "[The job growth rate problem is overstated becau·se the entry
     level job market has a high turnover rate.]  But the question is, will
     these jobs support families? And the answer is no. Without health
     insurance, and other benefits, most entry level jobs today won't keep a
     family with a working mother above the poverty line."

     3) In an August 1997 Omaha World-Herald article by Donnette Dunbar:
     "There's an assumption that [part-time work and temporary employment] are
     identical.   Part-time workers have increased only minimally in the past
     two decades.   It's not the growth of part-time work that's the main
     problem. Wages for less skilled workers for all jobs have been declining
     in the last 12 years and there has been a big increase in temporary
     workers."

     4) In a November 1995 Austin American-Statesman article by Suzanne Gamboa:
             "What I hope will happen is that internally in the Bureau of
     Census, they will adopt the recommendation of the [Academy of Science that
     poverty should be defined on the basis of disposable income]. The Census
     poverty line is not horrible, I'd rather use it than have nothing."

     5) In a November 1995 Los Angeles Times article by Lisa Richardson:
             "[It] is just so extremely rare for someone to [climb out of
     poverty and into prosperity.]  It's nice to know some people do make it
     like that, but it's almost unheard of.  If you take people of low skills,
     their options just aren't that big and most people are not going to get
     into what are typically considered middle income categories."

     IV.  Professor Blank has co-authored a paper with Patricia Ruggles, now of
     HHS, entitled "When do Women Use Aid to Families with Dependent Children
     and Food Stamps? The dynamics of eligibility versus participation,"
     published in the Journal of Human Resources in January 1996.


