RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:28-SEP-1997 15:20:06.00

SUBJECT:     Tobacco

TO: Elena Kagan        CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
As I see it, we will need 5 products for the tobacco meeting this week.
Here are the categories and the directions I think we should head in.

1. Talking points
The essential points would be:

*    Kids.   This is about protecting kids.

* Bi-partisan. We should all be able to get behind legislation to
control smoking in America. This will be a bipartisan process.   It is a
large bill, it effects many states, and millions of people.    I will work
with Congress, but I recognize they will hold hearings and follow their
process.

* Promptness.      Congress should take this up soon and make it high
priority.



2.    Q and A's

Q. Why didn't POTUS submit a bill?
A.    The President set out his priorities for the bill. Congress
legislates. The principles are clear, 1-5, it shouldn't be hard to get a
bill to the floor.

Q.   When should a bill pass?
A.  It should be at the top of the agenda for this year.  There is nothing
more important than saving thousands'of children from taking up smoking.
Three thousands are starting everyday.

Q.    Is POTUS just playing politics with this? Why didn't he show
leadership?
A. He's taken this issue on from the first, and taken the issue this far,
and is confident we will get a resolution of the issue. we will get a
bill by working together.

Q.   will negotiations include industry?
A.   The industry is a piece of this, but there isn't a need to negotiate
with them.

Q. What is the role of the VPOTUS?
A. VPOTUS will take a leadership role in the legislation.


3. Research questions
I've attached research questions on: who is to blame, what arguments work
best, why people think a bill may not happen. We should list some on
specific disputes we should test.   (We should talk about these).


4. Legislative strategy
Aspects of the legislative strategy.

1).   Goal.     Pass bill that embodies the President's principles by early
next year.


2) .     Timeline.

a).       POTUS announces principles for legislation.

b). Outreach to Congressional leaders indicating Administration commitment
to passing a bill.  (We should discuss this step very soon) .

c) Public meeting with POTUS/VPOTUS and congressional leaders-- public
statement that bill is important to country and should be top priority of
next year.

d) Congressional Action. Hearings begin, many pieces of legislation are
introduced. Some are comprehensive, some more limited.

e) Administration Action. Administration consistently urges adherence to
principles outlined by POTUS.   POTUS/VPOTUS events emphasizing need for
action-·- involve children, farmers, second-hand smoke science.  POTUS
urges issue not be fragmented and a comprehensive piece of legislation be
passed.

f). Congressional Action Continues. Larger coalitions coalesce around
Senatorial leaders on issue (Kennedy/Hatch) and House chairman (Bliley).

g) Administration Endorsements. Administration uses following options to
maintain progress of legislation: private meetings to encourage
coalitions of legislators, and encourage useful combinations of bills,
public comment on aspects of pending legislation to indicate support;
public comment/events to indicate criticism of pace of progress or
negative direction of bill.

h)     Congressional Vote Taking.   Bills reach committee and floor.

i).  Presidential Involvement Options.  Options include Presidential
statement, SAP, or invitations to leaders to WH to coordinate/ resolve
disputes.

j).    Bill is voted on.


bangers.     possible Republican approaches include:

* A public attack on the President for showing no leadership and playing
politics with issue;

* A private strategy of fragmenting the issue and letting only certain
parts of the bill advance to interminable hearings.


    * A laissez-faire strategy of letting chaos reign on the issue for a
    while.

    *  An attack on the Administration for not protecting farmers, for
    imposing taxes/government regulation, for helping trial attorneys.      Others?


    Answers.

    * Leadership. This President has shown courage in attacking problem.           We
    can do events and maybe take more Administrative action if R's are
    recalcitrant. Easy to hold their feet to fire to get things done.

    *    Fragmentation.   Privately urge prompt timeline for comprehensive bill.

    *    Specific Issues. Keep debate on kids. Defend farmers.



    5.    WH Structure and Next Steps

    Three Working Groups
    1. Tobacco Coordination Group. Agency and WH staff meeting every
    Thursday to coordinate policy and event planning.

    2. Tobacco Communications Group. Group meets to plan specific
    Administration communications events.

    3. Tobacco Legislative Group. Group meets to track legislative
    developments and pLan next steps.

    *    Regular meetings with VPOTUS staff for event scheduling and strategy

    Weekly conference call with Mike Moore's group

    Weekly conference call/Meeting with Public health group (includes VP/HHS)


    Next Actions that Need to be Taken
    1.   Prepare for POTUS/leadership meeting.

    2.     Hilley/Bowles outreach to Lott/Gingrich.

    3.   Coordinate Reed/ Shalala visits to key Hill members over next two
    weeks.

    4.    Schedule of events for rest of '97.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 017 - FOLDER -004


[09/29/1997]


