RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/Ou=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD I )

CREATION DATE/TIME:29-SEP-1997 09:10:06.00

SUBJECT:   Response to Broder

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I   )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD I    )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
After discussing yesterday's Broder piece with Ann Lewis, Riley and Bruce,
I'm recommending a 2-part response strategy.

The first would be an op-ed that makes the case that Clinton and Riley
have been consistently working to improve public education by investing
more resources, promoting serious accountability for results (through
Goals 2000 and national tests), and giving parents choice in public
education through charter schools. This strategy is showing results
(e.g., virtually every state has standards now, there has been a dramatic
increase in charter schools, and we are beginning to see achievement
increases (4th graders above international norm in math and science) .
While there has been bipartisan support for some of these efforts, there
is also a core group of Republicans that oppose these common sense steps,
and who are constantly trying to undermine standards and tests, slash
funding, and oppose efforts to improve public education. All they want to
do is provide vouchers and walk away from the public schools. It's a good
think Bill Clinton and Dick Riley are provide sound, consistent
leadership, and showing resolve, in the face of these attacks.

I would see either aDem. gov or Member of COngress as the author for such
a piece. Roy Romer, Jim Hunt, Howard Dean or Parris Glendining are the
most obvious choices, though they all have liabilities (Romer's DNC role
may make him look like an administration shil, Hunt probably won't want to
take on the right wing, Dean still doesn't get our testing initiative, and
G1endining, while supportive, is weak at home).  From Congress, Bingaman,
Kennedy and George Miller seem like the most obvious prospects.

Any reactions?

The second approach would be a letter from Riley to Broder--polite but
firm, in which he makes several points:   (1) he continues to have the
facts about Goals 2000 all wrong including, particularly, that the R's
have not raided Goals $ because they perceive it lacks a policy rationale
now. This year is the first year since the R's took over that the House
approps bill has contained any funds for Goals.   (2) while he keeps
criticizing the testing initiative as tiny, it would be in even more
trouble with the R's if we had gone the route he advocates--mandatory
rather than voluntary, and lots more subjects and grades; (3) a general
argument that we are on the right side and providing leadership, while the
R's are the ones messing things up.

What do you think?
"   ,


