              RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

              CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

              CREATION DATE/TIME:29-SEP-1997 17:41:15.00

              SUBJECT:    A few questions--since I'm missing your meetings

              TO: Elena Kagan { CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
              READ: UNKNOWN

              TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              CC: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
              READ: UNKNOWN

              TEXT:
              Sorry I missed this morning's meeting -- after all the Q&A excitment, I
              had to go with Nicole to a noon meeting of the House Women's Caucus re:
              the child care conference (we're trying to divide up all these meetings) .
              Also, I will miss our staff meeting tomorrow because I somehow let Betsey
              Myers talk me into appearing on a panel in the Indian Treaty Room at the
              same time.

              So let me ask you a few things via email:

              QUESTIONS

              Department of Labor Guidance: What else should I be doing to ensure that
              the DOL guidance gives as much discretion as possible to the PICs? I just
              put in a call to Ray Uhalde to ask him
              1) what is their lawyers' latest interpretation of how much authority the
              governor has to set state-wide policy; and 2) what is the revised
              timetable/ process given their decision on Friday to embark on a
              NGA-NaCo-NCSL-Mayors joint consultation process. Emily believes that we
              will go a long way toward making our friends happy if we make sure that
              PICs have the freedom to choose from among the eligible activities and
              individuals in the statute.  I will do my best to put the fear of God in
              them -- but Bruce can you reiterate this with Kitty or make the point at
              tomorrow's strategy meeting? Can anyone else think of anything else we
              can do?

              HHS Report on Data Processing: This sounds dull, but I think it's a test
              of whether this Administration is serious about time limits. HHS has
              fallen into the trap. Here are the key points:
              1) Currently, though states are forbidden from providing TANF to families
              for more than
                       5 years, there is no system in place to track individuals who move
              from state to state;
              2) The law requires HHS to produce a report on what would be required to
              create a computer        system to track how long people have been on
              welfare;
              3) HHS has produced a lengthy technical report with 5 options ranging from
              one that is weak and     cheap to one that is thorough and
              expensive.
              4) The HHS report then recommends we start with the weak and cheap option
              and eventually
                       move toward the more expensive and complicated one (which will
              never happen) .



  I think we should avoid making a recommendation among the options.
  There's no way we win on this one -- either we don't believe in time
  limits or we want to impose more costs and technical burdens on the
  states.  I think the report should be re-crafted to layout alternatives
  without choosing one.   What do you think?

  REMINDERS

 Arizona Privatization Proposal: The Dept. of Ag needs to respond by Friday
 to Arizona's privatization proposal -- either say yes, say no, or ask for
 more information. We had a DPC-USDA-OMB meeting on this ten days ago, and
 as a result USDA has drafted what with a few edits I think will be a
 pretty good "ask for more information letter." Diana is sheparding this,
 but she's out today and my role is to remind you that we need your
 feedback (Elena attended our meeting, so she got the detailed info, Bruce
 -- let me know if you want to see it directly).  I think if we decide what
 we want and then close the loop with Gotbaum and perhaps Podesta that
 should work.

  UPDATES

  Child Support Enforcement: There are many obstacles to a good child
  support event, but I'm trying to cut my way through the jungle.  I won't
  bore you with the details, but I hope to have more positive news soon.

  TANF Regs: Diana and lowe you a memo or briefing on HHS' proposed TANF
  regs. We've had some conversations with OMB, and they want to give HHS a
  series df questions and comments by week's end, so we're trying to draft
  some for OMB by COB Wednesday. I'll ask Cathy and Laura if we can have
  some time on your schedule on Wednesday.

  Federal Hiring: The possible VP federal hiring event is currently slated
  for Oct. 8th, but is still quite tentative. The theme is "on the road to
  10,000 by 2000" (apparently a Klain quip); the VP would announce the
  federal hires to date (over 1,400 since April) in Room 450 with an
  audience of some welfare hires and their agency mentors.


