RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPO/O=EOP [ OPO 1 )

CREATION OATE/TIME:30-SEP-1997 10:44:30.00

SUBJECT:   Re: A few questions--since I'm missing your meetings

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan!OU=OPO/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
From Bruce fyi--
---------------------- Forwarded by Cynthia A. Rice/OPO/EOP on 09/30/97
10:46 AM ---------------------------




Bruce N. Reed
09/30/97 09:03:10 AM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Cynthia A. Rice/OPO/EOP
cc:
bcc:
Subject:         Re: A few questions--since I'm missing your meetings

1. Remind me to put the fear of God into Labor this afternoon about
helping mayors
  2.  I agree with your recommendation on data -- we shouldn't recommend a
wimpy option. Down the road, should we recommend something serious?
  3.  I'm fine with whatever you want to ask of Arizona. Just make sure
Podesta knows what we're doing.
  4.  I look forward to a TANF reg briefing. You're no doubt very sick of
it already.
  5. Any chance of having anything ready on child support by Saturday?
It doesn't matter -- I'm just curious. Rahm and I are pushing a
fatherhood radio address to coincide with the Promise Keepers march, and
we're looking for anything to bolster our case.

Thanks -- sorrry to ruin your evening last night.




cynthia A. Rice
09/29/97 05:41:09 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPO/EOP, Elena Kagan/OPO/EOP
cc:      Diana Fortuna/OPO/EOP
Subject:         A few questions--since I'm missing your meetings

Sorry I missed this morning'S meeting -- after all the Q&A excitment, I
had to go with Nicole to a noon meeting of the House Women's Caucus re:
the child care conference (we're trying to divide up all these meetings) .
Also, I will miss our staff meeting tomorrow because I somehow let Betsey


Myers talk me into appearing on a panel in the Indian Treaty Room at the
same time.

So let me ask you a few things via email:

QUESTIONS

Department of Labor Guidance: What else should I be doing to ensure that
the DOL guidance gives as much discretion as possible to the PICs? I just
put in a call to Ray Uhalde to ask him
1) what is their. lawyers' latest interpretation of how much authority the
governor has to set state-wide policy; and 2) what is the revised
timetable/ process given their decision on Friday to embark on a
NGA-NaCo-NCSL-Mayors joint consultation process. Emily believes that we
will go a long way toward making our friends happy if we make sure that
PICs have the freedom to choose from among the eligible activities and
individuals in the statute.   I will do my best to put the fear of God in
them -- but Bruce can you reiterate this with Kitty or make the point at
tomorrow's strategy meeting? Can anyone else think of anything else we
can do?

HHS Report on Data Processing: This sounds dull, but I think it's a test
of whether this Administration is serious about time limits. HHS has
fallen into the trap. Here are the key points:
1) Currently, though states are forbidden from providing TANF to families
for more than
         5 years, there is no system in place to track individuals who move
from state to state;
2) The law requires HHS to produce a report on what would be required to
create a computer        system to track how long people have been on
welfare;
3) HHS has produced a lengthy technical report with 5 options ranging from
one that is weak and     cheap to one that is thorough and
expensive.
4) The HHS report then recommends we start with the weak and cheap option
and eventually
         move toward the more expensive and complicated one (which will
never happen) .

I think we should avoid making a recommendation among the options.
There's no way we win on this one -- either we don't believe in time
limits or we want to impose more costs and technical burdens on the
states. I think the report should be re-crafted to layout alternatives
without choosing one.   what do you think?

REMINDERS

Arizona Privatization Proposal: The Dept. of Ag needs to respond by Friday
to Arizona's privatization proposal -- either say yes, say no, or ask for
more information. We had a DPC-USDA-OMB meeting on this ten days ago, and
as a result USDA has drafted what with a few edits I think will be a
pretty good "ask for more information letter." Diana is sheparding this,
but she's out today and my role is to remind you that we need your
feedback (Elena attended our meeting, so she got the detailed info, Bruce
-- let me know if you want to see it directly).  I think if we decide what
we want and then close the loop with Gotbaum and perhaps Podesta that
should work.

UPDATES
.'
     Child Support Enforcement: There are many obstacles to a good child
     support event, but I'm trying to cut my way through the jungle.  I won't
     bore you with the details, but I hope to have more positive news soon.

     TANF Regs: Diana and lowe you a memo or briefing on HHS' proposed TANF
     regs. We've had some conversations with OMB, and they want to give HHS a
     series of questions and comments by week's end, so we're trying to draft
     some for OMB by COB Wednesday.  I'll ask Cathy and Laura if we can have
     some time on your schedule on Wednesday.

     Federal Hiring: The possible VP federal hiring event is currently slated
     for Oct. 8th, but is still quite tentative. The theme is "on the road to
     10,000 by 2000" (apparently a Klain quip); the VP would announce the
     federal hires to date (over 1,400 since April) in Room 450 with an
     audience of some welfare hires and their agency mentors.


