      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( cN=william R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ]     )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 1-0CT-1997 16:32:07.00

      SUBJECT:   ACE video script

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      Elena--

      Please review; Laura Capps is finishing tonight for taping tomorrow at
      noon; mostly need your attention to the two bracketed and bolded questions
      towards the end. Otherwise, bolded additions are from Mike and me.



                                                   PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
                                                   VIDEO MESSAGE TO THE AMERICAN
      COUNCIL ON EDUCATIOND,s
       D&EDUCATING ONE THIRD OF A NATIOND8 CONFERENCE

      16-18, 1997

              Hello.  ID,ve enjoyed speaking to the American Council on
      Education at your national conference year after year and wish I could be
      with all of you again in Miami.    I am pleased to know that the
      Administration is well represented at the conference by Judith Winston,
      the Executive Director of One America in the 21st Century, the
      PresidentD,s Initiative on Race, as well as Dr. John Hope Franklin,
      Governor William Winters and Rev·. Suzan Johnson Cook of the Race Advisory
      Board.   Thank you to ACE for focusing on an issue I believe to be the
      most challenging and pressing that we face as a nation.

               Equal opportunity is our central value, but the very meaning of
      that has fundamentally changed. For example, in the 19th century,
      opportunity meant access to a land grant.  In the 21st century, it will
      mean access to a Pell Grant to a community college[, to a trade school,
      to] or a university. It is my strongest conviction that we must work
      together to open the doors of college even wider. At a time when a
      college education means stability, a good job, a passport to the middle
      class, we must make at least two years of college as universal at the dawn
      of the next century as a high school diploma is today.

              And here we are making great progress Our balanced budget
      includes the largest increase in aid to education since 1965 and the
      biggest increase in higher education since the G.I. Bill 50 years ago.   By
      increasing Pell Grants and creating the HOPE Scholarship and Lifetime
      Learning tuition tax credits, we are eliminating the financial obstacles
      that have barred many of our citizens from pursuing post-secondary
      education.   We can proudly say for the first time in history that college
      is available for all Americans who are willing to work for it.  I want to
      thank ACE for its hard work in helping make this achievement possible.


             But, we know we have much more work to do.   We know that many
     other obstacles still exist, those which prohibit our children from making
     the most of their God-given potential.  For the first time since the
     1950s, our schools in America are resegregating. There are still too many
     places where opportunity for education and work are not equal, where
     disintegration of families and neighborhoods make it more difficult to
     plan for a college career. The recent rollback of affirmative action is
     slamming shut the doors of higher education on a new generation. [Earlier
     draft had a sentence on how diversity benefits all Americans, but was
     taken out due to space constraints.  Do you think itO,s critical to hit
     that note?]

              We must not give in to those who have given up on the idea of
     integration and the search for common ground. Despite the recent setback
     in the courts, I hope that all of you will come away from this conference
     emboldened by the need to preserve and protect appropriate affirmative
     action on your campuses. [Should we say protect diversity AND affirmative
     action here, or is affirmative action ok by itself? I have recommended
     that we use O&appropriate affirmative action08 because of feedback from
     counselO,s office on recent Q&A]. As we work open a national dialogue on
     matters of race, colleges and universities can and should playa central
     role in that effort.  I urge all of you to search for ways in which your
     institution can contribute.    Thank you and God Bless.


