      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

      CREATION DATE/TIME: 6-0CT-1997 11:07:15.00

      SUBJECT:   Draft memo for your review on Harris's idea to resume Daily Point of Light

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD]     )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      Here's a draft memo on Harris's proposal to resume the Daily Points of
      Light awards.  Let me know whether you want the memo to come from you, and
      whether you want to recommend an option -- I know you've said you really
      don't care in the past.   Steve Silverman would probably be willing to
      send the memo if you don't want to.

      This draft identifies a middle ground option between resuming and not
      resuming the awards, which is resuming them but not linking them to the
      President.   It's been hard to get closure on where people are on this
      issue, but I think Ann Lewis opposes it, while Steve Silverman thinks we
      should do something here. Harris says that the former President will be
      very disappointed if we reject this idea.

      DRAFT

      MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

      FROM:

      SUBJECT:                 Harris WoffordO,s Proposal to Resume Points of
      Light Awards

      Background: Harris Wofford has written to urge that you resume former
      President BushO,s O&Daily Points of LightOB awards.  He proposes to rename
      the awards the O&PresidentsO, [plural] Points of Light,OB with you and
      president Bush as co-sponsors. Rather than having the White House take
      responsibility for selecting and vetting the winners on a daily basis, as
      was the case under President Bush, Harris proposes that the Points of
      Light Foundation and the Corporation for National Service take on this
      responsibility. The Knights of Columbus have agreed to fund the costs of
      this program for one year.

      One factor complicating the decision is that Harris has had extensive
      conversations with the Points of Light Foundation and with President Bush
      himself on this proposal. Apparently Harris has made it clear that he
      favors this idea and that the decision rests with the White House.  Harris
      indicates that President Bush will be deeply disappointed if we decide not
      to resume the awards.

      One other timing issue is that you are scheduled to attend the dedication
      of President BushO,s library in November.  If we decide to reinstate this
      program, that event would be an opportunity to announce it, especially
      given the former PresidentO,s attachment to the Points of Light program.

      Arguments For:
-,.,
       ·
            Reinstating the awards is an easy way to keep the issue of service and
           volunteerism before the public on a daily basis.  It would continue to
           repair the rift between the AmeriCorps concept of service and the more
           traditional volunteer sector, just as the Philadelphia summit did.
           AmeriCorps members would be eligible for the awards.

            President Bush very much wants the Administration to do this.  He will be
           very disappointed if we do not, and he will see it as the White HouseD,s
           decision because of HarrisD, conversations with him.

           Arguments Against:
            The benefits of resuming the awards are minimal. Our efforts to reach
           out to the volunteer sector at the Philadelphia summit were so successful
           that it is not clear what this would add.  In addition, some would react
           negatively to such a decision, since the original Points of Light program
           was derided by many as an empty gesture.

            The daily responsibility of selecting and vetting winners will be
           time-consuming for White House staff, and not worth the effort. Although
           theoretically we could assign responsibility for vetting the award winners
           to the Points of Light Foundation and the Corporation for National
           Service, from a practical standpoint we would probably still feel the need
           to do a legal and/or political check on award winners.

           Options:
            Resume the awards as Wofford proposes.

            Decline to resume the awards.

            Reestablish these awards as the D&Daily Points of LightDB awards,
           administered by the Corporation and the Points of Light Foundation, with
           no connection to the President or the White House. It is not clear how
           President Bush would react to such a plan.


