RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 7-0CT-1997 14:17:32.00

SUBJECT:   Caucuses and testing--update

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
I talked with Andy Blocker briefly a little whl.le ago on testing issues
and the appropriations bill. He's got a somewhat different cut at things
than we did this morning, and suggests we need to worry about the Caucuses
more than we had been planning to.

Before turning to this issue in more detail, Andy and I reiterated to each
other that our overall position with regard to proposed Republican
compromises remains the same -- we are not interested at all in discussing
compromises that will require any additional authorization down the road.

with regard to the Hispanic and Black Caucuses, here's his view:

1. Obey has told Hilley that he feels uncomfortable carrying our water on
the tests while the caucuses continue to oppose them. Andy and Hilley
think that we need to take some steps to satisfy the caucuses in order to
shore up our own side in conference. At best we will get half of each
caucus to switch positions, but that should be enough for Obey.

In short, we need the caucuses not for their votes on the floor, but for
their impact on Obey in conference.

2. There are three keys to accomplishing this--(l) Spanish testing;   (2)
addressing civil rights concerns; and, (3) school construction. No
surprises here.

On Spanish testing--Andy's view would suggest we be more prepared to
commit now to pay for the tests than we discussed this moring. However,
we still have the problem of setting off the other side, so I'm not yet
inclined to move from where we were after we talked this morning.

On school construction-- Rengel will introduce his school infrastructure
proposal on Thursday at Ways and Means, as a substitute for a
Coverdell-like proposal.  I just came from a meeting where Treasury, ED,
OMB, NEC and me on behalf of DPC tentatively agreed that we should
support Rangel, through a Riley/Rubin letter. We'll see the letter
before it goes anyplace. Andy Blocker thinks this is a good move, and I've
asked him to figure out how to play this to our maximum advantage on
testing.

Mike Smith and I haven't yet connected on the other civil rights issues,
though I don't think there is much there we need to rethink from our
discussion this morning.


