        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP 1 )

        CREATION DATE/TIME:10-0CT-1997 13:13:26.00

        SUBJECT:        Reno letter to Harkin on recovering federal costs due to tobacco

        TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Bruce N. Reed        CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TEXT:
        Here is a draft letter from Reno to Harkin that George shared with us.  I
        think the pressure is going to continue to mount for various 3d parties to
        recover tobacco related costs. Today's Broin settlement will add to the
        pressure. I am concerned that the letter stakes out more of a position
        than we have thoughtfully reached. Your thoughts?

        The Honorable Tom Harkin
        United States Senate
        Washington, D.C. 20510

        Dear Senator Harkin:

                Thank you for your letter of September 18, 1997, requesting an
        answer to the question of whether the federal government will be bringing
        a suit against the tobacco companies for smoking-related health care
        costs. As explained in my previous letter, the Department of Justice
        along with the involved agencies have considered such suits and to date
        have not elected to try to recover smoking related costs incurred by the
        federal government through direct litigation against the tobacco
        companies.

                This Administration believes that our efforts should be directed
        at reducing teen smoking, as the President has said, "Reducing teen
        smoking has always been America's bottom line." That is why the President
        on September 17th of this year called for comprehensive tobacco
        legislation with the goal of reducing teen smoking by 50 percent within
        seven years. The President announced five key elements which must be the
        heart of any national tobacco legislation:

                1.      A comprehensive plan to reduce teen smoking, including
        tough penalties if targets are not met;

                   2.        Full authority for the FDA to regulate tobacco products;

                   3.        Changes in the way the tobacco industry does business;

                   4.        Progress toward other public health goals; and

                   5.        Protection for tobacco farmers and their communities.

                As Congress and the Administration work together to draft this
        comprehensive tobacco legislation, it will be entirely appropriate to
        consider the impact of smoking related diseases on federal programs.   It
        is also important to remember that the most meaningful action we could
        take would be to reduce teen smoking because this is what is going to
,r
          impact the lives and the health of our children.  If we can craft a
          legislative package that actually reduces teen smoking, then we will save
          not only the lives and health of our children, but we will also take the
          most important action possible to reduce what the states and the federal
          government have to spend in the future for health care costs caused by
          tobacco related diseases.

                  Crafting the comprehensive tobacco legislation called for by the
          President so that it will successfully reduce teen smoking, is an enormous
          challenge that will take commitment and concerted action by both the
          Administration and Congress. Forging such legislation will balance the
          competing interests of many different goals and policies. We believe the
          decision on whether and how to recoup the monies spent by federal programs
          to treat tobacco related diseases should be considered as part of this
          overall legislation and we do not believe it would be productive for the
          Administration to unilaterally address this mater through litigation at
          this juncture.

                  Again, we believe that the impact of tobacco related diseases
          should be considered as a part of the debate in forging the comprehensive
          tobacco legislation called for by the President.  Litigation, however, is
          not necessarily the best method for recouping these costs. As the
          congressional debate and investigation into the global tobacco resolution
          progresses, I will, of course, remain willing to reassess the desirability
          of trying to recoup the federal monies which have been expended through
          litigation.


                                                         Sincerely,



                                                         Janet Reno


