RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/ou=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME:17-0CT-1997 01:04:08.00

SUBJECT:   Summary of accomplishments since service summit for your review

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
This is for Ann Lewis to use when she talks to reporters.   I decided to
link each item to the summit's 5 goals -- kind of dorky, but since we hear
that Powell and Alter think we aren't focused enough on them, I thought
I'd see how it looked.   (There is an item in here on race that Silverman
wrote that I am checking on; it could be totally wrong.)


Administration Accomplishments Since the President sO, Service Summit

President Clinton is deeply committed to the goals of the President sO,
Summit for AmericaO,s Future held in Philadelphia last April.  Service and
the well-being of our nationO,s children have been at the center of the
PresidentO,s agenda since he took office.

The President is committed to moving forward with AmericaD,s Promise and
other partners to attain the summitO,s goals for children -- a caring
adult, a safe place, a healthy start, a marketable skill, and a chance to
serve. Since April, the President has continued to emphasize the
importance of service to audiences, including the Business Roundtable, the
Conference of Mayors, the Welfare-to-Work Partnership, and the radio
address, and has recognized major corporate commitments. At the same
time, the Administration has been moving forward on all five goals.

The Spirit and Work of the Summit Continues
Since the summit, AmericaO,s Promise and the Corporation for National
Service have continued the work that began at the summit -- working with
communities at the grass-roots level and securing commitments from
corporate and non-profit America toward the five goals. AmericaO,s
Promise, the independent organization founded to follow up on the summit,
has garnered over 200 new commitments since the summit, some very
substantial. Over 150 cities and states are holding O&mini-summits08
around the country, with the help of AmericaO,s Promise and the
Corporation for National Service. AmericaO,s Promise is encouraging
communities to become O&communities of promise08 that take responsibility
for reaching children at risk.  The President has met with General Powell
to discuss progress since April and talk about future directions.

The PresidentD,s Corporation for National Service is also helping
corporations and non-profits implement their summit commitments at the
local level. Viacom is deploying its employee volunteers through
AmeriCorps. The CorporationO,s Learn and Serve America program is helping
in the delivery of eye exams and glasses to over 40,000 needy children
promised by Vision Service Plan.  The CorporationO,s National Senior
Service Corps is helping the National Education Association-Retired meet
its commitment to deploy thousands of retired teachers as tutors for


America Reads.

The Administration is Moving Ahead on the SummitO,s Goals
Since April, we have continued our work on the' summi to, s five goals.
Several of the following initiatives were announced at the summit itself
by the President or by federal agencies.

AmeriCorps Scholarships:
We have increased opportunities for young people to serve their
communities. At the summit, the President issued a challenge to service
and religious organizations that we would provide 50,000 new AmeriCorps
scholarships over the next 5 years to organizations that offer young
people the chance to serve. The response since then has far exceeded our
expectations. Seventy-seven organizations answered that challenge,
offering to sponsor 10,000 new AmeriCorps members.  In June, 8,900
scholarships were approved, well ahead of our first-year plan for 5,000
scholarships.  (Summit goalS, among others.)

National Service Scholars:
This summer, we launched a new effort to recognize and foster outstanding
community service among our nationO,s youth.  We awarded scholarships to
over 1,600 high school students with exemplary service records in the
first year of the National Service Scholars program. A host of leading
community organizations stepped forward to raise the local match for the
scholarships, including the Kiwanis, Rotary, Lions, Veterans of Foreign
Wars, the American Legion, Elks, and WomenO,s Clubs. Each high school
principal was invited to nominate a junior or senior for the scholarship.
For next year, we have secured funding that will allow the program to
expand to 10,000 high schools -- almost half of all high schools in the
nation.  (Summit goalS.)

ChildrenO,s Health:
The Balanced Budget Act included a major investment in children's health
care, which will give many more children the "healthy start" that the
Summit recognized as so important.  In June, the President announced that
Kaiser Permanente is committing $100 million to provide health coverage
for uninsured children in California, complementing the AdministrationO,s
efforts.  The Administration is also focusing on outreach to families who
may not know their children are eligible for Medicaid or other health
insurance. (Summit goal 3.)

Welfare to work:
Since May, the Vice President has been leading the Coalition to Sustain
Success, a new partnership of civic organizations that is working with
state and local government to mentor families seeking to leave welfare for
work and provide them with networking and support.  In addition, the
Welfare to Work Partnership has mobilized over 2,000 businesses to hire
welfare recipients, so that those parents can move into the economic
mainstream and improve their childrenO,s future.   The Partnership is
helping companies all across the nation hire people off welfare through a
toll-free hotline, web page, and public service announcements, as well as
working closely with community and business leaders in a number of cities
to help promote innovative and effective welfare to work initiatives.
(Several summit goals.)

Loan-Forgiveness for Community Service:
The PresidentO,s proposal for loan forgiveness for those who perform
community service was enacted as part of the balanced budget. To
encourage private universities and non-profit organizations to offer loan
forgiveness to borrowers who take lower-paying service jobs, the President


proposed and won a provision that would not subject such loan forgiveness
to taxation. (Summit goalS.)

The PresidentD,s Initiative on Race: not sure this is right?????
Dialogue in Communities, one of the goals for the PresidentD,s Initiative
on Race, seeks to promote a national dialogue on the issues surrounding
race. We are working with AmericaD,s Promise to tap into their existing
structure and relationship with communities across the country to initiate
conversations on race.

America Reads and AmeriCorps: The Department of Education and the
Corporation for National Service have begun to implement the PresidentD,s
America Reads program this year, while seeking resources from Congress for
full-scale implementation in 1998-99. Hundreds of colleges and univer
sities [on Tuesday we will announce itD,s 800] have committed to provide
tens of thousands of work-study students as reading tutors in the current
school year as part of America Reads, the national literacy campaign to
ensure that every child can read well and independently by the third grade.
  AmeriCorps members are working in 94 programs across the country to
tutor and mentor, set up after-school and summer programs, and recruit
parents and community volunteers as tutors.   The Corporation is also
launching a new D&Seniors in SchoolsD8 initiative in nine cities to use
older volunteers as literacy tutors in some of the nationD,s poorest
elementary schools.  In the District of Columbia, over 1,000 college
students, volunteers, seniors, and parents will tutor first grade children
in 16 of the neediest schools in the city.   (Summit goal 4.)

White House Conference on Child Care: On October 23, the President and
First Lady will host this event as part of an Administration focus on how
to ensure high quali~y child care.   This effort builds on our earlier
emphasis on the importance of early learning.  (Summit goals 1, 2, and 4.)

Commitments by Federal Agencies:  Federal agencies are following through
on the more than 40 commitments they made at the summit, including
mentoring and tutoring and launching new partnerships with corporations
and nonprofits.  They are also continuing to launch new initiatives and
partnerships to reach the summitD,s goals.   Here are some examples of
agency progress:

 Department of Justice:   The Department of Justice has convened a new
public/private Mentoring Alliance to promote the SummitD,s mentoring goal,
disseminate information about best practices, and determine how best to
link volunteers with the children who   need them. Members include Big
Brothers/Big Sisters, One to One, Boys and Girls Clubs of America, and
Save the Children.  In addition, DOJ has followed through on its
commitment to more than double the number of sites for its Juvenile
Mentoring Program.   (Summit goal 1.)

DOJ also completed its commitment to expand its Drug Education for Youth
(DEFY) summer camp program that promotes positive life choices for
children between the ages of 9 and 12. After the summer program, the
children are linked with mentors from the local U.S. AttorneyD,s office,
police department, or university.   DOJD,s new Youth Network provides a
forum for young people and community organizations to exchange ideas on
juvenile violence and delinquency prevention.   (Summit goals 1 and 2.)

 Corporation for National Service: The Corporation for National Service
is taking the lead to meet the SummitD,s goal of engaging an additional 2
million young people in community service.  (Summit goalS.)   It is also
developing a new initiative D&To Learn and GrowD8 to expand and improve
.'
     the quality of afterschool programs (Summit goal 2).

      Department of Education:   This summer, the summer reading program
     Read*write*Now! reached over 1.5 million children through over 500,000
     reading partners, fulfilling the DepartmentD,s commitment.  (Summit goal
     4. )

      Health and Human Services:  In June, HHS Secretary Shalala launched a new
     partnership with the Girl Scouts, to teach girls about the dangers of
     substance abuse and other risky behaviors, featuring a new patch that Girl
     Scouts can earn by completing the program.  (Summit goals 1 and 3.)

      Department of Defense: The Army has modified its leave policy to make it
     easier for military and civilian personnel to volunteer in schools.
     Pursuant to its commitment, the Department of Defense is iricreasing high
     school enrollment in Junior ROTC Career Academies, an alternative to the
     regular high school JROTC program designed to address the special needs of
     at-risk youth.  (Summit goals 1, 2, and 4.)

      Department of Agriculture:  In September, the Vice President and
     Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman convened a National Summit on Food
     Recovery, to develop a national strategy to increase gleaning efforts by
     one-third by the year 2000.   (Summit goalS.)

      Department of Transportation: DOT has launched its new effort, the
     Garrett A. Morgan Technology & Transportation Futures Program. To date,
     DOT has heard from over 200 partners who want to join its effort to reach
     one million students by the year 2000. The program will offer these st
     udents better math, science, and technology skills and information about
     careers in technology and transportation.   (Summit goal 4.)

      Partnership with Schools: The Social Security Administration, the
     Department of Labor, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the
     Department of Transportation are among the agencies forging new
     partnerships with schools.  (Summit goals 1 and 4.)


