RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:21-0CT-1997 12:22:04.00

SUBJECT:   America Reads and testing stuff : read before POTUS briefing

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
1. Andy Blocker, Bob Shireman and I agree that we should discourage the
President from seriously engaging with Goodling on either America Reads or
testing--he is rapidly becoming irrelevant on the testing, and may be
bypassed by the appropriators on the reading initiative as well. This is
not the time to make him into more of a player, when he is doing so well
at reducing his influence.

2. There is a lot of "tea-leaf reading" about where Goodling is and what
he wants.  Best reading to date: he doesn't want to move a literacy bill
because he can't put one together that he will like and that has enough
support from his right and from the education groups to go anyplace.

We don't yet know what Goodling is going to do tomorrow when he marks-up a
literacy bill, but we continue to presume that he will include a provision
that prohibits the tests. (This may be a tactic that makes it easier for
him to lose the appropriations battle on the tests--he will still have
another game going)

3. The bill we had been working with him on was basically ok . It had a
decent balance between teacher training and tutoring; would enable
teachers to be trained in proven practices like Reading Recovery.

We and the education groups had one big problem with it, pertaining to a
requirment that schools identify approved tutors, let parents pick from
the approved list, and then the school pays the tutors for their tutoring
services. We view it as administratively unworkable; the ed groups also
view it as a voucher plan. However, this is the bill that isn't going
anyplace.

4. We don't yet have clear agreement within the Administration over how to
proceed on America Reads--whether to keep trying to get a bill, or work
with the appropriators to find a way to fund what we want through existing
authority. This is partly because we can't yet assess the liklihood of
getting a decent bill in the House.  If we thought we could get one, we'd
prefer that to using existing programs.  If we can't get something in the
House, there is much greater interest in using existing programs. No one
has yet thought of a strategy that begins with the Senate, and gets the
House to take what the Senate creates.


