 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

 CREATOR: Stephen C. Warnath ( WARNATH_S )     (CPC)

 CREATION DATE/TIME:22-0CT-1997 12:16:09.17

 SUBJECT: HOUSE APPROVES EXTENSION OF IMMIGRATION PROVISION -- FYI

 TO: Elena Kagan                             .( KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
 READ: NOT READ

 TO: Jose Cerda III                            CERDA J ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
 READ:NOT READ

 TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro                     SHlMABUKUR L ) Autoforward to: Remote Add
 READ: NOT READ

 TEXT:
 Date: 10/22/97 Time: 11:26
 IHouse approves extension of immigration provision
     WASHINGTON (AP)   The House today agreed to extend by two weeks
 an expiring statute that' allows illegal immigrants to remain in the
 United States while applying for legal residence in exchange for
 paying a $1,000 fine.
     Extension of the controversial provision was included in a
 stopgap spending bill that funds government operations through Nov.
 7, giving Congress more time to complete its appropriations
 process. The Senate is expected to take up similar legislation
 before Thursday's expiration of an earlier stopgap spending bill.
     House critics of the immigration measure abandoned their attempt
 to defeat the spending bill, which passed by voice vote, after
 being promised a separate vote on the provision next week.
     Opponents, led by Rep. Dana Rohrabacher, R-Calif., contend the
 statute fosters illegal immigration and improperly rewards people
 who broke the law by overstaying their visas or entering the
 country illegally. They say the measure also penalizes people who
 apply for visas overseas and often must wait years for permission
 to come here.
     --This provision is bad for our country because it undermines
 our laws,"  Rohrabacher said at a morning news conference.
     A Rohrabacher ally, Rep. Nathan Deal, R-Ga., termed the
 provision --in effect a government bribe. ' ,
     But supporters say the provision benefits only those already in
 position to secure their green card. It also pumps much-needed
 revenue into the coffers of the Immigration and Naturalization
 Service, bringing in an estimated $214 million this year, they
 note.
     --It does not give illegal immigrants the right to live in the
 United States," said Rep. Howard Berman, D-Calif. --The only issue
 it deals with is where they can adjust status."
     The statute is targeted at undocumented immigrants eligible for
 legal residence, either because theY're already in line for visas
 or are the spouse or minor child of a U.S. citizen. Parents of
 adult children who are U.S. citizens also can apply.
     Some 345,000 people took advantage of the rule in 1995 and 1996.
 This year, an estimated 214,000 have applied.
     The Senate has approved a permanent extension. But that
 approval, which wasn't matched on the House side, 'is included in an
 appropriations bill that has yet to be finalized.
     The Clinton administration supports continuation of the
     ARMS Email System
        <
                                                                           Page 2 of2


     provision, which was first enacted in 1994. The idea was twofold:
     Reduce the hardship on foreigners eligible to legalize their status
     and lessen the pressure on u.s; consulates overseas where
     immigrants previously applied.
     APNP-10-22-97 1129EDT


