      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL»

      CREATOR: Charles A. Blanchard { CN=Charles A. Blanchard/OU=ONDCP/O=EOP [ ONDCP 1

      CREATION DATE/TIME:23-0CT-1997 09:56:49.00

      SUBJECT:   ONDCP Update

      TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN=Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      I missed the Crime Meeting yesterday -- I had to attend a briefing of hill
      staff on our media campaign. The following is a brief summary of major
      activities at ONDCP:

      1. Reauthorization-~The Hastert reauthorization bill passed on a voice
      vote (it was on the suspension calendar).  The SAP opposed the bill, but
      did> not seek a veto. The Democrats did not seek a rollcall vote, but did
      attack the bill during their 20 minutes of debate. We understand from
      both House and Senate staff that the Senate reauthorization bill could
      come to the floor as early as next week.  The Senate bill is a Biden-Hatch
      compromise that has few of the problems that the Hastert bill has. Most
      notably, it does not have any numerical targets in statute.

      2. Youth Media Campaign -- We should shortly be able to go to the Hill
      with a proposal for our media campaign.  It is a three stage plan.  Phase
      I is a 12 city test phase that can begin almost immediately after
      approval. We have hired a contractor to do a comprehensive evaluation--we
      have 12 comparable control cities, are doing surveys before, during and
      after the campaign. Assuming that we go on the air on Dec. 1 with phase
      I, phase II will begin in late Feb.  It will be a nationwide media TV
      advertisement campaign based on a strategy developed by Porter Novelli,
      our media strategy contractor. We will , at the same time, put out one or
      more RFPs for a more comprehensive (i.e., using all forms of media, and
      not just TV) campaign. Once the RFP{s) are awarded, we go into the
      permanent campaign (phase :VII). We are now meeting with Hill staff, and
      will formally present our plan in the next week or so.  Let me know if you
      want to plan a POTUS or VPOTUS event around the commencement of any of
      these 3 phases.

      3. Performance Measures -- As you know, this is becoming an increasingly
      controversial proposal.  In my view, the resolution of this issue cannot
      be separated from what is happening at the Hill to our reauthorization
      bill. Yesterday, Janet Crist, John Carnevale and I met with Michael Deich
      (OMB) and all of his Deputies. The purpose of the meeting was to ensure
      that the performance measures are consistent with the budget process.   I
      think we made a great deal of progress -- it was a positive meeting.   I s
      till think that it would be a good idea for us to give OPD a formal
      briefing on this issue.

      4. Confirmations. The Senate Judiciary Committee has agreed to give a
      hearing on the confirmation of Tom Umberg (nominee for Deputy Director for
      Supply Reduction) and Robert Worshaw {nominee for Associate Director for


State and Local Affairs).   ,Most likely, the hearing will be November 3rd.

5. Crack Cocaine -- I have been meeting with DOJ to develop a detailed
long-term plan in light of the obvious fact that we have no Hill support
at this time fo'r our initiaitve. Once we have a draft document, I will'
send you and Karen Popp a copy. We will then have a larger meeting of the
working group to finalize the plan.  In the meantime, both DOJ and ONDCP
have been making preliminary contact with constituency groups that might
be willing to lend support.

Give me a call if you have any questions.

Chuck


