RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Eli G. Attie ( CN=Eli G. Attie/O=OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:23-0CT-1997 09:24:28.00

SUBJECT:   Draft of child care remarks for VP ...

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Lorraine A. Voles ( CN=Lorraine A. Voles/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Virginia M. Terzano ( CN=virginia M. Terzano/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ron Klain ( CN=Ron Klain/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
DRAFT; 10/23/97, 8:00 A.M.

Remarks by Vice President Al Gore
Child Care Conference
Thursday, October 22, 1997

        I want to personally thank all of you for joining us today at the
first-ever White House Conference on Child Care -- and I want to offer a
special word of gratitude to our First Lady, Hillary Clinton. No one has
a greater understanding of the challenges that face children and families
today. Her leadership is not only raising awareness of the need for safe
and affordable child care, it is leading us toward the kind of solutions
that will help millions of American families to be stronger, safer, and
better-prepared to live productive lives.

        Let me also say how sorry both Tipper and I are that. she could not
be here today. She has worked on this issue for a long time, and her
commitment to expanding child care is absolute.  She made me promise to
give her a full and detailed report on todayD,s conference -- so I hope
youD,ll all speak slowly and carefully; I may take a few notes.

        As many of you know, todayD,s discussions will carry far beyond
the reaches of this room. We are being joined by more than 110 satellite
link-ups in 44 states around the nation. And thereD,s a simple reason for
that overwhelming response: with more children being raised by working
parents than ever before, child care is an issue that touches all of our
lives. And I think it is emblematic of something even bigger.

        With the leadership of President Clinton and the First Lady, we
finally starting to realize that we need more of a focus on the American
family -- not rhetoric about it, -but a real understanding that the family
is the single most important entity in our society. The family is where
we turn first for help. And with all of todayD,s pressures, parents and
families need our help. They need more of the tools and resources to
balance the competing needs of the home and the workplace.

        ItO,s no accident that the Family Leave law was the first law this
President signed back. in 1993. ItO,s no accident that we just expanded
health care to half the uninsured children in America, the single greatest


expansion of childrenD,s health since Medicaid.  But talk to any working
parent, and almost the first words from their lips are D&child care.DB

        When they go to work in the morning, no parent should have about
whether their children are safe.  No parent should have to worry about
whether they can afford child care in the first place -- or whether their
child care center is providing a positive environment, with the
best-trained and most responsible staff.  That is why we are committed .to
ensuring throughout this nation safe and affordable child care .

      . And doing so will require parents, schools, child care centers,
community and religious groups, and government at every level working
together, in a real partnership.

        WeD,re working very hard to do our part. We increased funding for
child care subsidies by 70%. We expanded and improved the quality of Head
Start. We created D&Early Head StartDB       so the very youngest children
get the help they need to learn and to grow.

        But itO,s not just the quantity of child care that matters, itO,s
also the quality. Today, about half of all non-regulated child care
providers offer care that has been rated D&inadequate.DB When we allow
our children to spend their formative years in substandard child care, we
are truly robbing their chance at a brighter future. ThatD,s why
established the Child Care Bureau at the Department of Health and Human
Services -- to streamline child care operations and improve the quality
and efficiency of service.

        Quality also means ensuring that our children are healthy and
safe. Believe me, as a father of four, I know that young children are
experts at finding trouble. And I also know that kids pass colds and the
flu and other infectious diseases to one another with incredible
frequency. Our child care centers must be clean, healthy environments,
run by people who are knowledgeable, caring, and responsible.  Once again,
weD,ve tried to play our part. We launched the Healthy Child Care America
Initiative, that brought health care services and child care providers
together in cooperation.  Earlier this summer, President Clinton proposed
that child care regulations be strengthened so that all children in
federally subsidized child care receive the right immunizations.

        Unfortunately, the risks to our children donD,t always get smaller
as they get older.  Every week, nearly 5 million school children spend
time as latch-key kids, without any adult supervision.

        At best, they walk home alone, returning to empty houses. At
worst, they end up on the streets, getting into trouble.  Children from 12
to 17 have the greatest risk of being involved with violent crime, either
as perpetrators or as victims, between the hours of 2 and 6 -- that great
wasteland of time when school is out, but parents are still at work. We
need more quality after-school programs, to give children something to say
D&yesDB to.

        Over 2,700 school districts around the nation are using funds from
the Safe and Drug-Free Schools Act to support after-school programs that
keep kids away from drugs. Many of the companies and non-profit groups
that made commitments at the President sO, Service have become involved in
mentoring and after-school programs. The PresidentD,s Anti-Gang and Youth
Violence Act calls for a thousand new after-school initiatives around the
country -- and I urge Congress to pass it into law.


        But as I said, this is a partnership and we all have a role to
play. This afternoonD,s session is about listening to the ideas all of
you bring to that partnership -- to see what makes your models so
successful. All around this nation, innovative approaches to after-school
activities are bringing real results.

         When I was a boy, I was a member of the 4-H club back in
Tennes·see. At the time, 4-H was geared toward kids in rural agricultural
areas like my home in Carthage. [TELL ANECDOTE ABOUT YOUR TIME IN 4-H?J
Today, the 4-H After School Activity Program enrolls over 1,200 youth in
the city of Los Angeles, creating a safe haven for inner-city children.
OVer 85 percent of the parents involved claim the program has kept their
children out of gangs.   They see more responsible attitudes in their
children, and a real improvement in their performance at school.

          Tipper and I heard another powerful example at our annual Family
  Conference this June.  Susan Gendrich-Cameron, the principal at Cason Lane
. Academy in Murfreesboro, Tennessee, told us about her school -- open five
  days per week, year round, from 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. Eighty percent of the
  students participate in activities ranging from an optional full-day of
  learning, to arts and sports.

        It was our First Lady who reminded us that, on so many of the
challenges facing children and families, it truly does take a village. We
can lift up our children -- we can help parents succeed at home and at
work -- we can reach the day when quality, affordable child care is a fact
if life, not a subject of debate. That is why your presence here today is
so critical. And this is just the beginning.

         Now ID,d like to introduce the man who sits at the PresidentD,s
 cabinet table, and champions the needs of AmericaD,s children -- my good
 friend, Secretary of Education Dick Riley.


