 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ] )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:23-0CT-1997 17:54:47.00

 SUBJECT:   labor smoke

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ] )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Unions Sue Over Tobacco-Related Health Expenses

 union attorneys borrow a page from state suits filed by attorneys general.

                               BY BOB VAN VORIS

                   NATIONAL LAW JOURNAL STAFF REPORTER

 The National Law Journal (p. AD1)
 Monday, October 27, 1997

      WHEN NEGOTIATORS SAT down to carve up   $368.5 billion in tobacco
 industry
      spoils this spring, Washington, D.C.,   lawyer Robert J. Connerton was
 not invited. But
      Mr. Connerton, who says he represents   more than 23 million union
 members, may
      soon find himself right in the middle   of the tobacco debate.

      In April, Mr. Connerton's firm, Conner ton & Ray, began filing
 statewide class actions
      against the tobacco industry to recover money spent on
 tobacco-related diseases by
      union health care trust funds. The cases, modeled after Medicaid
 cost-recovery suits
      brought by 40 attorneys general, have been filed in 28 states, with
 ore expected soon.

      "I would characterize them as sort of knock-offs of the [attorney
 general] cases," says
      Thomas F. McKim, a lawyer for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., the
 second-largest
      cigarette manufacturer in the United States.

      The description is not entirely unjust. The causes of action are very
 similar, and some of
      the health care funds' court papers appear to borrow generously from
 the attorney
      general complaints. There are worse examples to follow, however.

      The attorney general actions have forced unprecedented concessions
 from the tobacco
      industry, including settlements in Mississippi and Florida of $3.6
 billion and $11.3     .
      billion, respectively.



      The funds' lawyers dismiss the idea that the attorneys general have
 an exclusive right to
      pursue the industry in this fashion. On the contrary, they say, the
 more parties working
      against Big Tobacco, the better.

 A Mixed Cast

      In contrast to the so-called Castano group--a Who's Who of
 plaintiffs' lawyers that
      filed smokers' class actions across the country and participated in
 the global settlement
      talks--an unusual mix of litigators, labor lawyers and specialists in
 ERISA and trust
      funds are representing the health care funds.

      Mr. Connerton's firm, which employs just 13 lawyers and three
 lobbyists, is best
      known for its expertise in labor and employee-benefits issues,
 although at least two
      partners have litigated toxic-tort cases. Consequently, Connerton &
 Ray has enlisted
      as co-counsel, among others, two New York-based litigation firms,
 Weitz &
      Luxenberg P.C. and Milberg Weiss Bershad Hynes & Lerach L.L.P.

      The funds they represent provide medical coverage for people employed
 by small firms
      or who work at trades like construction, in which workers frequently
 move from
      employer to employer. Employers under collective bargaining
 agreements provide the
      money for the funds, which are administered by boards divided equally
 between union
      and industry representatives.

      Federal law prevents the funds from spending money on anything other
 than members'
      health care and administrative expenses. As a result, fund lawyers
 say, any money
      recovered from the tobacco industry will go directly to union
 members' health care.
      "There is a far more direct relationship between payment of union
 members' medical
      expenses than between an [attorney general) and [a state's)
 citizens," says Melvyn I .
      Weiss, of Milberg Weiss.

      Mr. Connerton says the funds also spend a greater proportion of their
 total payments
      on smoking-related illnesses than do the state Medicaid funds. "The
 class of people we
      represent is exactly the group [the tobacco companies) have been targ
 eting," says Mr.
      Connerton. He quotes statistics ,suggesting that the blue-collar
 workers participating in
      union health care funds are more likely t'o smoke- -and smoke
 heavily--and less likely
      to quit than the average American. He says the annual cost of


 treating smoking-related
      diseases among participants in union .health care funds nationwide is
 $3.3 billion--a cost
      he believes Big Tobacco should bear.

 Genesis of the Union Suits

      In the fall of 1996, says Mr. Connerton, faced with the example of
 state attorneys
      general suing to recoup Medicaid funds paid to treat sick smokers, he
 determined that
      his union clients could go after the tobacco industry on a similar
 theory. But complaints
      could not be filed until the spring, after fund trustees--who
 typically meet only four
      times a year--had a chance to consider the litigation and give Mr.
 Conner ton a green
      light.

      "All of a sudden, we started reading in the newspapers about the
 possibility of a
      settlement, and we started hearing we were going to be cut out," says
 Steven E.
      Fineman, of Weitz & Luxenberg, which signed on as co-counsel with,
 Connerton &
      Ray in six eastern states and the District of Columbia. The group
 hustled to get as many
      cases filed as possible in. an effort to keep the funds from being
 shut out, he says. By
      June 20, the day the global proposal was announced, they had filed in
 11 states. Their
      fears of being cut out were justified. If enacted by Congress as is,
 the global settlement
      would effectively doom the health care fund cases, ending class
 actions, outlawing
      punitive damages and .imposing other restrictions that would make the
 suits nearly
      impossible to try, much less win.

       Conversely, the fund cases threaten to unravel the proposed
 settlement. "To sell the
       deal, they have to keep all other comers away from the door," says
 Victor J. Van
       Bourg, of Van Bourg, Weinberg, Roger & Rosenfeld, in Oakland, Calif.
 The firm is
       co-counsel on the first health care fund case, filed in California in
 April. Van Bourg
       Weinberg is also co-counsel in cases brought in Arizona and Hawaii.

      "I'm not looking to blow up a settlement the others have worked out,"
 says Mr. weiss.
      "I think the tobacco industry has more ability to pay than the $368
 billion reflects. That
      $368 billion is really just a drop in the bucket." R. J. Reynolds'
 Mr. McKim says the
      health care fund suits are unlikely to affect any global resolution.
 "I don't think they're a
      threat to the settlement," he says. "They have so little legal
 merit."


      So far, none of the cases has progressed far enough for its merits to
 be tested. Those in
      Washington, Oregon and California are the furthest along, but no
 judge has decided
      whether a class can be certified.

 Army of Lobbyists

      On the legislative front, four lobbyists are working to ensure that
 the funds are not shut
      out by a global settlement. And lawyers involved in- the funds'
 tobacco cases have met
      with members of Congress and Clinton administration officials. They
 will have to speak
      loudly to be heard over the army of lobbyists pushing the proposed
 global settlement
      on behalf of the tobacco industry, the attorneys general and some
 plaintiffs' lawyers.
      "The tobacco lobby has hired almost every lobbyist in town. If I have
 any unemployed                                        -
                                   .
      friends, I send them over," says Mr. Connerton .

      The union fund lobbyists appear to be ~aking some headway. Sen. Frank
 Lautenberg,
      D-N.J., has made comments indicating support. So has Minnesota's
 Attorney General
      Hubert H. Humphrey III, an outspoken critic of the global pact.

      Many cities and counties, like the health care funds, were frozen out
 of the negotiations
      and stand to'have their cases eliminated if the global settlement is
 enacted without
      change. Sixteen California cities and counties, including San Fran
 cisco and Los
      Angeles, have sued the tobacco industry. Lawsuits have also been
 brought by New
      York, Erie County, N.Y., and Cook County, Ill. Birmingham, Ala., has
 filed a federal
      class action on behalf of cities and counties nationwide.

      Like lawyers for the cities and counties, those representing the
 funds predict that any
      legislative settlement cutting them out will be vulnerable to
 challenge on appeal. "They
      want to eliminate our lawsuits without giving us a penny," says Mr.
 Van Bourg.
      "Downright un-American, I say."i


