 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:24-0CT-1997 10:32:50.00

 SUBJECT:   what the President thinks too

 TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 TRB FROM WASHINGTON: CHOOSE
 OR LOSE

 By Jonathan Rauch

 The trouble with Washington--oh, all right, a trouble--is that there is so
 little correspondence
 between nice ideas and nice people. My North Carolina friends tell me that
 if you want an amiable
 fishing companion for a weekend, you could hardly do better than Jesse
 Helms. On the other hand,
 every so often a flint-eyed curmudgeon gets it right. Take Congressman
 Charles Taylor of North
 Carolina. In an article not long ago, The Washington Post portrayed
 Taylor, a Republican who
 grudgingly doles out federal appropriations for the District of Columbia,
 as a steel-sided,
 cold-hearted man whose "disdain" for the District is "palpable." As if
 that were not enough, among
 his steel-sided, cold-hearted, hard-nosed suggestions was one that the
 District should adopt
 educational vouchers, so that parents "can vote with their feet and escape
 this abysmal system." To
 that end, he mischievously tucked 2,000 "scholarships" into his
 appropriations bill, with the noisy
 support of the House Republican leadership and to the predictable and
 continuing outrage of the
 White House and the Democrats.

 I've always found it a little odd that liberals hand the voucher idea to
 Republicans like Taylor and
 Newt Gingrich, rather than grabbing it for themselves. It is true that in
 many places vouchers are a
 solution in search of a problem: it's hard to get excited about improving
 rich suburban high schools
 that act as feeders for Ivy League colleges. However, for poor children,
 trapped in execrable
 schools, the case is moral rather than merely educational. These kids
 attend schools which cannot
 protect their physical safety, much less teach them. To require poor
 people to go to dangerous,
 dysfunctional schools that better-off people fled years ago, and that
 better-off people would never
 tolerate for their own children--all the while intoning pieties about
 "saving" public education--is


 worse than unsound public policy. It is repugnant public policy.

 Moreover, the arguments against school choice are as intellectually flimsy
 as any set of arguments in
 public policy today. Will choice destroy the public school system?
 Competing with Toyota did not
 destroy GM, and it certainly did not do GM's.customers any harm. Our
 higher education system is
 voucherized, inasmuch as you can take your federal loans.and scholarships
 anywhere, and our public
 universities are none the worse for that. Interestingly, we have no
 gun-ridden, educationally
 dysfunctional state universities--not one. Imagine that.

 will choice leave the weakest students or the most ignorant parents
 isolated in rotten schools? The
 hostage-taking philosophy implicit in this argument--Iock some in because
 others may not have the
 sense or ability to leave--is ethically peculiar, to say the least. But
 set that aside. If you believe that
 educational competition will make the system worse for those who cannot
 leave, then you should
 also believe that automotive competition has left millions of Americans
 stuck buying rattletrap Fords
 and Chevies that are worse than the 1978 models. Faced with the imminent
 flight of their customers,
 public schools will scream at first, and then flounder and then, as a last
 resort, begin to get their act
 together.

 With choice, will taxpayers pour money into second-rate, fad-ridden,
 educationally dubious
 institutions? will children end up in schools where history is bizarrely
 Afrocentric, math puts
 "reasoning" ahead of right answers, books are dumbed down, academics are
 downplayed, and
 standards are otherwise poor? What a shame if anything like that ever
 happened! It is hard to see
 how people will be made worse off by the chance to decide whether to keep
 what they have now or
 try something that they may like better. Some parents will pick bad
 schools, but surely that is better
 than letting bad schools pick parents.

 "In the first independent evaluation of Cleveland's groundbreaking school
 voucher program," The
 New York Times reported recently, "a Harvard University study has found
 that the program was
 very popular with parents and raised the scores of those students tested
 at the ·end of the first year."
 Another study, reported in The Public Interest, finds that choice not only
 improves schools but
 strengthens parents' ties to them. In fact, if there is any objection that
 makes real sense, it comes not
 from the education establishment but from the libertarian right:· when all
 students get government
 vouchers, all schools may gradually become government schools.

 Maybe, but in the District of Columbia, now is not the time to worry about
 preserving the integrity of


    private education. We're talking about a public school system which, as
    the District's financial
    control board reported when taking over the schools late last year, loses
    40 percent of its students
    between grades nine and graduation; whose superintendent's budget is four
    times the average of
    neighboring districts; whose board of education budget is larger than
    Chicago's, though Chicago has
    five times as many students; which spends much more per student than the
    national average, though
    it couldn't say how much because the system did not know how many students
    it had. What does all
    that money buy? According to the control board, the longer students stay
    in the D.C. schools, the
    "less likely they are to succeed educationally." What baffles me most
    about vouchers is liberals'
    resistance to them, a fact which reflects more poorly on liberalism than
    any other fact I know. The
    case for school vouchers is the classic case of consumers against
    monopolies, the case that Ralph
    Nader and the Consumers Union taught us all in the 1970s. Vouchers are
    also a classic opportunity
    to equalize opportunity. Why should the poor be denied more control over
    their most important
    means of social advancement, when soccer moms and latte-drinkers take for
    granted that they can
    buy their way out of a school (or a school district) that abuses or annoys
    them?

    No one, of course, expects the Democrats to reverse their position on
    school choice overnight. That
    is not how politics works. What is disturbing, though, is their adamant
    refusal even to entertain the
    idea. In a political movement or party, real corruption, as opposed to the
    pettifogging kind, comes
    when the leaders place the interests of pOliticians and public-service
    providers over the interests of
    their constituents, especially their poorest and weakest constituents. By
    embracing school choice--if
    not everywhere, then at least somewhere--libera1s could at one stroke
    emancipate the District's
    schoolchildren while also emancipating liberalism from that basest sort of
    corruption. Now is a
    moment, one might add, when the Democratic Party could do with looking a
    little less corrupt.

    JONATHAN RAUCH

    Jonathan Rauch is author of Demosclerosis: The Silent Killer of American
    Goyernment (Times
    Books) .

    (Copyright 1997, The New Republic)


    Table of Contents:
     The New Republic


