 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP   [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:24-0CT-1997 10:36:35.00

 SUBJECT:   ivory towers

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: -Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 This may be a phony issue, but maybe not.  In any event, it's the sort of
 phony issue we would normally be'doing a lot about.

 COLLEGE COP-OUT: CLOSING THE
 BOOKS ON CAMPUS CRIME

 By Robyn Gearey

 You're a high-school senior, or maybe the parent of one, and you're
 weighing an application to the
 University of Pennsylvania. It's Ivy League all right, but it's an urban
 campus--right there in the heart
 of Philadelphia--and, well, it doesn't have the greatest reputation for
 safety. So you ask the school
 for a copy of its crime statistics. When the university obliges, you find
 that there were no murders,
 just a handful of rapes in the past three years, and a mere eighteen armed
 robberies in 1995. That
 doesn't sound quite as bad as you thought.

 But it turns out the University of Pennsylvania has neglected to inform
 you of a few small things. Like
 the fact that, according to campus police logs, the number of armed
 robberies in 1995 was closer to
 two hundred. Like the fact that these statistics do not include the
 shooting of Patrick Leroy, a senior
 who was shot on one of the main walkways through campus on September 25,
 1996. Why has
 Penn been so circumspect? Maybe because it's trying to keep up with the
 competition.

 Schools neglect to report as many as 75 percent of the crimes committed on
 their campuses,
 according to one recent study. A handful of watchdog groups,' led by the
 Pennsylvania-based
 Security on Campus (SOC), are trying to change this: in 1990, pressure fro
 m the group helped --
 convince Congress to pass the Student Right-to-Know and Campus Security
 Act (CSA). The law
 requires schools to compile annual crime statistics from both campus
 police and other school
 officials, and then distribute the data to students and staff--as well as


any prospective students or
staff who request it. But based on interviews with activists, federal
officials, and college
administrators, it seems clear that only a small percentage of colleges
are in full compliance with the
law.

College officials complain, with some reason, that they face conflicting
legal mandates: while CSA
requires schools to make information about crime public, there is also the
1974 Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act (ferpa), which prevents schools receiving federal
funding from releasing a
student's educational record without his permission. Many college
officials have interpreted that to
extend to records of disciplinary proceedings concerning alleged crimes
committed on campus. But
two state supreme courts have ruled--quite rightly--that ferpa's privacy
provisions don't preclude
reporting anonymous statistics. And it's hard to believe the colleges have
only the students' interests
at heart when they fail to meet even the less controversial demands of the
law. A 1996 study
conducted by University of Cincinnati professor Bonnie Fisher and her
colleague Chunmeng Lu
found that just 37 percent of the 785 schools surveyed complied with the
unambiguous requirement
that crime statistics be made available to prospective students.

Recently the Department of Education has investigated a handful of schools
accused of not
complying with the law. According to the Department, Moorhead University,
a Minnesota school
with over 6,000 students, underestimated its annual crime rate and under
reported illegal incidents at
fraternities. After some back-and-forth between the school and the
government, federal officials
reexamined Moorhead's compliance several months later. Again, the
university failed to pass muster:
"We believe that the institution has not demonstrated a serious commitment
to its obligations under
the Campus Security Act and has discounted the seriousness of the issues
raised by this office."

Soon the Education Department cited other schools: Virginia Tech had
neither "accurately compiled"
nor "accurately disclosed" crimes at its Blacksburg, Virginia, campus; in
particular, the school had
not disclosed an alleged rape in September 1994. Miami University of Ohio
was cited for violating
six separate CSA provisions: it had "fail[ed] to properly gather the
required crime statistics from all
pertinent sources," and its office of judicial affairs was not reporting
crimes "as a general policy."

The "University of Pennsylvania is one of two schools that remain under
scrutiny (the other is
Clemson University in South Carolina) and it's not hard to see why.
According to The Philadelphia
Inquirer, the school routinely fails to report crimes that occur on the


streets and sidewalks connecting
campus buildings as well as on property the school leases to businesses.
For example, there are the
discrepancies, reported by the Inquirer, between university police records
on robberies and Penn's
1995 crime report. And then there is the fact that Penn excluded the
shooting of Patrick Leroy from
its report the following year. The university's explanation for the
omission: technically speaking, the
shooting was on a public walkway that traverses the campus.

Penn is also awaiting another judgment: the Daily Pennsylvanian newspaper
reports that a former
student is suing the school on grounds that university officials neither
reported nor acted on a rape
charge she filed with a university police officer in November 1994. The
plaintiff claims that she was
dissuaded from filing criminal charges because the university assured her
it would handle the matter.
According to the article, the university claims the rape never occurred,
despite a statement from the
officer at the time that a sexual assault complaint had been made.

One can certainly sympathize with college officials struggling to balance
the requirement to release
crime figures and the need to protect student privacy. Indeed,
representatives from the colleges
under investigation counter the Education Department's charges by saying
that the reporting
requirements are ambiguous. For example, CSA does not explicitly say that
crimes committed on
public roads or walkways need to be reported--even if those paths are
heavily traveled by students
and within campus boundaries. And many college officials also realize that
violating a student's right
to privacy invites lawsuits.

But one reason to question the colleges' explanations is that many
institutions actively discourage
victims from reporting crimes--even to campus police. A 1992 survey of
campus police and security
personnel condficted by William Whitman, director of the Campus Safety and
Security Institute,                      .
found that "students who were victims of reportable violent crimes"· were
encouraged "not to report
the crimes to campus police/security. If the attacker was another student,
they encouraged the victim
to use the campus judicialsystem"--where, of course, it's easier to keep
things quiet. Sheldon
Steinbach, vice president and general counsel for the American Council on
Education (ACE), denies
that schools would do that, but Whitman reported that "several [college)
Directors of Security were
told they could look for a new job if they ever revealed the institution's
true statistics." The Education
Department hasn't always helped matters, either. According to a March
General Accounting Office
report, "the Department has been slow to monitor compliance" with CSA and
was over a year late
in submitting a required report on campus crime to congress. More


seriously; GAO charged that,
although the Department and independent auditors had identified violations
at sixty- three colleges
since the law's enactment, the Department failed to impose sanctions
against any of the violators.

The Education Department blames these failures on a confusion over
reporting requirements and
difficulties getting complete data from colleges. However, Department
officials have also contributed
to the general confusion over what colleges are required to do under CSA.
In April of 1994, the
Department ruled that privacy laws should not prevent schools from
releasing statistics of how many
crimes occurred, so long as those statistics did not include names or
other identifying details. Then,
this July, the Ohio supreme court issued a broad ruling that disciplinary
records do not qualify as       .
educational records--and, thus, cannot be kept confidential. You'd think
the Education Department
would applaud such a ruling. Not so. Apparently alarmed that a state court
had made too sweeping
a rejection of the privacy provisions in ferpa, an Education Department
official sent a letter to several
colleges in Ohio, criticizing the court's ruling. Whatever the intent of
that letter, the effect was to give
colleges added credibility in their claim that ferpa laws trump crime
reporting laws.

Congress may soon step in to rectify what the universities and the
Department of Education have
not. The reason has a lot· to do with Ben Clery and his parents, Howard and
Connie, who, in 1987,
founded Security on Campus after Ben's sister Jeanne was beaten, raped,
and murdered in her dorm
room at Lehigh University. Through its sponsorship of the CSA, the group
has almost
single-handedly forced the issue of campus crime into the spotlight.
Before CSA was passed, most
colleges did not compile crime statistics at all: fewer than 5 percent
submitted information to the
FBI's voluntary crime reporting program.

Because many colleges still seem to be shirking their reporting
responsibilities, Security on Campus
is now promoting another measure: the Accuracy in Campus Crime Reporting
Act (accra),
introduced this February in the House by Tennessee Republican John Duncan.
In theory, accra
would clear up any lingering confusion over just what CSA covers. accra
would say explicitly which
campus officials must document criminal incidents for inclusion in the
CSA-required annual report. It
also would require that colleges submit these statistics to the Education
Department, which would
make them available to the public. The bill's more controversial
provisions would require colleges to
maintain open crime logs and to make campus judicial hearings open to the
public. And, for the first
time, violations of the law would provoke mandatory sanctions: at least 1


percent of the school's
federal funding per violation.

Congress held preliminary hearings on the proposal in July, in conjunction
with the reauthorization of
the Higher Education Act, and more hearings are scheduled for later this
month. But while the bill
has fifty-nine co-sponsors in the House, it has a formidable opponent in
ACE, which represents
some 3,600 postsecondary schools. "Some [of the law's proposals] are
highly destructive," says
ACE's Steinbach. Especially in hard-to-prosecute sexual assault cases, he
argues, a campus court
may be the only recourse available--and many victims even prefer it.
"Students often want the
judicial procedure because it's a confidential setting," says Steinbach,
who is similarlY troubled by the
open-court requirement:. "Imagine this," Steinbach says ominously, "you're
alleging a rape and all the
guy's frat brothers show up at the hearing. How willing are people going
to be to testify if they're
intimidated?"

On the issue of reporting crime, Steinbach is equally skeptical. These
officials "aren't trained in how
to determine what is a crime." Furthermore, he points out, "Some students
may want to talk to
someone [about an incident] but not report it. This could discourage
students from seeking
counseling" and, in cases where a crime is only reported to a school
counselor, "threaten the
doctor-patient relationship."

ACE has been lobbying hard against the bill, as have such smaller groups
as the National
Association of Student Personnel Administrators. In a four-page letter to
accra's sponsor, several of
the measure's opponents wrote, "We are concerned that [accra]· may not
provide the most effective
solution" to campus crime problems. The bill's reporting requirements, the
letter said, would have a
"chilling effect on victims" and·be "unduly burdensome" for college
authorities. Having the Education
Department act as a central repository for annual crime reports is "a
waste of taxpayer money"; and
opening records of criminal activity "will have a devastating impact" on
accused students.

Concern over the proposal to open campus disciplinary proceedings to the
public may be plausible,
but opposition to the reporting of anonymous statistics seems pretty
indefensible. Students and
parents have a right to know how prevalent crime on campus is. Several
courts have said so, as has
Congress. Steinbach scoffs that "Security on Campus is obsessed with
reporting as if reporting is a
panacea for campus crime." But the disclosure laws are not about reducing
crime--they're about
making educated choices more effective. You'd think that's a goal
universities and colleges would

SUpport.

 (Copyright 1997, The New Republic)


