RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Stephen C. Warnath ( WARNATH_S )     (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME:13-DEC-1996 16:42:16.56

SUBJECT: Tuesday meetings

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

CC: Jeremy D. Benami                          BENAMI J    (WHO)
READ:13-DEC-1996 17:29:12.33

CC: Diana M. Fortuna                          FORTUNA D    (OPD)
READ:13-DEC-1996 17:11:56.48

TEXT:

Elena -- I left you a long voice mail about having two follow-up
meetings: First, a meeting on the charitable organizations
definition at 2pm Tuesday in rm 211.   Second, federal public
benefits definition at 4pm Tuesday in rm 211.
For charitable organizations, we want to decide how best to handle
this in the guidance. Right now the agencies are just identifying
various interpretations based upon some legislative drafting
ambiguity and the lack of preciseness of what constitutes a
charitable organization. They haven't bitten the bullet to
recommend a course of action here.   The agencies who care about
this were asked to firm up their legal analysis of options for
Tuesday's meeting. We have also received a memo from the
Georgetown Law Center and and Catholic Charities today that sets
out some legal/policy issues to consider and we need to get that
to you to look over.
On federal public benefits, DOJ and HHS have been working on this.
We also have a memo prepared pro bono by Arnold & Porter that is
worth looking at -- Randy Moss has a copy of this that he can
provide to you.  It looks like we may end up with a preliminary
definition that will be refined and supplemented later. HHS in
particular pas been exploring this option.   This meeting is to
make some decisions and wrap this up.

I have asked Hayashi and OLC to be prepared to assist make sure
these meetings unfold in a productive way.

On timing:   I continued a hard line on the need to do this for
January 1st in today's meeting.   But there is no way this is going
to be cleared and ready for a proper release by that time, in my
opinion. And the problem is that if this is not done right we
will contribute to the problem and raise the level of anxiety,
confusion, and uncertainty.   INS observed that we have already
been tolerating the possibility of verification proceeding without
federal guidance, so we should be willing to allow two weeks into
January to do this right. HHS noted that getting this finalized
and cleared and doing the necessary preparing for release (Q & As
or whatever)   -- especially with many sensitive issues -- during
the Christmas week is an impossibility. Obviously some drafting
continues into next week. We will meet with some outside groups
at the end of next week for further input that will certainly
require some additional thinking.   Then many crucial people leave


for all parts of the country.   I am raising this so that you all
might have a discussion about how this should be handled at this
point.
Thanks.
.-
