      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN;Jose Cerda III/OU;OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:13-NOV-1997 20:53:19.00

      SUBJECT:    Draft Radio Address

      TO: Christa Robinson ( CN;Christa Robinson/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Leanne A. Shimabukuro ( CN;Leanne A. Shimabukuro/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN;Bruce N. Reed/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
      In case you all want to see the draft for tomorrow's radio address.

              Jose'
      ---------------------- Forwarded by Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP on 11/13/97
      08:52 PM ---------------------------



                 Jordan Tamagni
                 11/13/97 08:46:51 PM

      Record Type: Record

      To: Jose Cerda III/OPD/EOP
      cc:
      Subject: Draft


      PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
      RADIO ADDRESS ON
      DECREASING CRIME RATES
      November 15, 1997

       Good morning.  Today I want to talk about the important progress we are
      making in our fight against crime -- and the steps we are taking to build
      on that progress.

       Our families can only thrive if they are free from the fear of crime and
      violence. Over the past five years, we have done everything we can to
      give them that security. We put in place a comprehensive plan to fight
      crime with 100,000 more community police officers, tougher punishments,
      and better prevention.

       Three years since we passed the Crime Bill, we know our strategy is
      working. Allover the country, crime has dropped a record five years in a
      row. Today, we have even more dramatic proof of our progress: In 1996,
      crime rates fell to their lowest recorded level in nearly 25 years.
      Property crime is down.  Violent crime is down. And in one year alone,
      murder dropped by 10% -- the largest decrease in 4 years.  In our cities,
,>



     in our suburbs, in our rural communties -- for all races, for all incomes
     groups, and for men and women alike -- crime is down ... and hope is up.

      This remarkable progress is no accident -- our hard work made it happen.
     And community policing is at the center of our success.  In only 3 years,
     we have already funded 65,000 new police officers, and we are well on our
     way to meeting our goal of putting a full 100,000 police officers on our
     streets.

      Those police officers will tell you that another critical element of our
     success has been our on-going effort to ban assault weapons.  But as
     effective as the assault weapons ban has been, we know that some overseas
     manufacturers are modifying their guns to get around the ban and get those
     guns into the country.

      We did not fight as hard as we did to pass the assault weapons ban only
     to let a few gun manufacturers sidestep our laws and undermine our
     progress. Today, I am directing the Secretary of the Treasury to
     immediately suspend the importation of 30 different types of modified
     assault weapons for 120 days, while we study whether these modified
     weapons have legitimate sporting purposes. And any weapon that fails to
     meet that test will not come into this country.

      Assault weapons in the hands of civilians exist for no reason but to
     inspire fear and wreak deadly havoc.  They donO,t belong on our streets,
     or in our school yards.  That is why we banned them three years ago, and
     that is why we are acting to make that ban even stronger.

      WeO,re going to continue to do everything we can to crack down on illegal
     firearms, and the drug lords and terrorists who traffick in them.
     Yesterday, President Zedillo of Mexico and I signed an international
     convention that will strengthen illegal gun laws throughout our
     hemisphere, and give law enforcement agents important new tools to stem
     the flow of illegal firearms.

      Working together over the past five years, we have proven that we can
     drive down the crime rates. Now we must press on, confident that we can
     take back our streets from crime, restore our confidence, and give our
     families the security they deserve.

      Thanks for listening.


