RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:14-NOV-1997 17:32:22.00

SUBJECT:   Education Weekly report

TO: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Here it is.   Elena--note the extensive DPC involvement in the Chaka-Fatah
proposal!

California Bilingual Education Ballot Initiative: Opponents of bilingual
education in California have submitted petition signatures for a ballot
initiative that would end bilingual education programs and require that
children be taught in English unless a parent requests bilingual
instruction. DPC has been leading a White House and Education Department
effort to monitor this situation and determine whether and when it might
be appropriate to take a position on this initiative. Over the coming
weeks we will continue to review the legal, educational and political
issues involved, and present you with a detailed analysis.

Urban Education: DPC staff met with senior representatives of several
national organizations interested in urban education, including the
Council of Great City Schools, the u.s. Conference of Mayors, the National
Urban League, the Rainbow Coalition, the AFT and NEA, and MALDEF. They
were briefed on education proposals under consideration for FY 1999,
including the College-School Partnership initiative to increase college
enrollment among low income and minority students by providing mentoring
and other support service, and a standards-based reform initiative that
would challenge urban districts to institute policies that end social
promotions, require intervention in failing schools, and move incompetent
teachers out of the profession.  In general these proposals were well r
eceived, though they provoked considerable debate about student
accountability. The AFT felt strongly that even the mentoring initiative
should include a requirement that students meet some academic performance
requirements, while the civil rights groups were opposed to this in any
form.


