RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-NOV-1997 19:48:31.00

SUBJECT:     Minor Revisions in Bold

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 11/19/97 7:00pm
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR HEALTH CARE EVENT
THE WHITE HOUSE
November 20, 1997

           Acknowledgments: VP Gore; Sec. Herman; Sec. Shalala; Commissioner Peter
Thomas.

        I want to 'thank the Commission for the remarkable job they have
done to build consensus on this challenging issue.   I am proud to accept
the CommissionO,s Health Care Bill of Rights.   I commit to doing
everything I can to make those rights real for every American. And I
challenge the Congress to make them the law of the land.

        Throughout our nationO,s history, our strength has come from the
strength of our families, and from our ability to keep our values of
opportunity and freedom alive in each new time. Those values were
enshrined in AmericaO,s Bill of Rights. And as times have changed, our
challenges have changed, and our nation has acted.  Thirty five years ago,
during another time of change, the modern consumer movement was launched
when President Kennedy set forth a consumer bill of rights. The laws
passed to protect those rights -- consumersO, right to be safe, to be
informed, to choose, and to be heard -- protect our children, our
investments, and our environment to this day.

        Today, American families once again face changing times -- and
nowhere are these changes more profound than in the health care industry.
The American health care system is the best in the world -- we have the
worldO,s best health care professionals, the finest medical schools, the
most advanced research and the most sophisticated technology. But in
recent years, that system has changed as thousands of employers have
switched health care plans to HMOs and other new kinds of health care
plans.

        In many cases, managed care brings lower costs and improved
preventive care. But too often, families feel lost in this new world, left
out of the process of their own health care decisions. Too often, they
feel as if they are getting fewer real services and more red tape. And
far too often, they feel as if they are on the losing side of a battle
between cutting costs and quality care.

        When lowered costs lead to lower standards ... when life-or-death
medical decisions are made by distant case managers " . when vital
treatments are not even considered because they donO,t appear on a
prescribed list, then something is wrong, and we have an obligation to do
something about it.


        Today, Americans receive consumer protection when they purchase
cars, use credit cards, or even buy toys for their children.   Now we must
extend the same kind of protections to a person who visits a doctor,
checks into a hospital, or buys a health plan. Whether they have
traditional health care or managed care, we must make sure that none of
our people ever have inferior care.  There must be basic standards that
every American can count on, wherever they live and whatever their needs
-- and these standards should be the right of every citizen.

       Here is our Health Care Bill of Rights:

        The right to be informed about your health plan in terms you can
understand; the right to choose a doctor who meets your health care needs
in every situation; the right to medical services in an emergency,
wherever and whenever the need arises; the right to know all your medical
options -- whether or not they are on a pre-approved list; the right to
respectful care and equal treatment at every health care facility, by
every health care provider; the right to know your medical records are
confidential and are only used for legitimate purposes; the right to seek
redress grievances and concerns about the qual.ity of care you receive.

        These standards are long overdue -- now, we must act to make them
real for all       Americans.  I hope that all private health plans will
adopt the Health Care Bill of Rights -- and today, I challenge them to do
so right away.

        And I challenge Congress to pass appropriate legislation and make
these rights the law of the land for every American. There will be no
more important test in the corning months of our commitment to strengthen
our families, and I look forward to working with Congress to give them the
security they deserve.

        And I am acting, within my power as President, to implement these
rights to the extent I legally can. Today, I am directing every federal
agency and office that administers or manages health plans to adopt the
protections of the Health Care Bill of Rights. This will affect tens of
millions of Americans, including all Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries,
and all federal employees.

        Finally, there can be no rights without responsibilities. This
new world of health care offers greater choice and more fundamental
opportunities for health, than ever before.  Today we outline the rights
that every American should have. But every American has an enhanced
obligation to take an active role in his or her health care, and to take
responsibility for his or her own health.

        President Kennedy said, in proposing his plan for AmericaD,s
consumers, D&under our economic as well as our political form of
democracy, we share an obligation to protect the common interest in every
decision we make.DB The coming years can be a time of remarkable
advances, as the breakthroughs of science and medicine offer new hope for
health and longevity.  If we act to seize the opportunities of this time,
to reduce the risks, and to make sure that all Americans can reap the
rewards of change, we will meet our obligation to the common interest and
to future generations.


