RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     {NOTES MAIL}

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni { CN=Jordan Tamagni/OU=WHO/O=EOP [ UNKNOWN 1 }

CREATION DATE/TIME:19-NOV-1997 21:41:14.00

SUBJECT:     Revised Draft - 9:00pm

TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 }
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Paul E. Begala { CN=Paul E. Begala/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 }
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 11/19/97 9:00pm
PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
REMARKS FOR HEALTH CARE EVENT
THE WHITE HOUSE
November 20, 1997

           Acknowledgments: VP Gore; Sec. Herman; Sec. Shalala; Commissioner Peter
Thomas.

        I want to thank the Commission for the remarkable job they have
done to build consensus on this challenging issue. I am proud to accept
the CommissionD,s Health Care Bill of Rights.  I am commited to doing
everything I can to make those rights real for every American. And I
challenge the Congress to make them the law of the land.

        Throughout our nationD,s history, our strength has come from the
strength of our families, and from our ability to keep our values of
opportunity and freedom alive in each new time.  Those values were
enshrined in AmericaD,s Bill of Rights.  And as times have changed, our
challenges have changed, and our nation has acted. Thirty five years ago,
during another time of change, the modern consumer movement was launched
when President Kennedy set forth a consumer bill of rights. The laws
passed to protect those rights -- consumersD, right to be safe, to be
informed, to choose, and to be heard -- protect our children, our
investments, and our environment to this day.

        Today, American families once again face changing times -- and
nowhere are these changes more profound than in the health care industry.
The American health care system is the best in the world -- we have the
worldD,s best health care professionals, the finest medical schools, the
most advanced research and the most sophisticated technology. But in
recent years, that system has changed as thousands of employers have
switched from traditional health insurance to HMOs and other new kinds of
health care plans.

        In many cases, managed care brings lower costs 'and improved
preventive care. But too often, families feel lost in this new world,
left out of the process of their own health care decisions.   Too often,
they feel as if they are getting fewer real services and more red tape.
And far too often, they feel as if they are on the losing side of a battle
between cost cutting and quality care.

        When lowered costs lead to lower standards ... when life-or-death
medical decisions are made by distant case managers '"  when patients are
denied access to the specialized doctors they need, then something is


wrong, and we have an obligation to do something about it.

        Today, Americans receive consumer protection when they purchase
cars, use credit cards, or even buy toys for their children.   Now we must
extend the same kind of protections to a person who yisits a doctor,
checks into a hospital, or buys a health plan. 'Whether they have
traditional health care or managed care, we must make sure that none of
our people ever have inferior care. There must be basic standards that
every American can count on, wherever they live and whatever their needs
-- and these standards should be the right of every citizen.

       Here is what our Health Care Bill of Rights says:

        You have the right to be informed about your health plan in plain
English; you have the right to choose the right doctor for the right type
of care; the right to medical services in an emergency, wherever and
whenever the need arises; and the right to know all your medical options,
no matter how much they cost; you have the right to respectful care and
equal treatment at every health care facility, by every health care
provider; the right to know your medical records are confidential and are
only used for legitimate purposes; and you have the right to express your
concerns about the quality of care you receive, and to take action when
that care is inadequate.

        This bill of rights is the product of a strong consensus from a
broad group that brings together business leaders and health insurers,
working people and health advocates, doctors and nurses. But there will
still be those who will oppose our bill of rights ... and that is their
right. But narrow interests should never prevail over the national
interest. And the Health Care Bill of Rights will protect quality care,
protect consumers, and protect our families.

        These standards are long overdue -- now, we must act to make them
real for all Americans. Some of these rights should be privately
enforced -- and I challenge all private health plans to adopt the Health
Care Bill of Rights.   Others will require federal standards -- and I
challenge Congress to pass appropriate legislation and make these rights
the law of the land for every American. There will be no more important
test in the coming months of our commitment to strengthen our families,
and I look forward to working with Congress to give all Americans the
security they deserve.

        Today I am acting, within my power as President, to implement
these rights to the extent I legally can.  Effective immediately, I am
directing every federal agency that administers or manages health plans to
adopt the protections of the Health Care Bill of Rights, and to advise us
where they need the authority of legislation to do so. with this step, we
will ensure better quality health care for tens of millions of Americans,
including all Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and all federal
employees.

        Finally, there can be no rights without responsibilities. This
new world of health care offers greater choice and more fundamental
opportunities for health than ever before.  Today we outline the rights
that every American should have. But every American has an enhanced
obligation to take an active role in his or her health care, and to take
responsibility for his or her own health.

        President Kennedy said, in proposing his plan for AmericaD,s
consumers, D&under our economic as well as our political form of


democracy, we share an obligation to protect the common interest in every
decision we make.D8 The coming years can be a time of remarkable
advances, as the breakthroughs of science and medicine offer new hope for
health and longevity. If we act to seize the opportunities of this time,
to reduce the risks, and to make sure that all Americans can reap the
rewards of change, we will meet our obligation to the common interest and
to future generations.


