        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

        CREATION DATE/TIME:26-NOV-1997 14:55:25.00

        SUBJECT:   leaks

        TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TEXT:
        Attached is a first cut at some talking points for Monday. Bob Shireman
        will be sending me his thoughts on thementoring piece of this, and I will
        incorporate them as appropriate in a subsequent draft.

        Keep the following in mind as you look at this:
        1.  I view this as the first draft; I'll be working more on this over the
        weekend. If you have comments, feel free to call, page, e-mail, or fax to
        me at home  I  P6/(b)(6)I.                                                   [oou
        2.  I've talked briefly to Andy Blocker, who agrees we need to give a
        heads up to the Hill. He is on vacation next week and will not be in on
        Monday.  I've left messages for Minyon and Janet Murgia to call, but
        haven't heard from either.  This will be a major task for Monday. When
        she talks to the CBC members on this, Minyon needs to figure out a way to
        link school construction to the tests--to remind them that as we proceed
        on this initiative, we expect them to support the tests.
        3. I've tried to structure the talking points so they emphasize
        opportunity as much as accountability, especially with regard to social
        promotion. I've also tried to keep the details of the program general by
        talking about the kinds of practices we want to help replicate rather than
        on the requirements of the program. Do you think this works?

        4. There is a set of education and urban-oriented groups (Great CIty
        schools, AFT/NEA, Urban League, etc.) that has been meeting on urban
        education issues with ED for the past 6-12 months or so. They are mainly
        on board on this direction--expcept for the social promotion piece.   I
        think I need to brief at least a few of them on Monday before this is
        leaked to anyone, so they are prepared.

        5. I suspect the way to leak this is comparable to what we did for the
        Teacher Preparation and Recruitment proposal--Rahm or Bruce calls the
        target press and gets them to talk to me on background for the details.
        Bruce could also do the background -- he will be better at the soundbites
        than I will (though I'm pretty coachable!), though I will be able to deal
        with the substance at a greater level of depth if necessay. Bottom line:
        I'll do this anyway it makes the most sense.




..---   ---_._---


