   RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL       (NOTES MAIL)

       CREATOR: Jerold R. Mande ( CN=Jerold R. Mande/OU=OSTP/O=EOP [ OSTP 1 )

       CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-DEC-1997 14:52:29.00

       SUBJECT:   NYT's Food Safety Series

       TO: Toby Donenfeld    CN=Toby Donenfeld/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Donald H. Gips ( CN=Donald H. Gips/O=OVP @ OVP [ UNKNOWN 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
       READ: UNKNOWN

       TEXT:
       I wanted to make sure you noticed that the NYTs ran the first part of its
       four part series on food safety today. Actually, today's story, which was
       on food irradiation, was suppose to be the third piece in the series, but
       it was moved to first following FDA's irradiation decision on Tuesday.
       HHS is checking on whether we will see the other three pieces anytime soon.

       Today's story:

       Is Irradiation the Magic Bullet Against Food poisoning?

                  By GINA KOLATA with CHRISTOPHER DREW

                 MULBERRY, Fla. -- Five years ago, Harley Everett envisioned a
       burgeoning industry that
                 would rid meats, fruits and vegetables of harmful bacteria by
       bathing them briefly in gamma
                 rays. His company built an irradiation plant, tucked away on a
       dusty road in this phosphate mining
                 town. But business is hardly thriving.

                 His plant remains the only one in the nation built solely to
       irradiate food. Down the hall from, Everett's
                 office on a recent day, behind 6-feet-thick concrete walls,
       slender rods of radioactive cobalt glowing
                 ice blue waited uselessly in a deep pool of water. The plant was
       silent, its parking lot all but empty.
                 There was no food to irradiate.

                 Everett, the executive vice president of Food Technology
       Service, said the plant irradiates a few
                 items for people who cannot take a chance on food poisoning:
       poultry for hospital patients with
                 weakened immune systems, all the food the astronauts eat. It
       treats some strawberries, in season,
                 spices and a few potatoes and onions. That is about it.

                 But Everett is newly hopeful that the nation's long indifference
       to irradiation may be about to change.
                 As politicians and the public grow increasingly alarmed by a new
,.
"

     series of outbreaks of food
               poisoning, scientists and the food industry have renewed their
     search for a magic bullet.

               Tuesday, the Food and Drug Administration·approved the use of
     irradiation on red meat, the first
               step in the regulatory process that could allow beef companies
     to start using this tool by next
               summer.

               Everyone agrees that Everett's system works, and irradiation is
     not expected to add more than a few
               pennies to the cost of a pound of ground beef at the largest
     meat plants. The meat industry lobbied
               hard for approval of it and some leading companies see it as the
     a sure-fire way to eliminate any
               deadly E. coli 0157:H7 bacteria and other new hazards from
     hamburgers and other popular foods.

               But the public has shown little confidence in scientists'
     assurances that irradiated food is safe. There
               is almost no demand for irradiated chicken, fruits and
     vegetables, even though such products were
               approved years ago. One vocal consumer group, fanning fears
     about radiation hazards, has
               threatened to boycott any store that sells irradiated foods.

               And the big question now is whether the recent outbreaks,
     dramatized by a huge recall of
               hamburgers at Hudson Foods last August, have convinced consumers
     that the dangers outweigh
               their fears about the cure.

               As an incentive for processors and consumers, the Agriculture
     Department is considering allowing
               companies to label irradiated products as free of dangerous
     bacteria, said Dr. Daniel Engeljohn, who
               is writing final regulations on irradiation.

               But even the nation's largest beef producer has reservations.

                Although many scientists have said that irradiation does not
     cause significant changes in meat, the
                meat producer, IBP Inc., based in Dakota City, Neb., has found
     that the process slightly alters both
                the flavor and color of ground beef. Irradiation darkened the
     color of the meat and changed its taste
                in a "noticeable enough" way to cause concerns within the
     company, .said Gary R. Mickelson, an
                IBP spokesman.

               The company will need to test-market irradiated beef before
     deciding whether to adopt the process,
               Mickelson said, adding, "It will ultimately be up to the
     consumer to determine if it is acceptable."

               Mark Klein, a spokesman for the nation's second-largest beef
     company, Excel Corporation; a
               subsidiary of Cargill Inc., said: "We're in favor of irradiation
     as an additional tool. And if the


          technology works, we will use it."

          Irradiation has run into some practical problems with other
foods, especially with the most delicate
          fruits and vegetables, which can wilt under the doses needed to
kill harmful bacteria. But other new
          safety methods are drawing attention as well.

          Some meat and produce companies are adopting new technologies
that kill pathogens, or
          microorganisms that can cause disease, with blasts of steam,
light beams or ozone, a disinfectant
          long used in drinking water. And scientists are working on a
vaccine to wipe out harmful bacteria
          carried by cattle and chickens at the safest point possible,
before they ever leave the farm.

          But in recent months, attention has increasingly turned to
irradiation. The continuing battle over
          irradiation, whose supporters long for a more appetizing name,
like "cold pasteurization," illustrates
          the difficulties that lie ahead as scientists and the food
industry search for the best way to eliminate
          such dangerous pathogens as E. coli from the nation's food
supply.

          New safety methods -- no matter how much support they have --
are likely to face a variety of
          hurdles, including financial risks, intensive politicking by
mighty industry lobbyists and consumer
          groups, and, ultimately, a wary public.

          "Everyone wants to be second" to try irradiation, said an
executive at a large restaurant chain, who
          asked not to be identified because his company's plans are not
public. Moreover, he added, "the
          bigger they are, the more they want to be second."

          If it catches on, irradiation might end up being used as the
ultimate insurance for the most vulnerable
          products, like ground beef and pOUltry. But in the end, many
experts say, no one method is likely to
          be a panacea for food.

          "Irradiation may be helpful, and it may playa very important
role in the future," said Dr. David A.
          Kessler, a former FDA commissioner. "But I don't think it's
going, by itself, to get US where we need
          to be. It's not going to work if companies think they don't have
to keep up with basic sanitary
          practices, and that they can just zap it all at the end."

          But even as the questions persist, many regulators and food
industry executives agree that this is
          irradiation's moment, a time when the government's attention,
and the public'S, are focused to an
          unusual degree on a method with an unappealing name that, its
supporters hope, will eventually be
          on labels in supermarkets across America.
"-

               Irradiation: What It Is; How It Works

               The idea of irradiating food first surfaced just after the turn
     of the century, and it began to take hold
               during World War II,when scientists working for the Army found
     that ground beef stayed fresh
               longer if it was exposed to X-rays.

               The concept is simple: Irradiation can kill bacteria that can
     cause food poisoning by shattering their
               genetic material. Radioactive rays from sources like rods of
     cobalt are aimed at containers holding
               food and kill the bacteria as they pass through the food,
     leaving no residual radioactivity behind,
               scientists say.

               The FDA approved several limited uses of irradiation -- the
     first was to help the Army preserve
               canned bacon -- in the early 1960s. But it rescinded the
     approval for canned bacon after a few
               questions were raised about irradiation's effect on laboratory
     animals in the late 1960s, casting
               suspicions on the process that persist even though most leading
     medical and scientific associations
               have since declared that it is safe.

               Since then, the FDA has changed its view. The agency approved
     the irradiation of spices, fruits and
               vegetables in 1986 to destroy insects and mold, and it
     authorized the irradiation of chicken in 1990
               to kill bacteria like salmonella or campylobacter, which are the
     two biggest causes of food pOisoning
               in the United States.

               The petition seeking FDA approval to irradiate red meats was
     submitted in August 1994 by
               Isomedix, a company based in Whippany, N.J., with 16 plants that
     irradiate medical devices and
               food cartons. Few people realize it, but there are about 60
     irradiation plants in the United States and
               they sterilize a surprising array of items, from nipples on baby
     bottles to tiny containers holding
               coffee cream.

               Studies show that irradiation can essentially eliminate the
     disease-causing bacteria like the E. coli
               0157:H7 that has killed people who ate infected hamburger ~eat.
     It also can kill salmonella in fish,
               just as it does in chicken, and the FDA also is examining
     whether to approve it for seafood.

               Industry officials say it is less likely to be used on steaks,
     roasts and other slabs of meat, where any
               contamination lies on the surface and can easily be washed off
     in the plant or killed through cooking.

               But there is growing pressure from fast-food restaurants and
     consumers to improve the safety of
               ground beef. A single hamburger can contain bits of meat from
     dozens of cattle, the primary source


          of E. coli, and the bacteria can survive inside the hamburger
patty unless it is thoroughly cooked at a
          high temperature.

          The government became so concerned about the new strain of E.
coli that in 1994 it classified it as
          an adulterant in ground beef, meaning that processors would have
to recall any raw hamburger
          containing the bacteria.

          And increasingly, scientists have been saying that the food
industry should eliminate such hazards,
          rather than leaving safety up to the diligence of each consumer.

           The Safety Debate

          Most infectious-disease specialists and public health experts
say the science and benefits of
          irradiation are well established.

          Over the years, researchers have focused on two main concerns --
whether irradiation can strip
          food of vitamins or create dangerous byproducts that could cause
cancer or other health problems in
          people who eat the food.

          But scientists who have studied irradiation say neither issue
poses a serious problem, and irradiation
          has been endorsed for years by groups like the world Health
Organization and the American
          Medical Association.

          "My sense is that there is no rationality to the arguments
against it," said Dr. Sherwood Gorbach, a
          professor of community health and medicine at Tufts University
School of Medicine.

          There is no doubt that irradiation -- just like roasting, frying
or barbecuing -- causes microscopic
          changes in the chemical composition of food. One fear, cited
frequently by Food & Water, a
          consumer group based in Walden, Vt., that is the main opponent
of irradiation, is that the process
          might create what are called "unique radiolytic byproducts," or
possibly harmful new compounds that
          are unlike any created by other types of cooking.

          Most scientists doubt that any such compounds exist. An FDA task
force estimated in the late
          1970s that if they do, the amounts too negligible to cause any
harm.

            Michael Colby, head of Food & Water, dismissed such research and
said,   "The FDA is flying on a
            wing and a prayer saying it's OK."

          And although radiation can slightly reduce the amount of vitamin
C in a piece of fruit like an orange,
          "there is more variation from one orange to another orange on a
tree than from one that was


          irradiated and one that was not," said Dr. Christine M. Bruhn,
the director of the Center for
          Consumer Research at the University of California at Davis.

          In pork and chicken, Dr. Bruhn added, irradiation can reduce the
amount of thiamin and riboflavin in
          the meat from 0.01 to 1.5 percent, an amount within the normal
variation between one pork chop
          and the next.

          Despite IBP's findings of slight changes in color and taste,
other researchers have found none. Dr.
          Elsa Murano, a food safety microbiologist at Texas A & M
University in College Station, said that in
          taste tests, trained experts found no significant difference,
except in one area. "Some panelists said
          the irradiated beef patties were more tender," Dr. Murano said.

          She said that the inability of scientists to find distinct
differences between most irradiated and
          non-irradiated foods "is the major evidence that it doesn't do
anything weird to the food."

          The nation's most influential consumer groups accept these
findings. Asked if there is any danger in                  .
          eating irradiated food, Michael F. Jacobson, the executive
director of the Center for Science in the
          Public Interest in washington, said: "No. The loudest critics
have contended that irradiation
          produces danger chemicals. But if it does, the amounts seem
vanishingly small."

         Whither Consumers?

          Ultimately, the public will be the ultimate arbiter of
irradiation's future.

          Consumer misperceptions have lingered despite all the evidence
to the contrary -- a situation that
          some compare to the worries that first greeted the
pasteurization of milk and the fluoridation of
          water.

          A CBS poll in August, for example, found that only 12 percent of
respondents favored irradiation.

          And while nearly 40 nations have approved at least limited use
of irradiation, only a few, like France,
          where many chickens are irradiated, have made much use of it.

          But Dr. Bruhn maintains that the notion of overwhelming consumer
resistance "is a myth."

          For example, Dr. Anna V.A. Resurreccion, a professor of food
science and technology at the
          University of Georgia, showed 126 study participants a slide
show on irradiation, then observed
          how they behaved in a simulated supermarket. Eighty-five percent
bought irradiated chicken.


          She also surveyed consumers, with no information given. And she
found that most of the
          respondents said they were less concerned about irradiation than
pesticide residues, animal drug
          residues, growth hormones, food additives and bacteria.

          That is no surprise to James Corrigan, president of the Chicago
area store Carrot Top, which has
          been selling irradiated fruit since 1992. The required sign
announcing that the food has been
          irradiated is no deterrent to many Carrot Top customers.

          "When I got started, I offered them a choice, to see if they'd
buy it," Corrigan said. He added that if
          the food languished unsold, he would assume there was no market
for it. "But that's not what
          happened," Corrigan said. Now he flies in exotic Hawaiian fruits
that otherwise would be barred
          from the mainland for fear of fruit fly eggs, irradiates them at
a nearby plant that was built to sterilize
          medical supplies, and does a brisk business.

          When Corrigan first said he would sell irradiated fruit, Food &
Water, the group that opposes
          irradiation, warned him not to try. "They took out radio ads in
Chicago and passed out fliers in a
          number of stores calling for a protest rally in front of my
store." But on the day of the rally, "no one
          showed up," Corrigan said.

          Food & Water also has tried to pressure poultry companies to
keep them from using irradiation. But
          the industry has been selling all the billions of chickens it
can process without irradiation, and so it
          has seen little need to bother with it.

          Everett, at his forlorn irradiation plant in Mulberry, said the
food companies have another worry. In
          telling him they don't need his services, some have said: "You
want us to put that irradiated food out
          there next to the non-irradiated food and say, 'This is clean
and this isn't?'"

          Consumers around the nation are as divided as ever about whether
they would welcome irradiation
          as the magic bullet of food safety.

          In Seattle, where the dangers of E. coli first emerged in 1993
when hundreds of people who became
          ill from eating undercooked hamburgers, Marie Lovitt, a student
at Seattle Central Community
          College, said she welcomed irradiation and would even pay more
for treated meat. "If it's going to
          cost more to save lives, it's worth it," she said.

          But in New York City, Judy Nurse, a child care worker, was wary.
"They give radiation for cancer,
          so I don't think it's a good idea for humans to eat it," she
said.


          Tony Guggino, a cameraman from Bergen County, N.J., said he
would buy it. "Everything I've read
          about it says it is safe," he said.

          But Guggino had to agree with his friend Marvin Welkowitz, an
audio technician from Nassau
          County, N.Y. "Irradiation helps in the manufacturing process,"
said Welkowitz, "but once it gets to
          the local market, the meat still has to be handled properly. If
it's not handled right in the market, it
          can still get contaminated."
\


