RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 4-DEC-1997 20:07:40.00

SUBJECT:     INTERNAL TRANSCRIPT: NY Times interview of the President

TO: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jennifer L. Klein ( CN=Jennifer L. K1ein/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP '[ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Christopher C. Jennings ( CN=Christopher C. Jennings/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 12/04/97
08:06 PM ---------------------------




Amy W. Tobe
12/04/97 06:18:55 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      See the distribution list at the bottom of this message
cc:
Subject:         INTERNAL TRANSCRIPT: NY Times interview of the President


    ---------------------- Forwarded by Amy W. Tobe/WHO/EOP on 12/04/97 06:08
    PM ---------------------------



        SUNTUM M @ Al
        12/04/97 05:48:00 PM
Record Type: Record

To: See the distribution list at the bottom of this message.
cc:
Subject: INTERNAL TRANSCRIPT: NY Times interview of the President




                             THE WHITEHOUSE

                      Office of the Press Secretary

Internal Transcript                               December 4, 1997


                    INTERVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT
                                    BY
                            THE NEW YORK TIMES


                            The Oval Office


3:13 P.M. EST


             Q    As you've been told, what we're looking at is a
couple pieces on the state of the presidency and where things are and
your goals for the future, particularly on domestic policy. And the
first thing that struck us in a lot of interviews, people said your
style has changed since early in your first term. You're much more
-- there is more of a corporate atmosphere here. There aren't the
long sort of bull sessions that go on and on, and you're delegating
more. And it's maybe not as much fun as it was, but things get done
-- you're more decisive. And I wonder if you see yourself having
grown in the job and your executive style changed at all?

             THE PRESIDENT:  I guess the short answer to that is,
yes, but it's somewhat more complex than that.  When we came in, I
had a very detailed agenda which I had laid out first in New
Hampshire, then right before the Democratic Convention, and then in
the book that Al Gore and I put out in the '92 campaign, "Putting
people First."

             But as always happens, there is a difference between
running for office and governing.   You have to confront the facts as
they are. We spent a lot of time right after the election and before
the inauguration and then in the early part of this administration
having exhaustive bull sessions·, if you want to call them that,
trying to work through and talk through these things, because we had
to come to grips with some very difficult issues at home and abroad.
I think we've got -- once we made the big tough decisions, it was
easier then to regularize the flow of work.

             I also think you just learn how to do it better. And I
do think we're better organized now. And I think it's important that
the President delegate a lot.  I'm still actually -- I was thinking
I'm probably putting in more hours now than I ever have on the job,
but I spend a lot of time talking to people one on one, reading,
trying to work through ideas.  I still send Rahm as much stuff as I
ever have. But I think that in terms of bringing the rest of the
White House in, I think it's very important that you get as much done
as possible, and I think we've steadily gotten better and better and
better at that.



             Q    Can you just give an example of that, of an issue
where you're not quite as intimately involved as you might have been
a few years ago, where you've delegated more?

             THE PRESIDENT:  No, I don't think -- if it's a big
issue, like climate change or the next steps in the Middle East peace
process or something like that, a big issue, I'm just as involved as
I ever was. But if it's something that we have more -- there is more
of a past now, more of a shared understanding, I might make more
decisions based on a detailed memo without a long meeting than I
would have otherwise, if it's something where I have a higher comfort

Of

level and we've got a clear course established.   I think that's a
better indicator.

             On the other hand, we still have large meetings with
broad discussions when there is a new set of decisions made.  For
example, we're now working on next year's budget, and we have the
same sort of process we all have there. You can't make those
decisions by memo because you have to talk through what the
alternatives are and work through them and then hear everybody around
the table.

             We will have -- sometime in the next few days, for
example, we'll have, regardless of what happens at Kyoto, we'll have
to have a big meeting on how we're going to do what we're going to do
anyway to deal with the climate change issues. And we'll analyze why
we didn't make as much progress in the first four years as I thought
we should have, apart from the fact that the economy grew very
strongly. And we'll work through that and try to set up a different,
whole different way of dealing with it so it will be more effective:
That will require meeting, exhaustive batting around of options.

             You can't pre-cook a lot of that. But the more you're
here, the more a lot of decisions flow within the framework that's
already been established, and you can make them more quickly.

             Q    You've spent 20 years as a chief executive
developing state and domestic policy in one way or another,' and
you've experimented quite a bit over the last five years in how to do
it -- creating the NEC, soliciting more outside memos from different
people, and you're generally credited now with doing a good job of
coordinating with the agencies and bringing them into the process.
How would you describe specifically the way you're idea generation
system works now? And are you satisfied with it? Do you think
you've gotten to the point -- to its best point so far, or do you
still have some more work that you plan to do?

             THE PRESIDENT: There is a difference -- first of all,
I'd say -- I'll answer the question, but let me first say, there is a
big difference in generating ideas and then putting them through a
policy process to see if they make sense, and coming up with a
policy, and then a strategy to implement it.   I think we have
developed, through trial and error and an enormous amount of hard
work, a policy development process where we can take an idea, and
even if it's a new and different one,' we can protect it from being
dismissed out of hand by people who are normally change averse or


overworked or whatever.  We've got a kind of openness to it. And
then have it honestly vetted, and still do enough of the basic work
that needs to be done so that everyone feels that they're consulted
and everybody with relevant information and knowledge and experience
can bring that to bear on the decision-making process.   And I
believe that it's a little less cumbersome and more timely than it
used to be, but still very serious.

             Now, it's a different thing on the idea of generation,
how do you get the ideas,.and I don't know that there is an explicit
process. There are a lot of people who know they can write us at any
given time with new ideas. We all read everything that's in print
all the time, trying to come up with new ideas. ·We listen to people
all the time. But we get the ideas from a variety of different
sources.  Sometimes members of Congress have put in bills that
reflect the new ideas that we want to work and see if there is
something there that maybe if we get behind we can make a difference.

             So I don't know that we have changed our system of
getting new ideas. When I was a governor, I used to say -- there
were three or four things I used to cite where Arkansas was the first
state in the country implementing something. And then I had eight or
10 examples where we were the second or the third state in the
country. And I would always say, I'm prouder of the places where we
were second or third, even though we were first, because it proves
that the states are the laboratories of democracy, that we could
learn from one another, and that we could move things.  We weren't
too proud to seek out new ideas wherever we could find them, if they
made sense for our people, and implement them.

             One of the things I keep trying to do here is to always
have enough new people coming in to keep the idea quotient high and
to make sure that all the people here, like Bruce Reed in Domestic
Policy, that they're always talking to people outside the White House
to try to make sure that we've always got ideas coming in, and then
whatever I think up.

             Let me give you one little specific idea, example.   I'm
very concerned about the fact -- when people think about this
business of intergenerational responsibility and how we're going to
go into the new century, both providing for the retirement of the
baby boom generation and doing it in a way that doesn't soak up the
incomes and the capacity of our children to support our grandchildren
and to invest in the future, most of the thought that's given is
given to, well, what should be done to stabilize Social Security to
make sure it's there.  But the truth is, Social Security is only a
threshold for living for the vast majority of seniors. And yet only
about half the American people are saving for their retirement.

             Now, in the first five years we've been here, the first
important thing we did was to try to protect retirement savings that
were endangered, which we did at the end of '94 with the legislation
that we'd worked .on that saved 8.5 million people's pensions and
stabilized 40 million others.

             And the second thing we did was to make the 40l(k) plans
more functionally useful to people who were changing jobs. And
interestingly enou~h, I got that idea from a letter that a guy I grew
up with wrote me because he was talking about how it took him nine
months to transfer his 401(k) plan and what the problems were.  So we


worked with Congress.  It turned out there were a lot of people in
Congress in both parties that were interested in this same sort of
thing, so we got together and we did that.   But still only about half
the American people are saving for their retirements.

              So I've been soliciting ideas.  I saw a couple of -- I
don't want to quote the competition, but there were a couple of
editorials sort of on both sides of the issue in USA Today the other
day about whether the right way to go was to expand 401(k) more and
then there was an opposing saying, no, it's inevitably titled too
much toward upper-income retirees.   But we had a whole discussion the
other day about what the next steps were in addition to whatever we
might do on Social Security reform to get more people to save for
their own retirement and to empower them to do so, and then to
protect the savings once they're made.

             So those are the kinds of things that we do around here,
and there is a lot of talk c- I don't know how many times, probably
three times a week I read a story in the paper or I see an article in
a magazine or something, and I just send it to Rahm, and I say, we
need to have somebody start working this idea, see if there is
something here that's -- something we ought to do.

             Q    My question follows a little bit from that. Rahm
will correct me if I'm wrong, but you have roughly 1,142 days left in
office.

             THE PRESIDENT:   A thousand days plus, yes.

             Q    A thousand days plus. You have very healthy
approval ratings, the best economy in a generation or longer -- no
more campaigns to run for Bill Clinton. What are you going to do
with that time? What is the second term going to be remembered for?
You talked a little about Social Security in the upper case sense
--I've gotten some lectures about lower case social security. Are
you going to tackle entitlements, or are you going to try and knit
together all the things you've been talking about for six years?

             THE PRESIDENT: Both. That is, when I ran in '91, I
made a decision that was a huge personal decision for me to undertake
a rigorous campaign and t.o leave a job that I loved and a life that I
loved very much, because I felt that we had no strategy for moving
our country into the 21st century, and that the consequence of that
was stagnation and drift and division. And I wanted to change that.

             I have not -- presidents are the custodians of the time
in which they live as well as the instruments of the visions and
dreams they have.  So the first thing I had to start with was, you
know, we don't have a war, we don't have a depression, we don't have
a cold war, but what we do have is a breathtaking change going on as
the economy and the societies in which we live become more
globalized, as the information technology revolution continues to
accelerate and as the world faces a whole new set of security threats
as well as opportunities, and, as ordinary people see this, in terms
of change that is both hopeful and threatening at the same time.

             Now, that is the new reality that, as far as we can see
now, will dominate the lives of our people for more than a
generation. We have no reason to believe that these structural
changes are likely to abate anytime soon.



             So I came to the American people and I said, look, we
need to have a new approach.  First we have to have a strategy to
provide opportunity for everybody who is responsible enough to work
for it. Secondly, we have to figure out how, with all these changes
going on and pulls, if you will, both beyond and within our national
borders, we're going to preserve our American community, our nation
as one America. And the third thing we have to do is to figure out
how we're going to maintain our leadership for peace and freedom and
prosperity.

             And so everything that I laid out, including having a
new philosophy of government which would -- because we had to do
something about the deficit -- we had quadrupled the debt in 12
years, we had to do something about it, but we couldn't walk away
from our investment responsibilities.

             So I said -- the first thing I tried to do was
articulate a new vision of government that was not something for
nothing and not everybody for himself, but a government that would
get everybody the tools and conditions they need to make the most of
their own lives -- career, family, community, country. And
everything I've done has sort of flown out of that.

             And I think that, for me, the next 1,100 days I think
will be just as exciting as the five years that have just passed and
we'll be building on that. Now, you have to -- you know, things come
up, like the Mexican financial crisis came up -- things present
themselves and you deal with them.  But they should be dealt within
the context of what we've done. So in that context, let's just talk
about some of the things that I think we should be doing.

             First of all, we made a good beginning this year on our
education agenda, particularly what was done to open the doors of
college to all Americans which is the most signal achievement in
educational opportunity in higher education in 50 years. But we have
more to do. We've won the initial battles, but we're not there on
the national standards in testing; we're not finished with providing
educational technology to all the schools.' I still believe we should
be working to try to deal with the infrastructure of our educational
institutions, even though we didn't succeed on that.

             I think that it is very important to identify school
districts that are, on balance, not functioning well, and try to
create an entirely different environment with more school choice,
more charter schools, end of social promotion, adequate use of
standards in testing. The substance of the announcement I made
yesterday at the Akron town meeting was I wanted to create
educational opportunities ,zones where we would basically support
communities that were willing to do something like what Chicago's
involved in now, so there's a whole education agenda out there.

             In addition to that, I think we have to recognize that
we have to do more for adults. As you know, I strongly disagree with
folks in either party who don't support the fast track issue, but one
of the underlying things there is that you can show I think that
there are more winners than losers in this economy, but there's a
sense that people who don't do well don't get enough help quickly
enough in a meaningful fashion to expand the winner's circle and to
be part of this move into the future.



             For four years in Republican and Democratic Congresses
alike, and almost for five years now, I've tried to collapse all
these district government training programs into a G.I. Bill of
Rights for American workers so we could basically create a system of
lifetime learning that would be immediate, quick, efficient and
relevant to the prospects of people allover America, so that that's
a security they know they always have that they'd be able to get
that.

              So there's a big education agenda out there.  The second
thing I think we have to do is to continue to work on helping
families balance work and family.   I'm very proud of what we've done
with family leave, with the earned income tax credit, with the
mininlUm wage, with tougher child support enforcement -- all these
things have helped to reward people who are struggling to be good
parents and effective workers. And I'm proud of what· we did on child
care and the welfare reform bill. But we need.to do more there, with
a broader family leave and a number of other issues.

             The third thing I'm interested in is this whole idea of
our responsibilities across the generation for the health of our
people. So we're about to have this Medicare reform commission to
look at what can be done to add more life to the Medicare trust fund
and structure it in a way that will guarantee quality affordable
health care to people who are Medicare eligible.

             I think, in addition to   that, I think we should take on
the issue of the long-term stability   of the Social Security system
and, as I said earlier, ways that we   can provide supplemental
opportunities for people to save for   their own retirement, so they'll
have Social Security asa threshold,    but have something on top of
that.

             I think we have to look at ways to continue to expand
health care coverage. We have to implement this -- what we did in
this budget, to provide health care coverage to 5 million more kids
in working families.  But there's stillS million kids out there
without insurance; there are a lot of young people that don't have
affordable options. And maybe the biggest problem that you see, with
more and more people taking early retirement, there are a lot of
people between my age and their qualification for Medicare that lose
their job-related health insurance and can't afford to get anything
else. And you'd be amazed - 7 I mean, I've taken a little
good-natured ribbing for having a way for the people who I grew up
with to have a way to write me at the White House -- I got a letter
just the other day from a woman who was in my high school class; her
husband got sick and took early retirement, he's got a pretty decent
retirement but they can't afford health insurance. And this is a
bigger and bigger problem for Americans.

             So I'm very interested in this whole issue of health
care, affordable health care coverage.  I think we should adopt a
patient's bill of rights.  I'm going to fight very hard for it.   I
think we worked hard to reconcile all the interest there -- you know,
we had health care providers, we had businesses, we had labor groups,
we had consumer groups, and I think it's a good solid document.

             So, anyway, there's that whole issue. And I think we
ought to move on -- we\ought to try to do some more on child care --


affordable, save, quality child care. That's more on the working
family thing, but I forgot to mention it.   I still think -- I go into
crowd after crowd after crowd, even upper-income crowds, everybody
will acknowledge that if they have school-age children they have felt
some conflict -- and I bet every reporter you know with a school-age
child has felt some conflict between their responsibilities at work
and responsibilities at home.  Now, you can't make all that go away,
but at least people ought not to be just torn up and upset all the
time, worried about how they're taking care of their kids and whether
they're doing that right.

             In the environmental area, I intend to spend a lot of
time in the next three years on three things at least -- first, the
climate change issue, which I believe is very serious.  I am
convinced that we can demonstrate to the American people that we can
substantially reduce our greenhouse gas emissions and fulfill our
global environmental responsibilities as well as our responsibilities
to our own people without giving up economic growth, but it will
require a very disciplined, organized, coordinated effort to do it.

             So I intend to do that. We still haven't passed the
Superfund reauthorization and we still have too many toxic waste
sites out there that are really causing a problem that is not only
environmental but is economic to the places where they exist. We've
got to continue -- we've got to keep working until we get that done.

             And the third thing that I'm very interested in is to
continue to work in this food safety area where I think -- if you
imagine over the next 20 years, it is inconceivable that you won't
have more and more and more volumes of food crossing national lines
in trade, and we have to be able to guarantee to the American people
that we have a safe food system.  I think that's terribly important.

             Finally, in this whole area, I would very much like to
see something done to even go further than we have with biomedical
research.  I do believe that in scientific terms, the last 50 years
will be seen as an age of physics and an age of space exploration.  I
think the next 50 years will very likely to be characterized
predominantly as an age of biology and the exploration of the human
organism, especially with the completion of the human genome project,
which I think will literally explode what we know about how to deal
with health issues.

             So there will be a lot there to do.  Let me just mention
a couple of other things. Our race initiative here I think needs to
be seen in the context also of what I have tried to do since I got.
here on citizen service, the whole idea of AmeriCorps, participating
in the President's Summit on Service, all that.  My goal with that is
not only to have some policy prescriptions which will help, some of
which I've outlined, and to help people try to come to terms .with the
things that we're fighting about like affirmative action, but in a
larger sense, to create an ethic of service across racial lines so
that when we begin this new century and when I leave office and go
off into the sunset, the typical American will have at least three
opportunities for constructive engagement with people with other
races -- one at work, one at school and one in community service
working on common problems.

              So I intend to try to work to sort of integrate all
that.   And finally, I've got a huge foreign policy agenda for the


next three years, as you know. Arid you didn't ask me about that, but
I mean, basically we have an area that we've -- the momentary impasse
over fast track notwithstanding, I think we've got to try to create a
global system where the democracies of the world are cooperating more
with shared markets.  I think it's good for our own prosperity and
it's good for them. And we can do it in a way that elevates
environmental and labor standards in that's accompanied by a more
aggressive program here to help people who are hurt get readjusted.

             You have to keep in mind, in the last five years we have
more than doubled the amount of money being spent on worker training
already. And we are now kind of setting up a system within the
federal government, which we should have done earlier -- I'll take
responsibility for that; we should have done it earlier, but we're
working hard to set it up -- modeled on what we did with communities
that had military bases close, to try to deal with communities that
have dislocations from trade, so we can move in a hurry.

             But I think we have to continue the trade agenda.  I
think we -- I hope we can get the Senate to support the Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty. We're going to have a protocol at the Biological
Weapons Convention which will build on what we did with the Chemical
Weapons Convention, which was ratified this year by the Congress, to
help to strengthen our hand in dealing with the biological and
chemical weapons fight.

             I'm going to China to continue to try to work out our
approach with them, which is engagement with integrity, and I think
it's working well.   I hope to have an impact, a positive impact on
the difficulties between Greece and Turkey, and relations between
India and Pakistan.   I intend to go to India and Pakistan next year
if all goes well.   I hope to activate our Africa Trade Initiative,
and I'm going to Africa.

             And I feel very good that we are in better shape than we
were six, eight months ago with our peace efforts in Bosnia.  I'd
like to see them successfully concluded.  I think we've got a good
chance now to see a successful peace in Northern Ireland because of
what's going on there. And I'd like ,to see, if Russia ratifies START
II.  I'd like to go back to President Yeltsin and finish the START
III process as we continue to dramatically lower the nuclear threat.

             So I feel pretty good about those things.  I do believe
we are going to have to face very clearly our responsibilities to see
that economic policy and foreign policy have to be integrated. If
you look at what I've been doing in the last few days over the
Thanksgiving holiday, working on the Asian financial problems, you
know, trying to set up a system for dealing with that; working with
the Japanese to try to think about the long-term implications. We've
got to develop a bipartisan majority, a substantial majority
committed to the proposition that our own welfare requires us to try
to stabilize and promote growth in other parts of the world because
it helps us to do it, and it maintains the march of democracy, and it
is essential to our maintaining world leadership.  So I intend to
work a lot on that.

             Q    Given all that's on your plate that you just
described, why do you think there is a sense out there among several
people we talked to, said openly, in all wings of the Democratic
Party they described a sense of what they see as aimlessness in this


White House?

             THE PRESIDENT: Beats me.   I mean, look what we did this
year. We got the balanced budget agreement through, which"had the
biggest increase in child health since '65, the biggest increase in
aid to education since '65, the biggest increase since the G.I. Bill
in aid to higher education. We reformed the FDA to move drugs to
market more quickly, and medical devices. We had a huge adoption
reform bill, which is an issue that I care passionately about and
that Hillary has worked on for years. And we had NATO expansion. We
had this China issue, I think, put on a very much more solid footing.
We had the Chemical Weapons Convention ratified.  There is a lot
going on this year. And there will be a lot going on next year. And
there will be a lot going on in '99, and a lot going on in 2000.

             You know, I can't answer that. I honestly don't know
why that is. But all I can tell you is, I'll do the very best I can
to disabuse them of it every day I'm here.

             Q    Did you think it was inappropriate what Gephardt
said the other day at Harvard about small ideas and the leadership
only nibbling around the edges of big problems in this country?

             THE PRESIDENT: Well, I didn't read his speech, so I
can't comment on that, but I'll talk about small ideas. Actually, I
told Rahm he ought to take up a list -- I told him about a month ago,
I said, you ought to get a list together of all these so-called small
ideas of ours and let's see whether the American people think they're
small ideas.

              Let me deal with big versus small. First of all, the
biggest crisis we faced when I became President was that the country
was paralyzed because we had quadrupled the debt in four years and we
had interest rates that were too high to permit a restoration of
solid growth, and we had a projected $300 billion deficit, designed
to get worse.

             Restoring fiscal responsibility to America is not a
small idea; it is a big idea. And the deficit had been cut by 92
percent before the balanced budget agreement was adopted.  I don't
think that's a small idea.

             I think the idea of having the national government on
the side of an anticrime policy that would actually lower the crime
rate to its lowest rate in 24 years, of putting 100,000 police on the
street, taking assault weapons off the street, and the Brady Bill,
which was responsible for keeping over 250,000 people from getting
hand guns because they have criminal records and mental health issues
-- I don't think that's a small idea.

             I think the idea: of having a welfare reform bill that
changed 60 years of assumptions because the welfare population had
changed that if people were in distress they should just get a check
until they got themselves out of it, to a system that says, no, if
you're able-bodied you've got to get yourself out of it within a
certain amount of time, but we're not going to take food or medicine
away from your kids and we're going to give you child care and we're
going to give you education -- I think that's a big idea.

               Those are just three big ideas.   I think that this


climate change issue is a big idea. I think that what we're doing
with NATO and Russia is a big idea. I think what we're doing with
China is a big idea. So I think that these are not small ideas.

             Now, let's take some of the small ideas. Today -~ two
days ago, a huge headline in the paper: Curfews Lower Juvenile
Crime. We were out there all last year trying to promote curfews,
promoting school uniforms because they lower some crime.

             A big part of what the presidency is, it seems to me, in
a society of free people, with limited government, is elevating ideas
that, if generalized throughout the society, would have a very
positive impact.   For all those kids that aren't going to jail, and
for all those people that are safer now, the expansion of curfews or
the expansion of 'school uniforms is not a small thing; it is a big
thing.

             We took $1,400 off the average closing costs for people
who are in HUD-financed housing. That may sound like a small idea.
If you're a new family struggling to get a home, that's not a small
idea; that's a big idea. And now we are at an all-time high in
homeownership in America.  For the first time we're at two-thirds
homeownership. That's a big thing; that's not a little thing.

             I think the fact that we worked to set up this national
nonprofit group to combat teen pregnancy and that the teen pregnancy
is going down -- I don't think that's a little thing; I think that's
a big thing.

             So I just have different views about what's a little or
a big idea. I think that real people think this stuff matters. And
maybe I spent too much time as a governor in a state where I related
personally to people from all walks of life, that I don't have the
appropriate discrimination between big and small, but I think that a
lot of these so-called small ideas make a big difference.

             What's the tobacco thing? When we took on tobacco for
the first time, was that big or small? I think it's big. Of course,
now it involves big dollars.  It's another one of the things, by the
way, I didn't mention, that I'm hoping we resolve in '98.

             But maybe you ought to give me a list of the so-called
small ideas and I could comment on them, the others.   But I don't
think they're small. And I don't think that we should -- we should
pursue big structural things, but if there is also some specific idea
that, if generalized, would hav:e a big positive impact in people's'
lives, I think it's good to pursue it.

             After I went out to Long Beach, California, on that
school uniform deal, Long Beach was literally flooded with requests
on school uniforms, and there was an article in the New York Times, I
think not very long ago, saying that something like 20 percent of the
school kids in America now are in school districts with school
uniform polices -- just exploded in three years. And that basically
the experience is that discipline and order improve, and violence and
disruption go down, and the student performance is better and dropout
rates drop. That's a huge thing.   That's not little, that's big.

             Q    To change gears a little bit, earlier this week you
had a discussion with Chairman Archer, about taxes I presume. Are we


going to be hearing something from you about some sort of change,
reform, reduction in the tax code, and for what purpose?

             THE PRESIDENT: He asked me if I would meet with him.   I
met with him about a year ago and we talked about his ideas about the
tax code. And he wanted to bring a gentleman in who was an expert
in, you know, basically his idea that we ought to have some sort of
national sales tax. And I said I would be glad to talk to him, and I
had a fascinating hour's conversation with him.

             I have drawn no conclusion yet about what I would be
for, but let me say, my objectives on taxes are -- and my questions
about all tax reform is:  Is it fair to average American taxpayers?
Is it realistic that you can implement the proposal, whatever it is?
Will it be good for the economy as a whole; will it support our
continuing growth of our economy? And will it be simpler? Can we do
that?

             Now, since we've been here, we've done a lot of work to
make it easier for people to interact with the tax code. More than
half the taxpayers now fill out that simplest little form. Millions
of people can file electronically who couldn't before.  We've done
what we could to really improve the system as it is, based on
progressive income taxation.

             So at the end of the year, every year, we do this.
We're open to new ideas, and I wanted to listen, but I didnit draw
any conclusion from it and I haven't reached a decision.yet about
what, if anything else, I might recommend in this area.

              I will say this -- we had a huge bipartisan vote at the
last of this last year in the House on a bill to further improve the
functioning of the IRS, which I hope the Senate will take up and pass
at its earl·iest opportunity in early '98. That would make a big
difference to a lot of American taxpayers, and I hope they will at
least do that.

             Q    But can we expect to see some form of tax reform or
tax relief in the next budget in the State of the Union?

              THE PRESID·ENT: No, I wouldn't say - - I don't think I
should give you any false expectations there.   I can't say yes, I
can't say no.   I wouldn't rule out the fact that I might find
something that I think would work, but I don't have an idea on the.
griddle as you are doing this interview.

             But one thing, let me say, I have a different view about·
this than some people do. We do not have a surplus now. We do not
have a surplus now.  We have a deficit now. It's a tiny one, and
it's less than 10 percent of what it was when I took office, but the
people who say we have a·surplus, I think it's very important that we
understand what they're saying. They're saying that the deficit has
gone down more rapidly than it was predicted to go down when we
signed -- when I signed the balanced budget bill and when it passed
back last summer.

             Therefore, some people think that we should go back to
the curve that we predicted last summer and spend all the money
between where we are now and where we are then.  I think that is a
questionable course.  I hope that we can continue to grow at 3


percent a year, and private sector growth has been over 3.5 percent a
year since I've been President. I hope we can continue to do that.
But I think that it is not prudent for us to go spending a lot of
money that we haven't really realized yet.  So I think we have to be
very careful -- this so-called spending the surplus -- it is not a
surplus that is being spent; it is the difference between the
projected deficit line today and the one that existed last summer.

             And if we hold tight and save all of that money or most
of that money,and show some discipline here, we might get a balanced
budget a lot quicker than they thought, and then we can decide what
to do. But I think we need to be somewhat careful before we just go
spend all this money that hasn't materialized.

             Q    Just to be clear on something you ment:ioned -- we
have one more just to try to clarify something. Are you saying you
might endorse a national sales tax?

             THE PRESIDENT: No, I didn't say that at all.   I said
that you should draw no -- he didn't even ask me if I was going to
endorse a national sales tax. John asked if this meant that I had
decided that I was going to offer a tax reform idea in '98, and I
said I hadn't decided to offer any tax reform idea in '98. But I
think that we should be open to ideas and listen to arguments.

             Is it fair? Is it progressive? Will it work? will it
be more simple and efficient? I think those are legitimate
questions. And Mr. Archer asked me if .I'd have the meeting, and I
said of course I would, and I did. I did not decide that I would
endorse it after the meeting.

             Q    Can I just quickly ask you -- we can't leave here
without asking about golf because many people that meet with you said
that you talk a lot about golf, but even to the degree where some
said it's sort of a preoccupation, where it's filling your thinking
in a way that polls used to during the campaign and so forth. And
they're worried that you may even be going too far in your golf talk.
We've heard that from Tom Daschle and other people, and Senator
Breaux said, it's golf, golf, golf; that's all he talks about.

             THE PRESIDENT: Almost the only people that ever
complain about it are people 'that don't play golf.   (Laughter.) And
I try not to say anything about it around them, but sometimes they're
in crowds -- I think that's a -- that's not so.   For one thing -- one
of the things that I've learned is that anything a President says is
subject to being multiplied by five -- (laughter) -- or 10. I'm
interested in it, and it's fun.   It's just a way I get away from it.
And when I talk about it, it's just a way I get away from it. If I
were really serious about it, I'd have a lower handicap and a
different approach.   (Laughter.)  But I like it; it's a lot of fun
for me.  It relieves the pressure of the job. But it's not -- I
don't think that I'm -- it's not fair to say I'm obsessed with it.

             Just like -- I think even that polling thing, to be
fair, if I had been a completely poll-driven President, I would not
have been willing to pass an economic plan that could only pass by
one vote. Or since I know how to read polls and I know that it's not
just the numbers but the intensity, I wouldn't have been the first
President to take on the NRA, or help Mexico, or do Bosnia, or do
Haiti, or do any number of other things we've done here.



             I think these polls are interesting and they're
important. They tell you what the people who hired you think, at any
given moment in time. And they shouldn't be completely disregarded.
But on the other hand, they're not a very effective guide for action
in a dynamic world.  You have to understand what really matters is
what the condition of the country is when you're finished, or when
you're up for election, or whatever. And if an administration in a
dynamic world really made decisions just based on polls, what they
would find is it was ultimately self-defeating because by the time
they were held accountable, the polls had been changed.

             You always really have to -- the right thing to do in
making decisions like this is to ask, first of all, what do you think
the right thing to do is.  Secondly, where do you want to be at the
end of the road; when you're finished what do you want the results to
be? And then, thirdly, is there a compelling way in a             free
society you can sell it to the American people so that they will stay
with you, because it is important to have popular support because
that's the way democracy works. And polls can be very helpful in
that regard, but they are a very poor guide to deciding what you're
going to do tomorrow, because the circumstances tomorrow may be
entirely different than they will be six months or a year from now,
particularly if you take the easy way out now.  You wind up in more
trouble tomorrow.

             We took the tough decisions in '93 and '94, and I regret
very badly that some of our people paid with their seats in Congress
-- on the economic plan and on taking on the gun lobby and all that.
But the country is in much better shape now and I think we laid the
foundation for a much stronger, progressive politics and a much
stronger Democratic Party into the 21st century because we did that
and that's part of our party's legacy.

             Q    Have you had any success in converting anyone in
the Senate on Bill Lann Lee? .

              THE PRESIDENT: No, but I think it's a real mistake.   I
think they made a real mistake on that. And I still don't even know
-- you know, I've had a pretty good working relationship and a very
candid relationship with both Senator Lott and Senator Hatch, and I
must say, I'm just -- I'm really disappointed.  I just don't -- I
just think it was a mistake and I don't even think it makes political
sense for them.

             This guy, his life story, his life's work, he made it
unambiguously clear that he was going to enforce the law as it is
written and interpreted by the Supreme Court; that he would recuse if
the specific California issue came up.  I mean, this is a -- they
just didn't make much of a case for being against this guy.  It
looked to me like whoever was in this kind of conservative bloc there
just decided he was going to take the fall. And I think it's a
terrible mistake.  I think he's a very able, good man.

            Q       Are you going to recess-appoint him?

             THE PRESIDENT: I'm not prepared to make a statement on
that one way or the other yet.

            Q       Tell them next week?



             THE PRESIDENT: Well, that depends in part on -- it's
not just my decision to make, you know. There's more involved in
that than me. But I'm not prepared to say one way or the other yet.
I'll just tell you I think they made a terrible mistake.

              Q    Is he willing to do it?     Mr. Lee, come here with
that 'sort of uncertainty?

             THE PRESIDENT: I don't know the answer to that for
sure. You'd have to -- somebody here may know the answer, so I'm not
trying to mislead you.

             Q      Somebody here does.

             THE PRESIDENT: I'm not trying to mislead you on that.
I've been working on this -- most of what I've been doing the last
few days has been on the financial issues in Asia, so I don't know.

             Q    Are you worried about a backlash from that and the
United States being seen as sort of a global economic superpower
dictator --

             THE PRESIDENT: In Asia? No, because of the way we did
it. Keep in mind, the Korean plan is consistent with the agreement
that all the finance ministers in the Asian Pacific region made --

             Q      In Manila.

             THE PRESIDENT: In Manila. And instead of Japan and the
United States coming in and bailing -- just doing the bailout
ourselves, and dictating the terms, this was part of an agreed-upon
negotiation with the IMF where we and others came in in a supporting
role.

             Did we say that there ciught to be strong terms? Yes, we
did do that. But again, that's just like what we had to do in '93.
It would have been a lot easier for us to have an easier plan in '93,
but it would have had less satisfactory results.   Because we had a
tough plan we got interest rates way down, we got growth way up.

             Look at what Mexico did, because they took the tough way
out. They took a terrible beating for a year and a half; two years
later they were in much better shape than anybody ever dreamed and
the government enjoyed strong support.

             So the only thing that the United States did, Secretary
Rubin, was to say, look, Korea has no stronger supporter than the
United States and we believe in its economic potential and its
economic future. But we want the plan to be real. And that's what
the IMF said they wanted and that's what we got. And I'm very
hopeful.

             Q    Has Louis Freeh made it harder to make the case
that campaign finance reform charges that remain are essentially
political?

             THE PRESIDENT:      I don't think so.

             END                              3:38 P.M. EST




Message Sent
TO:~   ____________________________________________________________
Lori Anderson
Brenda M. Anders
Douglas B. Sosnik
david t. johnson
Joseph P. Lockhart
Laura D. Schwartz
Michael McCurry
Megan C. Moloney
Jonathan Murchinson
Elizabeth R. Newman
Julia M. Payne
Joshua Silverman
Darby E. Stott
Amy W. Tobe
Barry J. Toiv
Michael Waldman
terri tingen
SUNTUM M @ Al@CD@LNGTWY
WOZNIAK N @ Al@CD@LNGTWY




Message Sent
TO: ____________~--~-----------------------------------------------
Rahm I. Emanuel/WHO/EOP
Paul E. Begala/WHO/EOP
Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
Gene B. Sperling/OPD/EOP
Michelle Crisci/WHO/EOP


