RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 16-JAN-1997 17:29:18.00

SUBJECT:   welfare reform/immigrants

TO: Elena Kagan     CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Can you deal with this, or pass on to Diana/Lyn? I don't like the
sentence on "the other deficiencies of the welfare reform law".   But more
to the point, I would like Diana or Lyn (or you if you want to) to sign
off on these letters. Or we could have Paul oversee a system for the
entire office.  It drives me nuts.
---------------------- Forwarded by Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP on 01/16/97
04:22 PM ---------------------------




Diane Ikemiyashiro
01/16/97 02:27:26 PM
Record Type:    Record

To:      Bruce N. Reed/OPD/EOP
cc:      Cathy R. Mays/OPD/EOP
Subject:         welfare reform/immigrants

The following draft is a response for George Soros.  I'll be faxing to you
Mr. Soros' incoming letter.  Please let me know of any modifications that
I need to make.

Thanks very much.

-- Diane


Thank you so much for your letter and for letting me know of your
  views regarding the welfare reform law's impact on legal
  immigrants.  I understand your concerns.

  The welfare reform law I signed is not perfect, but I believe it
  represents our best chance to reform the current system.  The
  millions of women and children across our nation no~ on welfare
  deserve a chance to break the cycle of dependency, and with this
  law, we have an historic opportunity to provide that chance
  without hurting the very people we are trying to help.

  As you may know, certain provisions of the Immigration.bill,
  which were included in the Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations.
  Act of 1997 that I signed into law in September, interact with
  the welfare reform law.  I urged Congress to change provisions of
  earlier versions of the Immigration bill that would have worsened
  the harmful effects of the welfare reform law on legal
  immigrants, increased the financial burden on state and local
  governments, and threatened public health.


  I am pleased that we were successful in convincing Congress to
  drop a number of these objectionable provisions, including those
  that would have denied HIV treatment services to legal
 immigrants, applied new eligibility rules to current legal
  immigrants, disqualified legal immigrants from receiving certain
  types of vital assistance, and required that legal immigrants who
  received public benefits be deported or denied naturalization.
  We also convinced Congress to reduce the income requirement for
  sponsors, which would have denied many legal immigrants the
  opportunity to reunite with spouses, children, and other family
  members.

  I have issued directives to ensure that legal immigrants and
  their children who remain eligible for benefits under the new
  welfare reform law do not have those benefits cut off mistakenly,
  and to allow eligible legal immigrants to become citizens as
  quickly as possible. At my urging, Congress adopted a provision
  in the immigration bill to allow eligible legal immigrants to
  continue receiving food stamps until April 1, 1997.   In addition,
  the new immigration law exempts battered immigrants and indigent
  immigrants from certain restrictions under the welfare bill, and
  exempts nonprofit charitable organizations from the alien
  verification requirements.

  I hope to work with the new Congress to address the other
  deficiencies of the welfare reform law.  It is now up to all of
 us to work together to ensure that the new welfare law is
  implemented successfully, for the benefit of those who need a
  hand up rather than a handout.

  I look forward to your continued counsel and active involvement
  in this important cause.


