RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Diana M. Fortuna ( FORTUNA_D )   (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME:16-JAN-1997 17:47:55.80

SUBJECT: Privatization issue and meeting tomorrow

TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED_B } Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E } Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ:NOT READ

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT COURIER
Tomorrow at 2:30 Ken Apfel is convening a meeting on the
privatization issue with the agencies.  Here is some background
on it. There are still a lot of unanswered questions.
Pending State Requests: We have pending requests from Texas and
Wisconsin. Texas wants to privatize food stamp and Medicaid
eligibility state
o
-wide.   It is not seeking a waiver to do so, but
simply arguing that current law allows this.   If we say no, then
they may fall back on a waiver request. Wisconsin is seeking a
waiver in order to privatize.
Areas for Potential Privatization: States may seek to privatize
eligibility services in 4 areas:   TANF, Medicaid, food stamps,
and some employment programs.   I don't know much about the last
one, but the unions are worried about it and the Dept. of Labor
is coming tomorrow.
TANF: The new law explicitly allows privatization without
Federal permission, and everyone agrees there is nothing to be
done about this.
Medicaid:   The law was not changed in this area.  The relevant
language that appears to preclude privatization is the
requirement for "merit systems protections." This is waivable.
Food Stamps: This is the most confusing and most active area.
This is also covered by the "merit systems protections" language.
Texas is arguing that, as long as the handful of people who
design the computer program that determines eligibility are state
employees, it can privatize many other parts of the operation.
USDA and OPM disagree.
Unions' Argument: The unions gave Erskine a paper arguing that
USDA and HCFA delegated their waiver authority on merit systems
to OPM in 1979, and that OPM must do a reg with notice and
comment, not a simple waiver, in order to allow this.   But, if
true, this really just delays action and doesn't really change
anything.
Options:   I suspect that legally we can do this if we want to.
State flexibility argues for saying yes, while the unions'
concerns argue no.   I'm not sure I detect a policy issue here,
beyond perhaps a desire to see if the private sector could do
this more efficiently than the public sector. Governors Thompson
and Bush will presumably complain loudly.   The departments will
lean toward opposing this.


