         RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

         CREATOR: Sandra Thurman ( CN=Sandra Thurman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

         CREATION DATE/TIME:11-DEC-1997 19:50:18.00

         SUBJECT:   Draft of briefing memorandum to Erskine

         TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         Todd A. Summers ( CN=Todd A. Summers/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
         READ: UNKNOWN

         TEXT:
         Here is the draft of the briefing memo to Erskine and Sylvia for the
         meeting next Wednesday with Dr. Hitt. Mind you, I am still working on
         it!   I'd love any suggestions that you might have.

         Sandy



         Next week, you will be meeting with me and Dr. Scott Hitt, Chairman of the
         PresidentD,s Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS.  Dr. Hitt is a prominent
         physician from Los Angeles with significant experience in the clinical
         management of HIV and AIDS, as well as local, state and national politics.

         This past Sunday, the Council released its Progress Report on the
         Administration's response to the epidemic (copy attached). While
         significant accomplishments with respect to funding and policy issues are
         recognized, the report is quite critical of the President and the
         Secretary of HHS. The Council's principal concerns are:
         a perceived de-prioritization of AIDS;
         inaction on needle exchange; and
         mixed signals on Medicaid expansion.

         Some background on these issues and our current policy positions:

         Prioritization of AIDS
         This concern relates primarily to the funding of discretionary AIDS
         programs.  It became a particularly hot issue when the balanced budget
         agreement was completed and no AIDS programs were listed under the
         "protected" classification. Advocates interpreted this as a
         de-prioritization of AIDS, which had in previous years enjoyed
         classification as a budget priority.

         This perception was exacerbated by requests in the President's FY98 budget
         (see attached table) that the community considered inadequate,
         particularly for the AIDS Drug Assistance Program for which the
         Administration sought no increase. Substantial increases were ultimately
         obtained, with Administration support, but the Republican appropriators
         championed these increases.  (In reality, for each year since the
         Republicans took over Congress, they have increased AIDS funding over the
         President's request.)


As has been the case in previous years, HHS has asked for only minimal
increases in its AIDS programs for FY99.  In its first passback, OMB
sought only level funding.  While this is a time-honored exercise, several
community members have gotten wind of the passback numbers and are quite
upset that the Administration isn't pushing for adequate ~ncreases.

Josh Gotbaum and I have been working on a Presidential Initiative that
would offer an additional $115 million for the AIDS Drug Assistance
Program, other parts of the Ryan White CARE Act, and the COCO,s HIV
prevention programs (representing a 6% increase overall)

Needle Exchange
This issue has become central to the AIDS community and, rightly or
wrongly, it has become symbolic of the Administration's leadership on
AIDS. Given that as many as 50% of new HIV infections are directly or
indirectly related to injection drug use, those on the front lines-are
increasingly interested in having the flexibility to employ all strategies
they deem appropriate.

congress, with strong support from the Administration, maintained the
current authority of the Secretary of HHS to remove the restriction on the
use of Federal funding for needle exchange programs.    [Footnote: To act,
the Secretary must determine that needle exchange programs (a) decrease
HIV infection among participants and (b) do not increase the use of
illegal drugs.   Her report to Congress this past spring was determinative
on the first test and less clear on the second.]   As a compromise,
however, Congress imposed a six month moratorium on the exercise of this
authority.  Many in the community believe that this left the door open for
the Secretary to make her determination prior to the expiration of the
moratorium and prepare to allow states, at their discretion, to use
Federal funds a's -soon as the moratorium expires. The PresidentD, s
Advisory Council is -recommending in a letter to the President (copy
attached) that he instruct the Secretary to act prior to the return of
congress on January 27, 1998.

Medicaid Expansion
This past April, the Vice President announced a request that HCFA study
the possibility of a demonstration program that would expand Medicaid
coverage to people with HIV. This was in response to recently released
guidelines from the NIH that recommend treatment earlier in the course of
illness. Unfortunatel¥" we are in a "catch 22." Currently, many
impoverished people have no access to treatment until they progress to
full-blown AIDS, at which point they qualify for Medicaid--which pays for
the treatment that may have forestalled the onset of AIDS.  (Some have
likened this to searching for the seat belt after the car has crashed.)

The AIDS Drug AIDS Drug Assistance Program (part of ~he Ryan White CARE
Act) helps, but because this is a limited discretionary program, there are
many states that have cut off new applications, limited their covered
formularies, or simply capped available benefits far below the annual cost
of these treatments (+/- $15K/yr).

HCFA has completed its preliminary analysis, and has determined that
expanding Medicaid would not be budget neutral.  Last week, a spokesman
for HHS told the press that the Medicaid expansion initiative was not
feasible without making clear that we were still committed to working on a
solution (my statement is attached).  This press leak was very untimely,
appearing in the Washington Post the first day of the CouncilD,s meeting
here in Washington.  Subsequent press coverage was quite intense, and was
then fueled by the release of the CouncilD,s report.  While I believe that


we were able to sustain a tenable position with the public, it does place
considerable pressure on us to maintain discussions on a long-term
solution to the health care needs of people with HIV/AIDS and on a
short-term response in the FY99 budget.

This is a very important issue to the AIDS advocacy community. They are
perhaps appropriately concerned that continued reliance on discretionary
programs like Ryan White for primary health care and treatments is a short
term solution that leaves them vulnerable! and they are seeking more long
term, systematic entitlement reform. While we will need to respond in
FY99 with additional funds for care and treatment, that will not address
their long term goal of modernizing Medicaid/Medicare coverage.

The CouncilO,s report expressed concern over "mixed signals" from the
Administration. They had drafted language far harsher but we are able to
calm them down by arranging for a call from the HCFA Administrator, who
clarified that the press article was not accurate and that HCFA would
continue to work with the community to find a solution.

Likely Requests from Dr. Hitt
I believe that Dr. Hitt will ask for several things from you:
a commitment to get the President to the next Council meeting in March;
a commitment to pass the CouncilO,s report to the President; and
a commitment to respond to their recommendations, particularly those
relating to needle exchange and Medicaid expansion.

My recommendation is that you respond as follows:

POTUS -attendance at next Council meeting:              you will support the
request, but it will be dependent on scheduling

Transmittal of Council Report to President:             this Administration
takes the CouncilO,s recommendations very seriously and will respond
appropriately

Needle exchange and Medicaid expansion:         you will call together
senior members of the Administration to address these recommendations as
soon as possible

Please let me know if you need any additional information.


