        RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

        CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael cohen/ou=oPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

        CREATION DATE/TIME:15-DEC-1997 14:41:02.00

        SUBJECT:    Heads up on Opportunity Zones

        TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
        READ: UNKNOWN

        TEXT:
        An issue surfaced today during a meeting with ED and OMB staff as we
        continue   to nail down the details of the Zones proposal that you need to
        be aware   of. The short version (details below) is that OMB may not yet be
        on board   with our version of Zones, and Frank Raines may still be wedded
        to (his)   alternative version.

        I assume that since DPC, ED and POTUS all have a common view of this,
        OMB's lingering concerns don't matter much.  However, si~ce the budget is
        not yet nailed down, and I'm not entirely clear on the process for
        completing the design of an initiative that has already been leaked and
        incorporated into the working budget, I thought I shouldn't entirely blow
        this off, and that you ought to know where things stand.

        So here's the deal:

        You recall that OMB has had a different conception of this initiative than
        we have. OMB has seen this as a pot of funds with which to reward school
        districts that have made significant achievement gains with their own
        funds and federal funds, since new federal programs focused on higher
        standards (Goals 2000 and an overhauled Title 1) began to be put in place
        in 1995. They'd get a- relatively modest amount of funding in the first 3
        years of the program, and then a big increase in years 4 and 5 only if they
        've made significant achievement gains.

         In contrast, we've seen this more as a pot of funds we could use to bribe
        more districts in implementing Chicago-style reforms in order to create
        models of urban and rural improvement. The funding needs to be up front
        both to support implementation and to provide an incentive for districts
        to step up to some particularly difficult challenges.

         As a result of lots of discussions with Barry White and his staff,
        starting from just before our leak, we've designed a proposal that pretty
        well merges both views--we keep our financial inducement for Chicago
        reforms, and build in a reward-for-performance component in two parts of
        the program.  First, by requiring districts that compete for the funds to
        demonstrate that they already have a track record of improving academic
        performance, district-wide or at least in a few schools where they set out
        to turn things around.  Second, districts that show significant
        achievement gains over the 3-year grant they receive get a bonus of two
        years of additional funding, although at a lower rate than the first 3
        years. DPC and ED are together on this.

        Today, Wayne Upshaw and Mary Cassel from OMB indicated that Frank Raines
        had been directly involved in shaping the OMB proposal and really felt
        strongly about their particular version of rewards-for-performance,
.'.

  including in particular the back-loading of funding. No one in OMB has
  yet gone back to him to get his views on the new approach that has
  emerged. They will get a memo on this to him tomorrow.    Bill is revising
  our 2-page description of the program to reflect the progress we have made
  since the leak, and we will make sure this goes to Frank.

  In our meetings and work, I've continued to move along according to our
  own design, while looking for ways to incorporate OMB's ideas where ever
  possible.  I assume that's the best thing to do unless Frank weighs in and
  tries to move us in another direction--at which point both of you will be
  called in for the final battle.


