RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Molly Brostrom ( BROSTROM M    (WHO)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 21-JAN-1997 18:05:52.08

SUBJECT: parting thoughts

TO: Bruce N. Reed                             REED B ) Autoforward to: Remote Addressee
READ: NOT READ

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ: NOT READ

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 POINT ROMAN
                -     -
Attached is an exit memo I put together to give you some thoughts
on the issues I've worked on (I'm putting a hard copy in your
boxes as well).   If you have any questions, I'd be glad to talk
to you tomorrow (my last day) .
o
January 21, 1997

TO:             Bruce Reed
                Elena Kagan
FROM:   Molly Brostrom
RE:             "My" Issues/Exit Memorandum
I wanted to give you general ideas on some of the issues on which
I have worked while at the Domestic policy Council and where I
think it is important for DPC to remain involved. Attached are
background and more specific thoughts for anyone who continues
work in these areas.
Homelessness. At the request of the President, the Interagency
Council on the Homeless became a working group of the Domestic
Policy Council in 1993 (funded and housed at HUD).   I think it is
important to continue White House involvement with the ICH for a
couple of reasons:   1) There is no other White House connection
for advocates and providers.   2) The ICH is a useful body for
interagency coordination and without White House involvement, the
ICH will become another arm of HUD and will lose other agencies'
involvement.
On the latter reason, there is increasing interest on the Hill
and among advocates on ensuring that other agencies (HHS in
particular) play a larger part in providing supportive services
for the homeless (Lazio circulated a draft homeless bill last
session that would turn HUD's Shelter
o
-Plus
o
-Care program into a
rental assistance block grant to states).  In addition, with
increasing consolidation of homeless programs in the last couple
years, it is increasingly important that "mainstream" programs
(training, education, health care) reach out to and serve the
homeless -- the ICH can press for and monitor this aspect.
Housing. The affordable housing needs in this country are
critical    and they play a key part in the success of moving
people from welfare
o
-to


D
-work -- yet have received little White
House attention.  I think this is an area where DPC should
continue and should increase its involvement: new housing policy
ideas are needed and HUD is developing some that could benefit
from White House backing. At the very least, a White House
contact for advocates and interest groups is important.
A couple of specific items:
D
-The interest in providing Habitat access to surplus
property should be monitored.  Rep. Lazio's public housing
bill contains a provision that would accomplish this -- HUD
and HHS are supportive; they are working on amendments that
would improve the Title V process. But GSA and OMB (the GSA
side) are reluctant.  The President has indicated he would

like this proposal to happen.
D
-Nic Retsinas' Office for Housing at HUD is developing a
Homeownership Tax Credit proposal that seems promising and
for which they are looking for an advocate at the White
House. The proposal would aim to increase homeownership
among households with incomes below the national median by
making investors eligible for a $9900 tax credit that
potential low/moderate income homeowners could use towards
the downpayment or mortgage.   I passed on further
information to Paul Weinstein.
Veterans. The Interagency Veterans Policy Group was created in
1994 to provide a forum for interagency work on veterans issues
and for White House communication with veteran service
organizations. DPC has been the lead, but it is co
D
-chaired with
us by Cabinet Affairs and Public Liaison with OMB involvement.   I
don't think continued DPC involvement is critical.  I do think it
is important for one office to take the lead and I would suggest
Cabinet Affairs with OMB providing substantive support.    I
believe the IVPG has played an effective role in giving access to
VSOs and thus muting criticism.
Seniors. With Chris and Jen/Pauline covering Medicare and
Medicaid, and NEC and OMB the primary contacts on Social
Security and pensions, the other seniors issues are relatively
minor (the Older Americans Act is up for reauthorization this
year-
D
-these programs are very important to senior groups-
D
-Bill
White of Public Liaison and Ken Apfel's shop can cover).
I do think, however, that there is potential for a DPC person to
work with HHS/Administration on Aging at looking at ways the
federal government can work with states and localities to prepare
for an aging population.  Initiatives outside Medicare and Social
Security are important and can divert attention from those two
sticklers.

I hope this is useful, and I wish you the very best in your work
at the Domestic Policy Council.


