RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Charles S. Konigsberg ( KONIGSBERG_C)     (OMB)

CREATION DATE/TIME: 5-MAR-1996 22:56:52.15

SUBJECT: PRELIM. ITEM VETO ANALYSIS/DO NOT CIRCULATE

TO: Robert G. Damus                           DAMUS R      (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 08:11:20.87

TO: Charles E. Kieffer                        KIEFFER C ) (OMB)
READ: 5-MAR-1996 22:58:14.99

TO: Lisa Kountoupes                           KOUNTOUPES L ) (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 09:50:07.18

TO: Joseph Minarik                            MINARIK J    )   (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 07:52:59.88

TO: Barry B. Anderson                         ANDERSON B)       (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 08:40:46.27

TO: James J. Jukes                            JUKES J )    (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 09:58:18.58

TO: Jacob J. Lew                              LEW J )   (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 08:30:31.72

TO: James C. Murr                             MURR J)     (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 08:34:51.88

TO: Harry E. Moran                            MORAN H )    (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 08:38:,07.73

TO: Betty I. Bradshaw                         BRADSHAW B)       (OMB)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 10:26:57.73

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E )    (WHO)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 08:33:32.79

TO: Paul J. Weinstein, Jr                     WEINSTEIN P ) (OPD)
READ: 6-MAR-1996 09:34:47.06

TO: FAX (9-622-9260,Clarissa Potter(Tre       TLXA1MAIL_\F:9-622-9260\C:Clarissa,potter
READ: NOT READ

TO: FAX (9-514-0563,Mike Small/DOJ-OLC)       TLXA1MAIL \F:9-514-0563\C:Mike Small/DOJ-
READ: NOT READ

TEXT:
PRINTER FONT 12 - POINT- COURIER
FOLLOWING ARE MY PRELIMINARY COMMENTS ON THE LATEST HOUSE ITEM
VETO LANGUAGE;    PLEASE GET BACK TO ME WITH
COMMENTS/CORRECTIONS/ADDITIONS BY WEDNESDAY NOON.  THANKS.
395
o
-5069.  PLEASE DO NOT CIRCULATE THIS DOCUMENT;     IT HAS NOT
BEEN VETTED THROUGH OMB YET.


Preliminary comments on House Item Veto Offer
(dated March 4, 1996    1:18pm):

PROVISIONS WHICH COULD RENDER ITEM VETO INEFFECTIVE:
1. Lockbox: The lockbox language, set forth in [brackets) as
new section 1024, would require the President to: reduce the
statutory discretionary spending caps to reflect rescissions of
discretionary budget authority; and to eliminate from the PAYGO
scorecard any positive balance that would otherwise have accrued
from applying the item veto to new direct spending or tax
benefits.
         This is problematic, especially on the discretionary side,
because the automatic lowering of spending caps, would make it
difficult to accommodate necessary supplementals later in the
year. Consequently, the lockbox's automatic cap reductions would
undercut the President's ability to use the item veto
effectively.
         Suggested improvement in the lockbox mechanism:  Provide
that the rescinded or canceled amounts be placed in an "emergency
reserve" to be available to offset emergency supplementals and
other emergency legislation. Although such "emergency
legislation" does not legally require offsets, the availability
of these emergency reserves might facilitate supplementals and
other emergency legislation when needed.

2.   Time for transmittal of cancellation message: Earlier
versions of item veto had given the President 10 days following
enactment of spending/revenue bills to identify items for
cancellation;   the Administration had recommended 20 days as a
more realistic time period. This offer, however, requires that
special messages be transmitted "on the same calendar day as
enactment of the law to which the cancellation applies." This is
utterly unrealistic and unworkable. Appropriations legislation
often has to be signed immediately upon presentment to the
President in order to continue vital government functions;   this
would leave no time at all to identify wasteful spending and to
prepare cancellation messages.   Simply put, this provision guts
the item veto.
 [When this is corrected, it will be necessary to add
conforming amendments to the BEA to clarify that OMB
discretionary spending reports and PAY
o
-GO reports, required
under current law to be issued 5 days after enactment of
legislation, need to be adjusted following a rescission of
discretionary appropriations or suspension of new direct
spending or targeted tax benefits.)

3. Effective Dates and Sunset:  This Act would become effective
upon enactment of a balanced budget (by 2002), and would sunset
in FY 2002. Authority to eliminate wasteful spending and special
interest tax provisions should be provided immediately -- without
delay -- and should be permanent.  In addition, in order to be
most effective, the cancellation authority should be made
applicable to unobligated balances from already enacted FY 1996
appropriations.

4. Nonseverability: The draft contains in [brackets) a
nonseverability provision which would invalidate the entire item
veto mechanism if any part of the mechanism -- cancellation of


targeted tax benefits, for example -- were to be found
unconstitutional. The statute should be severable, so that --
for example -- cancellation of discretionary budget authority
could continue, even if cancellation of direct spending or tax
benefits is successfully challenged.

5. Definition of Targeted Tax Benefit: The draft language would
define targeted tax benefit as "any revenue
o
-losing provision
which provides a federal income tax deduction, credit, exclusion
or preference to 100 or fewer beneficiaries" with several
exceptions;  the definition also includes transition rules that
provide special treatment to 10 or fewer taxpayers, with
exceptions.
        The Treasury Department notes that it will be difficult, if
not impossible. for anyone to determine the number of persons
affected by any particular tax provision.   This test requires too
much precision and is too easy to avoid or manipulate in the
drafting process and by taxpayers.   It creates an incentive for
tax benefit provisions to be drafted too broadly.   In addition,
it provides no time limit within which this "100 or fewer"
standard must be met.
        A definition of targeted tax benefit closer to the original
Senate definition is preferable -- i.e., causing a revenue loss
and "having the practical effect of providing more favorable tax
treatment to a particular taxpayer or limited group of taxpayers
when compared with other similarly situated taxpayers."

ADDITIONAL ISSUES:

o Identifying congressional districts: The draft would require
that each cancella~ion message identify "the specific State and
congressional district, if any, affected by the cancellation; and
the total number and dollar value of all cancellations imposed
during the current session of Congress on the State and
congressional district .... " This requirement is unduly
burdensome and unnecessary: unduly burdensome for OMB which will
already face the difficult task of carefully vetting each
provision of spending and revenue bills immediately upon
presentment;  and unnecessary because the objective of the
cancellation authority is to eliminate wasteful spending wherever
it may occur, without regard to geographic distribution.

o Definition of "item of new direct spending";    It's unclear what
the phrase "relative to the most recent levels calculated
pursuant to section 251 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency
Deficit Control act of 1985" means.    We recommend the following
definition:
The term "direct spending" means--
                  (A) budget authority provided by law other than
        appropriation Acts;
         (B) entitlement authority as defined in section 3(9)
        of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act       of
        1974; and
         (C) the food stamp program.

o Definition of "cancel": This draft is preferable to earlier
drafts because the term "cancel" is substituted for the
constitutionally problematic term "veto." However, the


definition of "cancel" -- particularly with respect to new direct
spending and targeted tax benefits -- is too vague. We recommend
the following:
         The term "cancel" means--
    (A) with respect to "new direct spending," withholding
the authority to obligate the United States pertaining
thereto, and suspension of legal entitlement to claim any
benefits or payments deriving therefrom; and
    (B) with respect to "targeted tax benefits," the
suspension of legal entitlement to claim any Federal tax
deduction, credit, exclusion, preference or other tax
benefit deriving therefrom.

o Cancellation effective unless disapproved:  The time line for
congressional consideration of disapproval bills appears to
provide the following:  30 session days for fast
D
-track
consideration of disapproval bills;   if the disapproval bill is
vetoed, an additional 5 session days for consideration of the
veto message;  then the cancellations become effective, within an
additional 10 calendar days "unless ... a disapproval bill is
enacted into law."   Since 5 session days is provided for review
of a veto message, it's entirely unclear why the additional 10
calendar days is needed, in the case of a veto.    If a disapproval
bill has been vetoed, and not overridden during the 5
D
-day
override period, the cancellation should become immediately
effective so as not to needlessly waste budgetary resources on an
item which has been cancelled.  (This. anomaly is likely
unintentional and appears to exist because of the peculiar way
this section of the bill is constructed.)

o Disapproval bills: are required to be titled "A bill
disapproval the recommendations submitted by the President on

Use of the term "recommendations" is inaccurate; the special
messages are more than mere recommendations. The term
"cancellations" would be more appropriate.
D
Previous Administration comments which have been incorporated:
(for EOP use only)
o Uses the word "cancel" with respect to direct spendirig and
targeted tax benefits, instead of "veto" which we objected to on
constitutional grounds.
o Inserts "new" before "direct spending" in order to clarify.
o The lock
D
-box mechanism, requiring automatic spending cap
reductions, does not appear to apply to the out years, as in
earlier drafts.
o No longer gives JCT authority to determine targeted tax
benefits (which Justice objected to on Chadha grounds) .
o Latest draft has dropped the Senate provision prohibiting the
inclusion of non
D
-emergency items in an emergency bill.
o Deletes the 3
D


-judge court judicial review mechanism but retains
the requirement for expedited consideration.
o
Time
o
-line under latest House item veto language:
(Session Days)
DAY 1:                           Date of enactment of spending or revenue
                 bill; President to transmit special messages
                 on the same calendar day (single special
                 message for each Act)
DAY 5:                   Disapproval bills, if any must be introduced
                                 in House and Senate
7 days following
introduction:            Committees must report disapproval bills
   (day 12)

DAY 30:                 Congressional consideration of the
                                disapproval bill and any conference report
                                thereon must be completed (conferences may be
                                required because it's in order in the House
                                and Senate to strike specific disapprovals,
                                and it's in order in the Senate to add
                                additional disapprovals) .

Track 1:                                                Track 2:
Spending/revenue provisions             In the case of a veto,
are cancelled unless, w/in              5 session days are provided
10 calendar days (excluding             for consideration of the
Sundays) after the expiration           veto message;  the spending/
of the congressional review             revenue provisions are
period (above), a disapproval           cancelled within 10 calendar
bill is enacted into law                        days if the disapproval bill
has not become law                              (due to an override)


