 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Bruce N. Re.ed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JAN-1998 19:41:25.00

 SUBJECT:   I'll take all of you with me, of course

 TO: Michael Waldman ( CN=Michael Waldman/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Cynthia A. Rice ( CN=Cynthia A. Rice/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Michelle Crisci ( CN=Michelle Crisci/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TO: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.    ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ: UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 BASEBALL
                      Time for owners to show resolve

                      By Peter Gammons, Globe Staff, 01/04/98

                          he 50th anniversary of Jackie Robinson's debut has
 passed, but
                          hopefully not faded, and this week marked the 25th
 anniversary of
                      another pioneer's stardom, that of Roberto Clemente. To
 many Hispanics,
                      the celebration of Robinson's place in 20th century
 America too often
                      focused on one minority group when in fact he opened up
 professional
                      athletics to all Americans and reminded us that,   in real
 ity, we all are
                      members of a minority.

                      Dark-skinned Hispanics were banned from mainstream
 baseball, as well;
                      remember, Luis Tiant Sr. was the lefthanded pitcher on
 the all-time Negro
                      leagues all-star team. Considering that


 Japanese-Americans were confined
                    to camps during world War II in this country, can you
 imagine what would
                    have happened if a Hideo Nomo had tried to pitch for the
 Dodgers in 1947,
                    or if Sak Lee had tried to jump to the Red Sox - OK,
 Braves - in 1950?

                       But now, as we remember Clemente's greatness as a player
 and a
                   humanitarian, comes word within the industry of a survey
 that claims baseball
                   is on the brink of a remarkable revival because of the
 economic power of its
                   Hispanic and Asian-American audiences, both of which
 have been
                   essentially ignored by the media and the politically
 correct.

                       John Harrington knows the business community. He's heard
 from the Bank
                    of Boston people that they can't keep up with the
 mortgage business in the
                   mushrooming New England Hispanic communities from Boston
 to Lawrence
                    to Providence. Restaurant chain demographics show the
 hot middle-class
                    spending power is in the Hispanic communities throughout
 the country. You
                    wonder why the Mets, like the Red Sox, have gone so hard
 after Korea?
                    Go to Flushing, check out the Korean community, and
 you'll realize why
                    they had 12,500 walkups for a Chan Ho Park appearance.

                   So don't these baseball people realize that there's no
 story more American
                   than that of Orlando and Alberto Hernandez?

                       We would like to believe that they do, and anyone who
 watched John and
                   Maureen Harrington interact with the children at the
 ABCD Christmas party
                   that Red Sox employees sponsored would think maybe, just
 maybe,
                   someone in power gets it.

                   In the post-Robinson era, inertia put the sport where it
 is today, with recent
                   polls indicating that it runs second to pro football in
 fan interest. Earth to
                   baseball owners: If you want to reach a huge section of
 the 15-and-under
                   audience, study your demographics, especially in
 contrast to other sports.
                   Do not listen to 19-to-53 white male talk radio.

                       Entertainment industry people see the same boom, as do
 some network
                       people, so the New Year's resolution of the people who


overthrew Fay
                  Vincent and have run baseball with all the vision and
success of Warren G.
                  Harding should be to peer out from their bunkers and
understand that the
                  game cannot grow if it is operated as the private estate
of an oligarchy.

                      Here, for the New Year, are some suggestions.

                      Bud Selig is not the problem on his side, any more than
 Donald Fehr is the
                   problem, and in Selig's tenure, he has tried to bring
 his Balkanized owners
                   together, with sporadic success. Many like and respect
 Selig, but this is an
                   entertainment industry, in which perception is more
 important than reality,
                   and public perception is not kind to Bud Selig.

                   During his tenure, the Commissioner's Office has fallen
 apart, marketing has
                   become a joke, those left to man 18-hour-a-day jobs in
 PR cannot get
                   teams to make players available in the World Series ...

                   Fairly or unfairly, baseball was savaged by the 1994
 strike, and the many
                   fans who have never returned to the game see Selig's
 image every time they
                   think of the sickening cancellation of the World Series,
 followed by the
                   crack-brained notion of replacement ball.

                    So, please, let's not go through the charade of a
 headhunter presenting two
                    or three empty suits whom we know Jerry Reinsdorf and
 his ilk will throw
                    out. Reinsdorf has made a mockey of the White Sox, so
 why is he even
                    listened to? Baseball needs to go into the 21st century
 with someone who
                    stands for the American dream that this game is supposed
 to be. Bill Bradley
                    wouldn't be interested, in all likelihood, and while
 Paul Kirk would be
                    terrific, somehow someone has torpedoed him.

                    OK, so let's clear the decks of the old guard. The
 perfect candidate is Bruce
                    Reid, President Clinton's senior policy adviser. And,
 Bud, don't tell me you
                    don't need anyone from politics, because you do; anyone
 can find marketing
                    people. Reid is brilliant, he is purposeful, he knows
 people, and he proposed
                    to his future wife with a note stashed in a peanut shell
 at Three Rivers
                    Stadium.


                  Then put together a governing board to accompany Reid.
It would consist of
                  eight owners, Fehr, two players elected annually (for
instance, Tom Glavine,
                  David Cone, or B.J. Surhoff), Paul Beeston, one network
power (such as
                  Dick Ebersol) , one elected GM representative and, if
they really want vision,
                  Sandy Alderson. Give the union participation and
responsibility, and their
                  "nyet"   party line will diminish. After that, form a
committee of five general
                  managers - yes, you need operations experts - as well as
a couple of
                  Commissioner's Office staff members to oversee the real
world, so that, for
                  instance, the draft is held in July and September
callups are eliminated so
                  that pennants aren't decided by minor leaguers.

                      Everyone can then pledge never again to expand, because
 the nickels and
                   dimes that shortsighted owners pocketed from those
 rights fees cost them
                   millions upon millions in inflated salaries.

                      Then Reid, with the advice and consent of the board,
would appoint an
                  attorney general, perhaps Alderson, and dismantle the
pitiable league office
                  system that damaged the sport greatly in the Roberto Al
omar case. The AG
                  would be in charge of discipline, from on-field flareups
to minor league
                  steroid abuse (a huge, ignored problem), to agent abuse
(the union is too
                  scared), to a complete overhaul of the umpiring system.

                   An outsider's perspective, with the help of the board,
 the networks, etc.,
                   could enhance progress in the international field. Urban
 development
                   programs should be dramatically upgraded (there have to
 be thousands of
                   Carlos Pena stories, from Haverhill to Houston) .

                   If you're an owner, build a baseball academy, modeled
 after the Kansas City
                   Royals' prototype, grab every athlete you can find, fund
 a development
                   league, and see how many Frank Whites and Michael Colem
 ans you come
                   up with.

                      Robinson and Clemente give the people who run baseball
 the opportunity to
                      look back and try to explain what the game meant to
 American society.
                      Unfortunately, most of the anniversary observations have
 dwelled on the


                        past. Baseball can again assume its place as the sport
 of the American
                   dream, but it will not happen looking back, and it will
 not happen with the
                   view from the trench dug by Selig's oligarchy after its
 25-year cold war with
                   the Players Association.

                   If indeed baseball is on the brink of a renaissance,
 then what it needs is
                   creative vision. What it needs is for Mr. Selig, Mr.
 Harrington, and others to
                   step back so that the game can move forward.


