RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jose Cerda III ( CN=Jose Cerda III/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 8-JAN-1998 19:14:50.00

SUBJECT:   AR and Brady

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
BR/EK:

Attached please find the text of an e-mail I've prepare to give Bruce
Lindsey a "heads up" on Arkansas and Brady. Any thoughts, comments? Or
should I just go ahead and send it?

Jose'



Bruce:

The Treasury and Justice Departments are preparing to resolve the issue of
Brady background checks in AR, and we expect it to be controversial.
Thus, Bruce, Elena and Rahm thought I should forward a note to you with
some of the history and details.  Please let me know if you require any
additional information.

Jose (6-5568)

AR and Brady Background Checks

Since the Supreme Court overturned part of the Brady Law last summer, the
Departments of Justice and Treasury have worked with the state and local
law enforcement officials initially charged with conducting background
checks. (CLEOs, or Chief Law Enforcement Officers) to encourage them to
continue to do background checks on a voluntary basis. More than 90% have
complied with this request.   Only two states -- AR and OH -- and about 100
small jurisdictions of 5,000 persons or less resisted. Several weeks ago,
OH signed a Memorandum of Agreement with Treasury and Justice, and
re-instituted backgrounds checks. And, while the 100 or so smaller
jurisdictions have been contacted, these areas include less than 1% of the
gun buying public. Thus,    AR remains the only major jurisdiction that
refuses to conduct background checks.

Justice and Treasury have worked hard to resolve this issue, but the State
Police -- by order of the Governor's Office -- have refused to do
background checks on a voluntary basis. At first, a staff attorney in the
Attorney General's office concluded that background checks were no longer
mandated by federal law and should be stopped. Attorney General Winston
Bryant, however, reversed this decision and clarified that not only could
background checks continue as a matter of AR state law -- but that they wer
e actually required.  Despite this opinion, the Governor has still refused
to allow the State police to do background checks, and he has told Justice
that AR will not do so unless it receives new federal funds for this


purpose.  For its part, Justice has informed the Governor that he has
unobligated federal funds into which he could tap.

As a result of this stalemate, Bryant has asked Treasury to designate his
office as the CLEO in AR responsible for background checks. Bryant's
office would utilize the FBI's NCIC database (instead of the State
Police's database) and resume background checks in AR on a voluntary
basis.  Treasury and Justice are prepared to comply with this request, and
are tentatively schedule to make the necessary changes starting January
22nd. We do not believe that the Governor is aware of this proposed
resolution, and we do not expect him to be supportive.


