RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Jordan Tamagni ( CN;Jordan Tamagni/OU;WHO/O;EOP [ UNKNOWN 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JAN-1998 16:57:54.00

SUBJECT:   Slight revisions in bold

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN;Elena Kagan/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Ann F. Lewis ( CN;Ann F. Lewis/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Jeffrey M. Smith ( CN;Jeffrey M. Smith/OU;OSTP/O;EOP @ EOP [ OSTP 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: John H. Gibbons { CN;John H. Gibbons/OU;OSTP/O;EOP @ EOP [ OSTP 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: John Podesta ( CN;John Podesta/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Ruby Shamir ( CN;Ruby Shamir/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN;Cathy R. Mays/OU;OPD/O;EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Sara M. Latham ( CN;Sara M. Latham/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Draft 1/9/98 5:00pm

PRESIDENT WILLIAM J. CLINTON
RADIO ADDRESS ON CLONING
January 10, 1998
        Good morning. This week, like many Americans, I learned the
profoundly troubling news that a member of the scientific community is
laying plans to clone a human life.  Today, I want to talk about the
reasons why we, as a nation, must condemn this plan as a violation of our
deepest values.

         Last year, news that scientists had successfully cloned a sheep
astonished the world. We knew then that this remarkable breakthrough had
the potential to yield enormous agricultural and medical benefits.  But we
also knew that with this great potential came the troubling possibility
that these new techniques could be used to clone human life.

        I said then and I believe just as strongly today that any
discovery that touches upon human creation requires us to move with
caution, care, and deep concern about the impact of our actions. That is
why I banned the use of federal funds for cloning human beings while we
study the risks and responsibilities of such a possibility.  And that is
why I asked the National Bioethics Advisory Commission to conduct a
thorough review of the scientific, moral, and spiritual dimensions of
cloning human life.  The commission spent three months speaking to
families, physicians, religious leaders, and researchers, all of whom
agreed unanimously that attempting to clone a human being is unacceptably


dangerous to the child and morally unacceptable to our society.

        In response to this overwhelming consensus, I sent legislation to
Congress that would ban human cloning for five years, while preserving our
ability to study the morally and medically acceptable uses of cloning
technology. Unfortunately, Congress has not yet acted on this
legislation.

        This week, we learned why we need it. While the vast majority of
scientists and physicians in the private sector have refrained from using
these techniques improperly -- and risen up to condemn any plan to do so
-- we know now that there will be those who ignore the consensus of their
countrymen and proceed without regard for our common values.  So today, I
call again on Congress to act now to prevent the use of these techniques
to clone a human life.  It is untested, it is unsafe, and it is morally
wrong.

         Let me be very clear about this. I am firmly and fully committed
to supporting scientific research and development, because I believe it is
essential to our progress as we go forward into the 21st Century.  The
balanced budget that I submit in just a few weeks to Congress will reflect
that commitment. And in my upcoming State of the Union address, I will
talk more about what we are doing to keep America on the cutting edge of
the scientific and technological advances that are driving the global
economy. But science divorced from values will not bring us one step
closer to meeting the challenges or reaping the benefits of of the 21st
Century.

        Because ultimately, it is our values that drive our vision for the
future -- and our commitment to carry those enduring ideals with us, and
to renew their promise in a new century and a new millennium. We must
never lose touch with that, no matter the reason, or we will lose touch
with ourselves as a people. Thanks for listening.


