RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

CREATION DATE/TIME: 9-JAN-1998 13:16:44.00

SUBJECT:   Labour platform on education

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: William R. Kincaid ( CN=william R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Tanya, can you find out more about the Labour bill on class size?     Here'S
their manifesto from the fall conference:


   Education

   1. We will make education our number
   one priority, and we will increase the
   share of national income spent on
   education as we decrease it on the bills of
   economic and social failure.



     Education is LabourO,s number one priority. It is not
   just good for the individual, it is an economic
   necessity for the nation. We will compete successfully
   on the basis of quality, or not at all. And quality
   comes from developing the potential of all our people.
   It is people who are our greatest national asset. Our
   policies must ensure that they can fulfil their potential.



   Straight into action



     In our first months in government we have moved
   swiftly to introduce a range of measures to help raise
   school standards and tackle complacency. Our
   national targets are ambitious and, over the next five
   years, we will be judged on the progress we make
   towards meeting them.

     At the heart of our strategy is a drive to provide a
   head start for every child. We have moved rapidly to
   end the bureaucratic nursery voucher scheme, setting
   in train new local partnerships to deliver a place for all


  four year-olds and the establishment of 25 early
  excellence centres to embody a new integrated
  approach to nursery education, childcare and family
  learning.

    We have moved to improve literacy and numeracy
  in primary schools. We have announced new
  numeracy and literacy targets, and been able to
  identify money to fund 50 literacy summer schools for
  11 year-olds this year, which will make a real
  difference to 1,500 children moving into secondary
  schools in the autumn. We are also investigating ways
  of securing more time for teaching these subjects in
  primary schools. And we have established a
  numeracy taskforce which will be reporting at the end
  of this year.

    We will operate through providing pressure and
  support to root out bad practice and extend the good
  practice that exists in our schools. We have
  established a new standards and effectiveness unit at
  the Department for Education & Employment, and a
  new national standards taskforce. Together they will
  spread best practice, provide support to schools
  which need it and tackle failure. The new standards
  taskforce will enable good heads and teachers to
  evangelise about what works well, and to bring
  examples of good practice to our attention.

     The QueenO,s Speech announced two education
   Bills. The first was introduced on 22 May to make
   good our key election pledge to cut class sizes for all
   five, six and seven year-olds, by using the money
   saved from phasing out the assisted places scheme in
   England, Scotland and Wales. It is now on the statute
   books.

     The second Bill, to be introduced in the autumn,
   represents the most comprehensive package of
   measures ever put forward to raise standards in all
   our state schools.



   Excellence in schools



     In July, in advance of the autumn Education Bill,
   David Blunkett published a major White Paper,
   Excellence in Schools, setting out proposals for
   delivering our manifesto commitments on standards,
   fairness and accountability within the education
   system. It was followed by a full programme of
   consultation over the summer with parents, teachers,
   business and local community representatives and
   LEAs.

     Proposals in the White Paper aim to develop a
   greater awareness across society of the importance of


  education and increase expectations of what can be
  achieved. By the year 2000, the government aims to
  achieve:

     U a sound beginning for all children through
  high-quality nursery education for all four year-olds,
  with integrated early yearsO, education and childcare
  provision; baseline assessment; class sizes of 30 or
  under for all five, six and seven year-olds; improved
  training for all primary teachers in the teaching of
  literacy and numeracy; and a significant improvement
  in the maths and literacy achievements of 11
  year-olds

    u new measures to improve standards and
  accountability, including value-added school
  performance tables; school and LEA-based targets
  for improvement; new measures to improve the
  school-inspection process; and action to tackle failing
  schools. The DFEE will be more outward looking and
  in touch with the education service through the work
  of the standards and effectiveness unit

    u a modernised comprehensive system through
  imaginative use of pupil grouping; Education Action
  Zones and an extensive network of specialist schools
  benefiting neighbouring schools and the local
  community. A National Grid for Learning will link all
  schools within a national strategy for information and
  communications technology

    u a higher-status teaching profession through better
  training and support and higher standards. All
  headteachers will hold a professional headship
  qualification; there will be a core curriculum for
  teacher training; and new standards which all trainees
  must meet before qualifying to teach. There will be
  new induction arrangements for all newly qualified
  teachers, with better training for existing teachers and
  a new grade of advanced skills teacher. Teacher and
  headteacher appraisal will be improved, and
  streamlined procedures for dealing with incompetent
  teachers will be introduced. A new general teaching
  council will promote and speak for the profession

    u a range of measures to help children achieve,
  including better support for parents through family
  learning schemes, home/school agreements, better
  information about childrenO,s progress and national
  guidelines for homework. We will put more parents
  on school governing bodies and parent
  representatives on LEAs. New behaviour policies will
  reduce unauthorised absences and the number of
  exclusions from schools. To motivate and retain
  students, the curriculum for post-14 year-olds will be
  made more relevant with better school-business links,
  after-school study support centres and new
  programmes of work-related learning

    u new partnerships to ensure fairness and


  transparency in funding, admissions and planning of
  the school system. There will be a new framework of
  foundation, community and aided schools, allowing all
  good schools to flourish, while giving better support
  to those schools that need to improve. Both LEAs
  and school governors will have clearly defined roles
  so that they can contribute positively to raising
  standards, and there will be improved partnerships
  and links with schools and their local communities,
  including independent schools.



  A Budget for education



    LabourD,s first Budget for 18 years demonstrated
  the governmentD,s commitment to making education
  our number one priority. A total of ?2.3 billion extra
  was allocated for schools. Provision for schoolsD,
  current spending will rise by 2.7 per cent next year in
  real terms, more than the growth in the economy, and
  is the first step in delivering the manifesto pledge to
  raise the share of our national income that is spent on
  education.

    Of the ?2.3 billion, ?l billion will be allocated for
  schools in the UK for 1998-99 from the contingency
  reserve, and ?1.3 billion will be allocated in the form
  of a grant, not. borrowing, for school maintenance
  over the next five years from the proceeds of the
  windfall tax.

    The extra ?1 billion for 1998-99 from the reserve
  for schools in the UK means ?835 million more for
  England, ?89 million for Scotland, ?50 million for
  Wales and ?28 million for Northern Ireland. By
  allocating the money in July, LEAs and schools have
  been given more time to plan their budgets and
  staffing for next year. The additional money for
  education signals an end to the relentless rise in class
  sizes, and will allow schools the freedom to focus on
  strategies for raising standards.

    Applications for the ?1.3 billion capital funding will
  be tied to proposals for improved school
  performance as well as for tackling disrepair. The
  private sector will also contribute through
  public/private partnerships.



   Lifelong learning



    David Blunkett launched the 1997 Adult LearnersD,
  Week, and demonstrated his belief in the importance
  of adult education by setting up a taskforce headed


  by Professor Bob Fryer from the Northern College to
  develop a strategy for adult learning. Work has begun
  on plans to introduce a University for Industry and
  individual learning accounts to provide those in work
  with opportunities to improve their skills. In July·, the
  Kennedy Committee published a major report on
  further education, and the report of the Dearing
  review of higher education was also published. The
  governmentD,s response to both of these reports will
  be addressed in a White Paper on lifelong learning in
  the autumn, setting out our goals of improved access
  and greater equality of opportunity.



  Student support



    The Dearing Committee report recognised that
  further improvement and expansion in higher
  education could not be afforded on the basis of
  current arrangements, and calculated that there would
  be a 72 billion funding gap in higher education within
  the next 20 years unless new approaches were found.
  Because of the urgency in tackling this issue, the
  government announced its preferred option for new
  funding arrangements for students in higher education
  in advance of the lifelong learning White Paper.

     From October 1998, the government intends to
   phase in a new system of student loans to cover all
   maintenance support and. a 71,000 annual
   contribution towards tuition fees. Students from
   lower-income families will be exempt from fees, and
   there will be no parental contributions from
   lower-income families. This preserves the principle
   that education should be free to the least well off. A
   supplementary loan of 7250 for students in financial
   difficulties will also be made available.

     Repayment of future loans will, for the first time, be
   properly related to income and the ability of a
   graduate to repay. Repayments will also be made
   over a considerably longer average period of time
   than at present. These changes will bring a closer
   alignment between arrangements for students in higher
   and further education and for full-time and part-time
   students, and provide funding to increase participation
   and improve quality in higher education for the future.
   They are based on the principle that the costs of
   higher education should be shared between those
   who benefit. On average, graduates start to earn 20
   per cent more than non-graduates within ten years.

     These proposals build on the principles set out in
   Lifelong Learning and agreed by Conference last
   year:

     U access to higher education should not depend


   upon ability to pay

    u the repayment of graduate contributions to
   maintenance costs should be related to income

     u access to high-quality education should be
   improved

     u the system of funding should be made more
   efficient.

     Education was the ToriesD, biggest failure. They
   cared more about structures than standards, and were
   interested only in high standards for a few, leaving
   mediocrity and failing schools for the rest. Nearly half
   of 1i year-olds in England and Wales fail to reach
   expected standards in English and maths. Britain has a
   smaller share of 17 and 18 year-olds in full-time
   education than any major industrial nation. Nearly two
   thirds of the British workforce lack vocational
   qualifications.

     The Labour government is committed to reversing
   this failure and building a learning society that values
   all its citizens and encourages them to succeed. All the
   initiatives taken so far set a positive agenda for work
   over the next 18 months that will help to deliver our
   promise of higher standards and improved learning
   opportunities for everyone.


