  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.   ( CN=Paul J. weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-JAN-1998 14:36:33.00

  SUBJECT:   Hill Mtg (DAILY ENTRY)

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  They want" are help with New Democrats. Looks like Superfund isn't going
  anywhere with this strategy.
  ---------------------- Forwarded by Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP on
  01/13/98 02:36 PM ---------------------------




  Bradley M. Campbell
  01/13/98 02:16:04 PM
  Record Type:    Record

  To:       Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OPD/EOP
  cc:
  Subj ect:         Hill Mtg (DAILY ENTRY)

  here's my own summary.  90 percent of the meeting was about Superfund.
  ---------------------- Forwarded by Bradley M. Campbell/CEQ/EOP on
  01/13/98 02:15 PM ---------------------------



  Bradley M. Campbell
  01/12/98 07:54:19 PM
  Record Type:    Record

  To:      Kathleen A. McGinty/CEQ/EOP
  cc:      Robert S. Kapla/CEQ/EOP, Wesley P. warren/CEQ/EOP, Shelley N.
  Fidler/CEQ/EOP
  Subject:         Hill Mtg (DAILY ENTRY)

  Katie: Janet Murguia and I met this afternoon with staff for Gephardt and
  ranking committee Democrats.on the House side concerning the environmental
  agenda for the coming Congress.   Superfund consumed most of the meeting,
  but we did cover discussion of overall message/agenda.

  * First, there is strong interest in a common Democratic message on the
  environment.  In particular, we discussed a "Democratic Clean Communities
  Agenda," which would largely mirror the President's priorities while
  avoiding issues that threaten to divide documents.   Initial ideas for the
  legislative agenda would include Clean water (focused on full funding for
  the President's initiative and possibly on the Pallone beach water
  quality/ right to know bill); the President's environmental crimes bill
  (announced at Kalamazoo and introduced this Congress by Schumer) , the
  Dingell brownfields bill,   (water quality and right to know), possibly a


  children's health bill (codifying the President's Executive order), and
  full funding to preserve our parks and great places.  Climate is
  bracketed, in the sense that there may be united Dem support for climate
  incentives, but the treaty issue is likely to be divisive. All of these
  individual items are in preliminary and negotiable, the idea is to get a
  unifying slate of items that exemplify a message, hopefully to include the
  major jurisdictional committees.

  · Second, on Superfund, there seems to be a consensus among House
  Democrats that it is not helpful to pump up Superfund reform as a priority
  -- at least not unless we are placing heavy emphasis on how bad the
  Republican proposals on Superfund are at the same time . . Instead, there is
  a preference for emphasizing how much site cleanups have progressed, and
  the need for brownfields legislation. All House Committee Democrats agree
  that there is a zero likelihood of an acceptable Superfund bill getting to
  the President in this Congress. Even if the Committees move forward with
  one bill or rival bills, it is a near certainty that Archer will kill it
  in Ways and Means rather than reinstate the Superfund taxes on the oil
  industry. Because of these circumstances, there is lingering resentment
  among House Democrats about the May 15 reauthorization deadline that was
  established as a condition of the advanced appropriation of funding
  commitments that the President made at Kalamazoo. There is also lingering
  and strong concern about the President's continued emphasis on the need
  for Superfund legislation, as evidenced in his preholiday interview with
  the New York Times.

  with EPA's help, Committee Democrats are currently working on an
  alternative/substitute Superfund bill that would be consistent with the
  Administration's reform principles.  we expect to be able to support this
  bill, and we hope to use it as a basis for unifying Democrats on
  Superfund. The Committee Dems have asked for our immediate help in
  getting the "new Democrat" coalition to sign onto this bill, and to help
  stem the efforts of some in the caucus to develop rival proposals (e.g.
  Barcia and Dooley introduced a bill at the end of the first session that
  was closer to the Republican bill than to the Administration's
  proposals) .

  We are continuing to confer with EPA and to elicit views on how to
  respond to this state of affairs.  You should convene a deputies meeting
  on Superfund to unify the agencies once we've had a chance to confer
  further with EPA,


