 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Paul J. Weinstein Jr.     ( CN=Paul J. Weinstein Jr./OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME: 13-JAN-1998 18:23:16.00

 SUBJECT:    Tobacco Slot

 TO: Elena Kagan       CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Virginia Appuzzo wants to    have a proposal for a tobacco person from us by
 tomorrow.  She is meeting    with Sylvia Mathews and John Podesta on Thursday
 and wants to push for the    slot now. Virginia is optimistic she can get us
 a slot. The following is     my attempt at a description:


 Proposal

         Provide the Domestic Policy Council (DPC) with a slot to hire a
 mid-level tobacco policy staffer until the passage of the settlement which
 we would expect to happen late next Fall. We would recommend that the
 slot expire next December, to allow for an effective transition and shut
 down of operations on the tobacco settlement.

 Rationale

         The staffer would takeover the tobacco issue which is currently shared by
 several DPC staffers. Until last August,   the DPC did have one individual
 working on the tobacco issue (Elizabeth Drye).  Because of the importance
 of the issue to the President and the amount of time and work that must be
 dedicated to this matter, we need to have one individual who can devote
 their complete attention to the tobacco settlement.

 Responsibilities

         The staffer would be responsible for developing Administration positions
 on the more than $300 billion tobacco issue as it moves through the
 legislative process.  Some of the responsibilities of the job include:
 developing specific Administration positions on spending the hundreds of
 billions of dollars of tobacco revenues; analyzing and proposing
 effective tobacco cessation and media campaigns; crafting a White House
 position on civil liability issues as they effect the tobacco industry;
 negotiating a position acceptable to state governments on the allocation
 of over $100 billion involved in legislative proposals and involving
 Medicare settlements; and developing an internal and external strategy for
'resolving issues of concern to tobacco farmers and their political
 representatives who feel the legislation may devastate their states. The
 issue will be of great importance to this Administration because involves
 the health of millions of people, the intense interest to the leadership
 of Congress, Governors, and state attorney generals, it provides the
 funding for several major spending initiatives the administration will
 support during the upcoming year; and it will test the ability of the
 Administration to coordinate the efforts of every major cabinet-level
 agency.


            This individual would report to myself, my Deputy Elena Kagan, and
    Tom Freedman, director of' the Policy Planning office in the DPC.


