    RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

    CREATOR: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1

    CREATION DATE/TIME:13-JAN-1998 11:46:21.00

    SUBJECT:   Globe story

    TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Tanya E. Martin ( CN=Tanya E. Martin/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TO: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
    READ: UNKNOWN

    TEXT:
    He found somebody to confirm, despite my efforts to obfuscate.       Good thing
    no one reads the Globe.

    Clinton to propose school-aid plan

                         Would spend billions to cut class sizes

                         By Brian McGrory, Globe Staff, 01/13/98

                             ASHINGTON - President Clinton, in his State of the
    Union address,
                             plans to discuss a multibillion-dollar proposal to
    make class sizes
                      smaller in public schools, according to senior
    administration officials familiar
                      with the plan.

                         The plan, which is still being shaped at the highest
    levels of the
                         administration,   represents one of the most significant
    items on Clinton's
                       education agenda for the coming year, officials said. It
    also comes at a time
                       when otherwise contrasting proposals from Republicans
    and Democrats call
                       for a massive teacher recruitment effort, raising the
    prospect of bipartisan
                       backing in Congress, according to officials.

                      , 'The decision has been made that the best way we can
    help out is through
                      getting more teachers into the classroom and getting
    smaller class sizes,"   said
                      one senior administration official, speaking on the
    condition of anonymity.

                         Said a second official:   "We have been working on this a
    long time. We are
                         delighted to see others interested."

                      The cost for the program will total several billion
    dollars, according to


                  officials familiar with the discussions, and it will be
highlighted in Clinton's
                  nationally televised Jan. 27 speech before both houses
of the Congress,
                  those officials said.

                  Administration officials, hesitant to provide details,
would not say if their
                  program would more closely resemble the Democratic or
the Republican
                  plan. The $8 billion Republican proposal, announced last
week by
                  Representative Bill Paxon of New York, calls for the
federal government to
                  provide block grants for states to pay the salaries of
100,000 new teachers
                  over the next five years.

                    The less ambitious $3.3 billion Democratic plan, drafted
by Senator Edward
                    M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, proposes that the federal
government
                  forgive a portion of student loans for each of 100,000
college graduates a
                  year who enter the teaching profession.

                   Said one administration official, in comparing the two
plans:   "We are going
                   our own way."

                  Officials said the program is designed to get at the
sticky issue of class size in
                  kindergarten through 12th grade, a problem that has been
highlighted with
                  increasing frequency by a wide range of groups,
including the Republican
                  Governors' Association.

                  Some studies have estimated that as many as 2 million
new teachers will be
                  needed in the next 10 years, as the teaching population
ages and the number
                  of students coming into the system continues to grow.

                  Administration officials also said the effort was
intended to be linked with
                  Clinton's push to establish national education
standards.

                   "Every aspect of the president's education agenda will
have one clear goal:
                   to help young people meet high education standards, ' ,
one official said.

                    Within the White House, officials remained tight-lipped
on details of the
                    program, reversing the pattern of the last week in which
they have been
                  freely highlighting the planned policy announcements in
the State of the Union


                     address. Yesterday, responding to a reporter's question,
Clinton alluded to
                  his education proposals for the first time in public,
though he declined to
                  provide any specifics.

                   "What I hope we will be able to do in this session of
Congress is to make
                   education a national issue,"   Clinton said, speaking at
a White House photo
                   opportunity. " I t would please me if it could be a
nonpartisan issue.

                     The president added:   "I have some weeks ago signed off
on a very
                     ambitious agenda, only part of which has been revealed.
We'll just keep
                     working at it."

                  Those senior administration officials familiar with the
agenda said Clinton will
                  also revisit the issue of school reconstruction spending
in his budget. Clinton
                  will also renew his call for education opportunity
zones, high poverty areas
                  designated for specific federal grants for teacher
training and after-school
                  programs.
EMAILS RECEIVED
ARMS - BOX 023 - FOLDER -001


[01/14/1998]


