     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL        (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Cynthia A. Rice (       CN~Cynthia   A.   Rice/OU~OPD/O~EOP    [ OPD 1

     CREATION DATE/TIME: 14-JAN-1998 13:11:03.00

     SUBJECT:   LA Time article on child support penalties

     TO: Andrea Kane      CN~Andrea    Kane/OU~OPD/O~EOP @     EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Elena Kagan (    CN~Elena    Kagan/OU~OPD/O~EOP @     EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Diana Fortuna (    CN~Diana Fortuna/OU~OPD/O~EOP @        EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ:UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed (    CN~Bruce   N.   Reed/OU~OPD/O~EOP @    EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     Unfortunately, this article refers to Shaw's plan to "reduce the sanction
     California faces this year from a projected $ 4 billion to about $ 10.8
     million" and
     says that Shaw also "hopes to relax the law's requirement that states
     build strictly
     integrated, centralized systems." (this is the statewideness issue I
     flagged for you
     yesterday -- California wants permission to link county-based computer
     systems
     instead of creating a statewide one) .

     Note however, that California still complains.


     Copyright 1998 Times Mirror Company
                                    Los Angeles Times
                        January 14, 1998, Wednesday,  Home Edition

     LAWMAKER BACKS STATE'S BID FOR LOWER CHILD, SUPPORT PENALTY

     BYLINE: MELISSA HEALY and VIRGINIA ELLIS, TIMES STAFF WRITERS

     DATELINE: WASHINGTON

     BODY:

        Under intense pressure from California state and county officials, the
     principal author of the 1996 welfare reform law is ready to propose
     changes to
     the landmark measure that could shield California from a devastating $
     4-billion
     penalty in 1998.

        Less than 18 months after the welfare law was enacted, Rep. Clay Shaw
     (R-Fla.) says Congress must scale back the automatic penalties that it
     would
     impose on states that fail to build centralized computer systems to track
     parents who owe child support.


    Shaw is set to propose a new penalty formula that could reduce the
 sanction
 California faces this year from a projected $ 4 billion to about $ 12
 million.
 Shaw also hopes to relax the law's requirement that states build strictly
 integrated, centralized systems.

     Shaw's proposal would ease California's path to compliance by allowing
 the
 state to establish a loosely linked network of dissimilar county child
 support
 enforcement systems.

    Shaw, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee's subcommittee on
 human
 resources, acknowledged that his draft plan is designed specifically to
 bail
 California out of its failure to meet the welfare law's requirements for a
 single,statewide computer system for child support enforcement.

    The state has missed the first deadline to create such a system, and its
 efforts to build one have been stymied by massive technical and political
 problems.

     "It's not entirely fair to those who really busted their backs to get
 the job
'done and tried to comply," said Shaw, who intends to air his proposals this
 month. "However, California's problems are more immense than many other
 states
 and there will be some penalty involved. But it won" t take so much money
 out
 that it will be tremendously regressive."

    Shaw's proposal, which has sparked controversy, comes as California's
 child
 support enforcement effort languishes in disarray. California collects
 support
 for less than 14% of the families that apply for it, and 3 million children
 receive nothing from the absent parent.

    Many experts fault California's system of county-administered child
 support
 enforcement, whose parts are not linked by a single computer system. As a
 result, a Sacramento mother hoping to get child support from a father
 living in
 San Diego might have to deal with two distinct systems that do not easily
 communicate with each other and that may have vastly different rules and
 regulations.

    The welfare reform law set out to fix that problem, mandating that each
 state
 have a "seamless" system that would track an absent parent's moves from
 county
 to county and make it easy to track whether that parent has kept up with
 child
 support payments;

    Although California has spent $ 100 million to build a computer system
 that
 would satisfy the requirements of the welfare law, Gov. Pete Wilson in


 November
 abandoned the project and canceled a $ 103-million contract with computer
 giant
 Lockheed-Martin IMS. Wilson's action came after his administration
 concluded
 that it would cost more to correct problems with the Lockheed system than
 to
 launch a new effort.

     But with that new effort not yet underway, the state is nearly certain
 to
 remain out of compliance with the welfare law for several years. And under
 the
 terms of the law now on the books, that infraction could cost California
 its
 entire welfare block grant for each year that its system fails to meet the
 federal standard.

    Under Shaw's plan, the secretary of the Department of Health and Human
 Services still would have to sanction California for each year it fails to
 institute an integrated system to track noncustodial parents. But the
 secretary
 would have the latitude to adopt a less punitive formula, dunning the
 state for
 4% of its federal child support enforcement block grant--or about $ 12
 million--in the first year of noncompliance.

     The amount of the less punitive sanction would increase over consecutive
 years from 8%--or $ 24 million in California's case--of the block grant in
 the
 second year, to a ceiling of 20%--$ 60 million in California--in the fifth
 year
 of noncompliance.

    If a state initially fails to meet the requirements but comes into
 compliance
 later within the same year, Shaw's plan would allow the secretary to
 return 75%
 of the penalty to that state.

    Shaw's proposal comes in response to feverish lobbying by California
 state
 officials as well as pressure from California lawmakers of both parties.
 Even
 district attorneys from throughout the state, who administer the separate
 county
 child support enforcement programs, have besieged Shaw with ideas to
 improve the
 law.

    "I've spent more time on the California problem than on any other," he
 said.

     The congressman's position represents a compromise. Many California
 officials
 have pressed for even more forgiveness for the state; children'S advocates
 and
 the Clinton administration have sought slightly stiffer penalty
 provisions. The
 administration and children's advocates also have resisted any bid to ease


 the
 requirement for states to build centralized systems that can track the
 whereabouts and employment status of parents who owe child support.

     In Sacramento.on Tuesday, the director of the state's Social Services
 Department said the proposed penalties would represent an improvement over
 the
 current law. But she blamed federal officials for giving the state
 incomplete
 and sometimes inconsistent guidance in overseeing the program, and
 suggested
 that any penalty levied against the state would be unfair.

    "If my choice is between $ 10 million and $ 4 billion, I will go with
 the $
 10 million, but I would really rather not have that much," said Eloise
 Anderson.
 "What are they spanking our hand for? We tried to do exactly what they
 told us
 to do and it didn't work.   . . I'm pretty upset about it because we really
 tried hard."

    Healy reported from Washington and Ellis from Sacramento.


