     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL      (NOTES MAIL)

     CREATOR: Diana Fortuna ( CN=Diana Fortuna/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

     CREATION DATE/TIME:15-JAN-1998 11:35:39.00

     SUBJECT:     Service on Monday by Cabinet and Race Advisory Board

     TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
     READ: UNKNOWN

     CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
     READ: UNKNOWN

     TEXT:
     FYI, a lot of Cabinet members are doing service on Monday. The list is
     below. We also pushed the race advisory board to do so, but their events
     are less service and more MLK Day commemoration.

     Department of State                                ,
     On January 19, Secretary Albright will lead an event in Minneapolis,
     Minnesota at a local vocational or community college.

     Department of Treasury
     On January 15, Secretary Rubin will deliver a speech in conjunction with
     Jesse Jackson in New York City.

     Department of Defense
     Secretary Cohen will be out of the country.   Deputy Secretary Hamre will
     participate in a Washington, D.C. ,Young Marines Unit mentoring event with
     kids, parents, and mentors honoring Dr. King.

     Department of Justice
     On January 19, Attorney General Reno will visit Jackson, Mississippi, .and
     help rebuild a home that was donated to Habitat for Humanity.  Joining the
     Attorney General will be AmeriCorps volunteers, Major Harvey Johnson, U.S.
     Attorney Pigott, and others from the community.

     Department of Interior
     On January 19, Secretary Babbitt will be in Philadelphia, joining Governor
     Ridge, Mayor Rendell, Dr. Deloris Tucker in the Dr. Martin Luther King,
     Jr. AssociationD,s annual luncheon and commemorative bell ringing.
     Secretary Babbitt will speak on the ethic of service at the luncheon.

     United States Department of Agriculture
     On January 19, Secretary Glickman will attend an Operation Push breakfast
     in Chicago, Illinois, with Jesse Jackson, Jesse Jackson, Jr., and Senator
     Carol Moseley-Braun. Secretary Glickman is also tentatively planning on
     participating in the City Year:Heroes events taking place in Chicago.

         Department of Labor
         On January 15, Secretary Herman will travel with the President to New York
         City for the MLK event on Wall Street. On January 19, Secretary Herman
         will participate in activities focusing on literacy at the MCI Center in
,-

Washington, D.C.

Department of Health and Human Services
On January 19, Secretary Shalala will be in Baltimore, Maryland, at the
Maryland Center for Veterans Education and Training, Inc., serving
breakfast to veterans.

Department of Transportation
On January 19, Secretary Slater, accompanied by Mrs. King,   plans to
introduce the Vice President in Atlanta, Georgia.   He will also
participate in the Do Something service activities.

Department of Energy
On January 15, Secretary PeOa will give a keynote address in the Forrestal
Auditorium. On January 20, the Secretary will also participate in a
community service initiative with the Department of EnergyD,s
Adopt-a-School.

Department of Education
Secretary Riley is participating in a literacy fair in Washington, D.C.,
with the Corporation for National Service at the MCI center.   This
program will focus on instilling a value of reading in children by giving
away free books, library cards, and simple lectures on Martin Luther
KingD,s philosophy.

Department of Veterans Affairs
On January 10, Secretary Togo West will give a keynote address in Chicago,
Illinois, at the 26th Annual Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Dinner held by
the Minority Economic Resources Corporation.

Office of Management and Budget
Director Raines will join children in Washington, D.C., from the HortonD,s
Kids mentoring and tutoring program as they serve the community.  Children
from the HortonD,s Kids program will prepare food for the homeless at
MarthaD,s Table.

Council of Economic Advisors
Chair Yellen also plans to participate in the Washington,   D.C., HortonD,s
Kids program.

Small Business Administration
Administrator Alvarez will participate with Sarah House in Washington
D.C.  This program is run by Howard University students who plan to teach
non-violence and conflict resolution to children in the Shaw community
through games, presentations, entertainment, and toy exchanges (violent
toys for educational toys).

Office of Personnel Management
Director Lachance will be in Connecticut working with the Volunteer Center
for Greater Bridgeport.

Federal Emergency Management Agency
Director Witt will tentatively participate in an event in California (TBA).

Social Security Administration
On January 15, Commissioner Apfel will host SSAD,s Martin Luther King, Jr.
Breakfast in Baltimore, Maryland. On January 19, he will participate in
the Capitol Area Food Bank project with AmeriCorps and community
volunteers to sort food that has been donated.
.',-



  The PresidentD,s Initiative on Race Advisory Board

  John Hope Franklin
  On January 19, in celebration of Martin Luther King Day, the Young
  Volunteers in Action (YVA) Student Board is hosting a Teen Forum on
  January 19 at the Hayti Heritage Center on Fayetteville Street in Durham,
  North Carolina. John Hope Franklin has been invited to participate.

  Linda Chavez Thompson
  On Monday, January 19th, Thompson will be in Silver Spring, MD and
  participate in service activities at the Montgomery County Volunteer and
  Community Service Center, River Road Unitarian Church, and PeopleD,s
  Community Baptist Church. This project connects churches of different
  ethnic and racial backgrounds with children from the Montgomery County
  Police Activities League (PAL) and will present a living memorial to Dr.
  Martin Luther King, Jr ..

   Reverend Suzan Johnson Cook
   On January 18, Reverend Cook will be joining the New York Metropolitan
   Martin Luther King Center for Non-Violence in the Bronx. She will join
   hundreds of people at the Central Synagogue on East 55th and Lexington for
   a silent prayer march that will lead them to the 5th Avenue Presbyterian
   Church on West 55th Avenue. On January 19, the Reverend will be speaking
   at the Riverhead Church 13th annual breakfast honoring Martin Luther King,
   Jr. at the Radisson Hotel.

   Angela Oh
   On January 19, Ms. Oh will be participating in the City of Davis,CA
   celebration activities and parade.

   Robert Thomas
   On January 19, Mr. Thomas will be attending the Naugle Amaturo Theater at
   the Broward Center for the Performing Arts, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida
   celebration in honor of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr ..

   Governor William Winter
   On January 19, Governor Winter will be the keynote luncheon speaker at the
   Itawamba County Community Summit. During the morning session, the invitees
   will be dispersed into five different groups depending on their area of
   focus (education, youth, economy, health, and quality of life). These
   groups will discuss what they can do in the future to help rtawamba County.

   Judith A. Winston
   On January 19, Judy will attend the Mcr Center event or the· Sarah House
   event in Washington, D.C ..


