RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD!O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE!TIME:16-JAN-1998 00:46:37.00

SUBJECT:   EEOC Reforms to Federal Sector Complaints

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan!OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett!OU=WHO!O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman!OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
On Thursday, we met with OMB to discuss the changes that the EEOC has
proposed to its federal-sector cases. We all agreed with the main parts
of the EEOC's proposals, which allow the EEOC rather than the agencies to
issue final administrative decisions and permit attorney's fees even
during the pre-complaint stage. However, many of the agencies disagree
with these changes, and even dispute EEOC's authority to issue final
administrative decisions.  We are going to meet with the EEOC on Friday,
January 16 at 2 p.m.

We did, however, decide to push the EEOC to change a few other items in
response to the agency comments.   (These are outlined below). Things seem
to be fairly on track to send the rule out for public comment by the State
of the Union.  However, as some of the agencies seem to be greatly opposed
to these changes, they may begin to put political pressure on the White
House to slow the process down.  In fact, Sally Katzen may have spurred
the agencies to ratchet up their concerns.  In an interagency meeting on
Thursday unrelated to these EEOC changes, Sally brought up the topic and
suggested that the agencies voice their concerns to their Secretaries.   In
addition, OMB indicated that if any of the agencies request a formal
opinion from OLC as to whether EEOC has the legal authority to issue final
decisions, this request could possibly slow down the process of the rule
going out for comment. However, at this point, it doesn't seem that any
of these things will slow down the process; we just thought you should be
aware of these issues.

The following are the items that OMB is going to try to get EEOC to change:

1.      Spell out more fully in the preamble its legal authority to
issue finai administrative decisions.

2.      Currently, the EEOC version of the rule removes the ability of
the agency to seek reconsideration of a final administrative decision.
OMB is going to suggest that EEOC add back this ability. Given that an
agency cannot appeal to federal court, a reconsideration request is the
agency's last chance to change the decision.

3.      Currently, the EEOC version provides that appeal of the EEOC's
final decision after hearing will review the AJ's findings of fact under a
clearly erroneous standard of review. We are suggesting that the EEOC
change this to the substantial evidence standard of review, which is the
same standard used for reviewing the Merit Systems Protection Board's
findings in federal court.
 ..
 .,


4.      The EEOC has proposed eliminating one basis of dismissal of
complaints--dismissal when the agency offers "full relief." The EEOC
argues that this type of dismissal prejudices the complainant who often
does not know at early stages of the process whether an offer constitutes
full relief.   OMB suggests retaining this basis of dismissal, but in
keeping with some agency comments, that the EEOC be required to certify
that an agency offer constitutes full relief so that the complainant will
have the benefit of a third-party assessment of the offer before any
rights to proceed are barred.

5.      Many of the agencies have objected to the availability of
attorney's fees during the pre-complaint process. The agencies argue that
this discourages settlement, and encourages attorneys to continue with the
litigation.  OMB is suggesting that the EEOC provide guidance to the AJs
to help them determine what are "reasonable" attorney's fees in order to
help prevent any abuses by attorneys to simply increase their fees.

These all seem to be reasonable changes, and will probably help to assuage
the agency's concerns.  If the EEOC agrees to these changes, the agencies
will at least believe that the EEOC is paying attention to their concerns
before the rule goes out for public comment.

We'll let you know what happens with the EEOC, although I suspect that
they will agree to most of these changes. Regards, Mary


