     RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL    (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

     CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( COHEN_M )    (OPD)

     CREATION DATE/TIME:24-JAN-1997 15:43:35.96

     SUBJECT: press conference q's & a's

     TO: Elena. Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
     READ:NOT READ

     TEXT:
     Here are my Q's adn A's at last.   Please note that I added a note to the
     President at the end of the last question -- the intention is to give him
     information on an event so he shouldn't be caught by surprise, but not to
     suggest this be part of an answer.   I'm not sure this format works or is
     appropriate.  Any ideas?
     ==================== ATTACHMENT    1 ====================
     ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:24-JAN-1997 15:37:00.00

     ATT BODY PART TYPE:p

     ATT CREATOR: Michael Cohen

     TEXT:

     PRINTER FONT 12 POINT COURIER
     Education Issues


     Q. Last week in Chicago you called for national standards in
     education. You said they should be national, but not federal.
     Why do we need them, and, if the federal government shouldn't
     establish them, how do you propose to create them?
     ?        I am convinced that we need national standards for what
     students should learn because every student, every parent,
     every teacher and every school must know what is expected of
     them, and must be able to measure their progress against
     these standards. While I believe in local control of
     education -- and we have local control right now -- there
     must be common expectations for students throughout the
     country. Algebra ought to be the same no matter where it is
     taught.
     ?        I will be talking in greater detail over the coming weeks
     and months about how we can accomplish this, and how the
     federal government can help states and local school systems
     carry out their responsibilities for determining what should
     be taught.
     ? .      Let me say now though that there is much available that we
     can use right now.   The National Council of Teachers of
     Mathematics have developed widely accepted standards for
     math. There are similar standards for science. And last
     week Secretary Riley and I announced that an international
     test in matha~d science -- one which shows clearly what
     world class achievement levels are -- will be available for
     local school systems and states to use.   This will enable
     them to tell clearly if their students are performing at
     high levels, and. more importantly, if they have a
     curriculum in place that can help students reach these high
     standards.   I urge as many school districts and states as


possible to take advantage of this unique possibility.




Q.   Last week you announced that students in some wealthy
suburban Chicago communities scored very high on an international
test in math and science, called for national standards, and
urged other school systems to test their students in the same
way.   Don't we know already that students in low income
communities will scores much lower than the rich students? If
all students are held to these same high standards, what will you
do to make sure that low income students in our cities, who don't
have the advantages that those suburban students have, can do
well on the test?
?        First, let me say that the point of giving this
international test to more students, including those in our
urban systems, is not to see who wins and who loses.    It is
to make sure that the people leading those systems, and who
send their students to those schools or who teach in them,
have an honest assessment of how well they do compared to
tough international standards.
?        Let me also say that I firmly believe that every child in
America, no matter what their family circumstances and even
if they live in our poorest rural areas or cities, can learn
to these world class standards.    You just need to t~ink of
all those students in inner city Los Angeles that Hymie
Escalante -- the subject of the movie Stand and Deliver

o
-helped to take and pass Advanced Placement courses in
Calculus when most people didn't even think they could learn
algebra, to realize that we can set and meet high
expectations for all of our students.
?        What we have learned from these tests is that the countries
that outperform us do so because of what happens in the
classroom, much more than what happens outside of it.    They
have high expectations for their students.   They have a
challenging curriculum, that is focused on a few topics each
year.   They teach in dept, so that students really
understand the material.   There is no reason in the world
that we can't do that in every school in this country, no
matter where it is.
?        Finally, while education is a local and state
responsibility, the federal government can and will help.
That is why I have fought so hard for funding for programs
like Head Start and the Title 1 program that helps
disadvantaged students, and Goals 2000 that helps set high

standards.




Q.   What is your view on the ongoing ebonics debate?    Is this a
