      RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL     (NOTES MAIL)

      CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

      CREATION DATE/TIME:22-JAN-1998 19:34:27.00

      SUBJECT:   Cloning

      TO: Elena Kagan      CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
      READ:UNKNOWN

      CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)       )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
      READ: UNKNOWN

      TEXT:
          Attached is OSTP's draft of a memo that could be sent to the President
      on cloning.  In general it is accurate: in meetings with OSTP (Rachel
      Levinson), VP (Gips), counsel (Marshall), Leg affairs, and DOJ we came up
      with four options-- the current approach, two refinements, or a generally
      worded approach recomended by some outside groups.   It recomends in favor
      of one of the refinements and recommends against preemption.  However, it
      is sloppy and not informative enough. We are meeting again tommorow m
      orning to improve it.  You are more familiar with the President's thinking
      on this issue, but here is what I think the memo should do better:

      1. Explain what FDA can do.   FDA has not formally announced it, but Bill
      Schultz thinks they have the authority to ban cloning for the time being
      on the basis of it not being safe.  FDA thinks there is still a need for
      legislation that bans cloning on ethics grounds so that when it is a safe
      technology it remains a banned procedure.

      2. Explain clearly the pros and cons of each option's effect on
      research. The option we chose (C) was supposed to be the most research
      friendly while still banning making human with cloning, that needs to be
      clearer.

      3.  I think we should list an option of not sending up a new bill. We've
      already said our principles and endorsed model legislation, we could offer
      to work with Feinstein or Kennedy to fix the problems we all see in our
      bill. The President could direct FDA to come up with a regulation, and
      leg. affairs could work with the the Senate to preserve embryo research
      but ban the making of humans via cloning (for instance by banning
      implanting in the womb using somatic cell nuclear transfer.)  If you agree
      with this last point, I'm not sure we even need a special memo to the
      President but it could just be included in the Weekly.


        ==================== ATTACHMENT   1 ====================
      ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

      TEXT:
      Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D2)MAIL466907129.026 to ASCII,
       The following is a HEX DUMP:

      FF57504354050000010A020100000002050000007F33000000020000D3FB73FE9A8A77D2782B66
      1EC66758841864E2E63FFE472CE64944AB5B3DF2761461E35C665E42AD6B6F76F3COF78BC51CA5
      C91B547815402DE01AD982EB603898C4D4B75BOD7B40S7BOA4A2890DBD8AFC6E4F913B225AAOA3



    DRAFT MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

    FROM:

    SUBJECT:                                 Cloning Legislative Options

            Interest in cloning legislation was renewed by reports that a Chicago physicist plans to
    attempt to use this technology to create a child. Your January 10 radio address challenged
    Congress to enact a ban on private sector activities like the one you have imposed on the public
    sector. This issue is likely to appear in both the House and Senate very soon after they return.
    Based on bills introduced in the fall, and the difficulties inherent in trying to craft a bill of
    appropriate scope, there is a strong possibility that Congressional measures may deviate from the
    principles outlined in your draft bill.

            This memorandum summarizes the following options with respect to a legislative strategy
    on cloning: (A.) continue to support the principles and language in your June 9, 1997 draft bill;
    (B.) support the principles but refine the current lariguage; (C.) change the scope of prohibited
    activities to respond to criticism; or (D.) adopt a prohibition with a more general focus.

            The memorandum also presents the pros and cons associated with a clause pre-empting
    state legislation of human cloning.


    I. Substantive Prohibition

    A. Support existing language without changes

            Your bill has been praised by industry and professional societies for its narrow focus on
    the act of creating a human being through somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), the technology
    used to create Dolly the sheep, and the absence of mention of embryo research. These groups
    also applaud your protection of noncontroversial biomedical research and the 5-year sunset
    provision. Current language maintains the status quo with respect to freedom to carry out
    embryo research in the private sector under existing (albeit limited) Federal oversight. The
    Federal ban on creation of human embryos for research purposes is unaffected by any of the
    options in this memorandum.

    B. Refine current language

           Continue to hold to the principles expressed in your draft bill but make the following
    changes to clarify the prohibition:

    Current language:
    It shall be unlawful for any person or other legal entity, public or private, to perform or use
    somatic cell nuclear transfer with the intent of introducing the product of that transfer into a
    woman's womb or in any other way creating a human being.



                                                                    Automated Records Management System
                                                                    Hex-Dump Conversion




    Suggested modification:
    It shall be unlawful for any person or other legal entity, public or private, to introduce the product
    of somatic cell nuclear transfer into a woman's womb in order to create a child.

    Rationale
           There is greater agreement on the definition of a child than there is on a human being,
          thus avoiding some, but not all of the embryo research and abortion debate.
           The term "or in any other way" created unnecessary confusion.
           "Intent" was included as protection for a defendant, but industry and medical
          practitioners suggested deleting it.

    C.    Continue to support the principles in the existing bill but broaden its scope

            We would like you to focus on pros and cons of including the phrase "in order to create a
    child" as it appears in Option B.

             You have been sensitive to the need to be very cautious in setting a boundary around
    permissible biomedical research through this bill; hence its narrow focus. The phrase "in order
    to create a child" maintains that view with its implied intent. However, it suggests two
    potentially troubling scenarios of which you should be aware. First, it may be interpreted to
    encourage abortion because transfer of the product of cloning would be prohibited only if it was
    done so as to create a child, not if it was done with intent to abort. Second, someone caught in
    the act of attempting to create a child using this method could avoid liability simply by aborting
    the cloned embryo or fetus.
             Therefore, we would suggest that the prohibition be modified to read as follows:
    It shall be unlawful for any person or other legal entity, public or private, to introduce the product
    of somatic cell nuclear transfer into a woman's womb.

            This clear language means that during the time this law is in effect, no one in the public
    or private sectors may perform somatic cell nuclear transfer and implant the resulting product in
    a woman's uterus. Today, this is legal in the private sector, although it may be possible to exert
    some regulatory oversight, as discussed in the background attachment. Some fertility research
    would be precluded under this option, although it is difficult to determine how much because
    efforts are generally made to sustain a pregnancy after implantation; not to perform experiments
    with the intention of aborting.

            The right-to-life community criticized your bill for allowing the creation of embryos for
    research purposes using private funds, as long as those embryos were aborted subsequently.
    This modification still permits the creation of embryos but removes the incentive for abortion.
    While the scientific and medical communities supported your earlier version, it is likely that you
    will retain their support even with this change in view of the larger threats to research emanating
    from Congress. However, it does make the sunset clause all the more crucial. We have been
    told that the fertility research community would not object to this approach.

    D. Adopt a more genenit prohibition




             Your bill is intended to prevent anyone from creating a child who is a genetically
     identical copy of an existing or previously existing person. Somatic cell nuclear transfer is one
     way of accomplishing this feat and you endorsed the recommendation of your National Bioethics
     Advisory Commission in limiting the scope of your bill to the use of this technology to create a
     child. Another option would be to construct a more general, non-technology specific ban such
     as the following:

     It shall be unlawful to create a child who is genetically identical to an existing or previously
     existing child or adult.

             Violation of this ban will depend on one's definition of the point at which life begins.
     Some people believe that an embryo is a child, hence, creating identical embryos would be in
     violation of the law. Under this definition, an existing reproductive technology known· as
     blastomere or blastocyst splitting would be prohibited. This method is used to treat women with
     reduced fertility, particularly those who are older and wish to have more than one child but are
     unable or unwilling to undergo the drug treatments necessary to stimulate hyperovulation. It
     may also be used with donor eggs. What is done, in essence, is to fertilize one egg and after just
     a few cell divisions, split the early embryo. This mimics the occurrence in nature of identical
     twins.. However, the mother has the option of implanting both embryos, or freezing one and
     implanting it at a later date, thus creating non-contemporaneous twins.

            If one believes that life begins at birth, then it would be permissible to create a cloned
     embryo, implant that embryo in a woman's uterus, and abort it at any point prior to birth. This
     course has the same shortcomings as Option 2 in that it may be interpreted to encourage abortion.

     Recommendation:

     We propose that you select Option C. so as to: maintain as narrow a prohibition as
     possible, thus protecting a wide range of biomedical research, and preserve the status quo
     with respect to incentives for abortion.


     Approve: _ __                  Disapprove: _ __                   Discuss: _ __


     II. Federal Pre-emption of State Regulation

             The industry is strongly advocating that the Administration use this bill to pre-empt state
     laws restricting cloning research. The industry cites the California Bill as an example of the type
     of provision that would prohibit appropriate biomedical research on cloning and they fear that
     the political climate would likely pressure states to adopt unduly restrictive measures.

           There are also a number of reasons arguing against pre-emption at this time. For
     example, federalism concerns would normally militate against preemption unless it could be
case, although the industry might be inconvenienced by the existence of differing laws, there is
no clear reason why uniform standards are required. Indeed, in the area of biomedical research,
there is a strong argument in favor of allowing the states to experiment with a wide range of
options because no single correct approach to this issue is immediately obvious. Moreover, the
industry's fears that the states would act in concert to preclude important biomedical research,
beyond the use of cloning to create a child, seem unwarranted. It is not likely that every state
would choose to ban all research because the states that elect to forego restrictive regulation
would be likely, on that account, to attract new industry.       Finally, using this particular bill to
preclude all state regulation of biomedical research is inconsistent with our position that this bill
is designed to address only the limited issue of cloning and is not an attempt to address broader
research issues.

Recommendation:

We recommend against adding a pre-emption clause.


Approve: _ __                    Disapprove: _ __                    Discuss: _ __




Attachments:

A. Discussion ofImpact of FDA Regulatory Authority on Legislative Strategy

B. H.R. 922 - Bill Introduced By Rep. Vernon Ehlers to prohibit the expenditure of Federal
funds to conduct or support research on the cloning of humans.


