RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Thomas L. Freedman ( CN=Thomas L. Freedman!OU=OPD!O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE!TIME:22-JAN-1998 11:59:56.00

SUBJECT:   Ideas that are in the Pipeline

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan!OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ:UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed!OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1 )
READ:UNKNOWN

CC: Mary L. Smith ( CN=Mary L. Smith!OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
You mentioned having some actions for the next 6 weeks.
Here's some that we have ready, near ready, or could conceivably get
ready. My choices would be school takeovers, attack alcohol billboards
near schools, an international tobacco convention announcement or endorse
a position on tobacco farmers for the bill, and cloning regulation for
starters. We'll try and pull together some more ideas, but this is the
current list.

Ideas that may some work:
"School takeovers: make explicit threat to pull Title I funds if schools
don't meet certain specified criteria.
"One agency food agency (still being vetted with cabinet secretarys)
"Alcohol marketing: Stop alcohol companies from putting up billboards near
schools
"Tobacco events:  Endorse a tobacco farmers posiiton, Announce an
intenrational framework convention to go after the problem worldwide.
" Workplace Religious Freedom -- negotiating for bipartisan bill that
would let folks take time off more easily to practice their religion.
" Gun running between states: support legislation to increase penalties
for this very widespread practice (Florida guns got to NY) .
"War on heart attacks: We have some private companies interested in
donating the defibrillators, coordinate this with Am. Heart Assoc.,
airlines, police,  Mayors, with goal of saving some specific number of
Americans a year.
"Pay Equity.  Data and technical assistance -- agencies no longer saying
there is no cost. When all the paper comes in from the agencies we now
expect them to project costs at $14 million.


Ideas that need less work
"Cloning:  FDA thinks it should be able to make a detemrination to say it
has regulatory authority to stop cloning on safety grounds for a few years
"Virtual University. There is some money in budget for this.   Could do
event with some of the Governors that have started this and involved their
state universities.
\"




