RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: William R. Kincaid ( CN=William R. Kincaid/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD ) )

CREATION DATE/TIME: 25-JAN-1998 17:26:26.00

SUBJECT:   Zones Paper

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Cathy R. Mays ( CN=Cathy R. Mays/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO)    )
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD!O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD ) )
READ:UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Attached are the following draft materials for the Education Opportunity
Zones:

Revised 2-pager (urb98pub.9)
Examples (urb98ex.4)
Internal Q's and A's (eozq&a.7)

It's especially important for you to review the two-pager.  Mike and I
recommend that we let the Department distribute the examples, which are
fairly lengthy.  Also, please note that these Q's and A's are fairly
detailed and are designed to anticipate the kinds of questions that
Education is likely to get.

Thanks.

-- Bill==================== ATTACHMENT     1 ====================
ATT CREATION TIME/DATE:   0 00:00:00.00

TEXT:
Unable to convert ARMS_EXT: [ATTACH.D74)MAIL49553642V.026 to ASCII,
 The following is a HEX DUMP:

FF57504396040000010A02010000000205000000465B0000000200001C85841B03A6250ACAB5DF
E9214E312E5F5CA6EA3FAA09F6897666C911674427D9B5701A67E4BBA7397E92022446F5D494AA
OF77E28D55E89D346D89736C6DC274687ADE088B44A5BF7010C55A3C8BCA2C292B36F47C36CCBA
38FB84271D8657D8D2B7E702B81CA409DFC2CAB1CDD4B6645DF9BOF6520F8C4E6B346B6D1D9A91
714241BA9AD7E1B29A00129C932B071A826AABDB9E86D4F98227906A3FCE812DF635EA9B636C4E
5D8BD9AE8B7E8A8AFF9D97E5DB73FAE548CE6EOCBFOAEF1582DB55933OB50E55C06F3BBOA8A3ED
DE72CB14B43E441E8425A81C4988B8531C4373CC477D06D05269117951D1FDACE4F9A940370434
321F420EAOFD8A2D9CE75A3F3968ED87BAD02575459122750DBBF93F822C1512BC6F3EBE2E26AO
91B4238AF1A03A686CA5FD58590AA2993246EF7A671636343DOBC693798F9DD30B25ACEB6EIF6D
BF17FOF2DCC9B380C7F39366D519A21281A795277A432E5115049FD331840BI1EE2661A78579AF
2D5E2D9CD356EB374B1A37C2BA567A6D1C7B0460537410DFACA5F1CC476B6D938CD3C33E24E464
1905674B902FOD20A66DD5FDB5D9DD5C21A689C106EB510B4AD42E5411C532D5B5558241B09445
E8DE432ABA5E1286F462389B5F86E248C3FA5CB4A9C8D89086C187535E76D86F675A08A95E22EB
8DEF763C0502000E000000000000000000000008020100000010000000C4020000005503000000
                              QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
                         DRAFT for internal use only -- January 25, 1998


                                        Overall Questions

What is the purpose of the Education Opportunity Zones?
This initiative will help accelerate and expand progress in high-poverty urban and rural school
districts that are on the right track, and highlight models of success. Education Opportunity
Zones will demonstrate how a serious approach to high standards benefits all students. Funds
will be targeted to improve low performing schools, expand opportunities for student
achievement, broaden choices for families, and hold schools, teachers, and students accountable
for results.

How does the Zone initiative relate to the President's other new initiatives?
Education opportunity zones are part of a broader set of initiatives to help strengthen urban and
rural schools. President Clinton has proposed a [$10 billion] national campaign to modernize
schools, a $350 million initiative to recruit and prepare teachers for underserved urban and rural
areas, and made a dramatic commitment to expanding the availability and quality of child care
and after-school learning opportunities. These and additional proposals still to be announced
will have a powerful impact on improving the prospects of children in some of our poorest
communities.

Are you proposing this initiative as an alternative to respond to Republican calls for
vouchers?
The President is committed to strengthening public schools, not abandoning them. Along with
other new initiatives that will help raise achievement for urban and rural students, like school
construction and teacher recruitment and preparation, we are proposing Education Opportunity
Zones in response to the clear need for sharp improvements in the nation's poorest school
districts and to encourage and expand promising school reform efforts that are taking a
disciplined, effective approach centered on high standards. The fact is that 90% of our students
attend public schools, and our primary responsibility, especially with limited federal resources, is
to make sure that the public schools they attend are among the best in the world. This means
concentrating our time and money on raising academic standards, improving teaching, providing
schools with technology and other up-to-date learning tools, and creating charter schools and
other forms of choice within the public school system. In contrast to vouchers, the Education
Opportunity Zones will support effective local efforts to improve education for all students in
participating districts, rather than just a few.

This initiative clearly encourages districts to discontinue social promotion. How do you
respond to criticisms of that approach?
The President strongly believes that we shouldn't promote kids who are not ready because it will
hurt them over the long term. This initiative is designed to hold teachers and schools



                                                          Automated Records Management System
                                                          Hex-Dump Conversion
conditions under which districts take steps to ensure that students are ready to meet standards the
first time, rather than falling behind and needing remediation.




                                       Qualified Applicants

What communities will be eligible for the Zone initiative?
High-poverty urban and rural school districts will be targeted under this initiative. In order to be
selected as Zones, districts will have to show that they have already begun to raise student
achievement, or that they have begun to put into place credible and effective improvement
policies.

How many school districts will be eligible to participate?
This initiative will target urban and rural school districts with a significant percentage or a large
number of students in poverty. This means that well over a thousand districts will be eligible,
including districts in every state.

Are Zones entire school districts or smaller areas within school districts?
Entire school districts, or consortia of districts, will be designated Education Opportunity Zones.
Grant funds may be used for district-wide activities such as improving sound management and
assessment systems, as well as to improve low-performing schools. Districts may choose to
target their resources under the initiative to subsets of low-performing schools.

Will large cities receive a preference for designation as Zones?
Proposed legislation will direct the Secretary to seek to ensure that both large and smaller urban
areas are selected to participate, as well as rural school districts. We expect that urban school
districts will receive a substantial proportion of funding under the initiative.

Can consortia of districts apply to be Zones?
Yes, consortia of districts can apply. We anticipate that most consortia will be comprised of
rural school districts.

Can charter schools participate in the program?
Under state law, public charter schools are generally either Local Educational Agencies (LEAs)
or public schools within an LEA. Charter schools that are part of an urban or rural school district
designated as an Education Opportunity Zone may benefit from this program. Charter schools
that are considered an LEA themselves are eligible to apply only if they meet the eligibility
criteria for all LEAs. That is, they must be high poverty and serve a small town or rural
community or an urban area. While charter schools may be eligible to apply, the purpose of this
initiative is to demonstrate that a district-wide, serious approach to high standards can help raise


                                                  2

Are private schools eligible for funding under this program?
Private schools cannot be designated as Education Opportunity Zones, but students, teachers and
administrators associated with private schools within an area served by a Zone will be eligible to
participate, on an equitable basis, in training and extended learning programs supported by the
initiative. Likewise, private school teachers and administrators will also be eligible to receive
materials and information developed through the grants.

Can schools serving Native American students apply for funds?
Yes. Most BIA schools and schools that serve large concentrations of Native American
students will qualify as eligible applicants under this program. Many of these schools are rural
and have high percentages of students from low income families. Proposed legislation will
direct the Secretary to seek to ensure that there is an equitable distribution of grants among
geographic regions of the country and to rural schools serving large concentrations of Native
American students.

[Can territories and outlying areas apply for this program?)


                                      Grant Size and Scope

How many grants are expected to be awarded and what will be their size?
The Zone initiative would invest approximately $200 million in FY 99, and $1.5 billion over five
years. We expect to fund over 50 grants to urban and rural communities. Urban school
districts will receive grants of $10-25 million per year (depending on the size and proposed
activities). Rural communities will receive grants of $250,000 to $3 million (for consortia) per
year.

The Zones will be selected in two rounds, the first in FY 1999, and the second in FY 2001.

Are grants renewable?
Grants will be awarded for 3 years. As part of their original grant award, districts will agree to a
rigorous performance partnership that includes specific benchmarks for student success.
Districts may receive further support in years 4 and 5 only if they have demonstrated success in
reaching the agreed benchmarks.

Will districts have to provide matching funds?
No, districts will not have to provide an explicit match. However, a successful applicant will
have to show how it will use all available resources, including the new funds sought under the
Education Opportunity Zones program, in order to carry out its plan to raise student achievement.
Moreover, each applicant must show how it will continue to carry out its strategies using
other resources at the conclusion of Zones funding. Education Opportunity Zone funding will


                                                 3

                            Application Process and Grant Activities

What will districts have to include in their applications for funds? Must they indicate
which schools they will target for improvement?
Districts will have to demonstrate in their applications that they are using their existing funds
effectively and have already begun to raise student achievement, or, at a minimum, that they have
begun to put into place credible and effective improvement policies. They will also need to
explain how they will address key aspects of effective local reform such as: holding schools
accountable for helping students reach high academic standards, including rewarding schools that
succeed and intervening in schools that fail to make progress; holding teachers and principals
accountable for quality, including rewarding outstanding teachers, providing help to those who
need it, and fairly and quickly removing ineffective teachers; ensuring students don't fall behind,
by providing a rich curriculum, good teaching and extended learning opportunities; ending social
promotions and requiring students to meet academic standards at key transition points in their
academic careers; and providing students and parents with expanded choice within public
education.

Applicants must also demonstrate the support of all key stakeholders -- including parents and
teachers. They must describe how they will use all available resources -- federal, state, local,
and private -- to carry out their reform strategies and how they intend to maintain the reform
effort once federal funds expire. Furthermore, successful applicants will need to describe how
they will intervene in schools and how they will measure progress, including defining rigorous
benchmarks for success.

How will Zones be selected?
Districts or consortia will be selected under a competitive, peer-review process. Reviewers will
be looking for districts which best address the purposes of the program and which demonstrate
the greatest likelihood of modeling successful approaches for raising achievement in high
poverty urban and rural areas.

What kinds of activities can the grant funds support?
School districts will use Education Opportunity Zone funds for key activities such as: providing
extra help to students who need it to meet challenging standards, through after-school, Saturday,
and/or summer school programs; providing bonuses to schools that make significant gins in
student achievement; turning around failing schools by implementing proven reform models, or
closing them down and reconstituting them or reopening them as charter schools; building
stronger partnerships between schools and parents, businesses, and communities; implementing
sound management practices and accountability systems; providing intensive professional
development to teachers and principals; helping outstanding teachers earn master teacher
certification from the National Board for Professional Teacher Standards and giving them
bonuses when they do; and implementing programs to identify low performing teachers, assist


                                                4


     them to improve, and remove them if they fail to do so.

     What flexibility will districts have in the use of other resources?
     All public schools within an Education Opportunity Zone -- regardless of poverty level -- will
     become eligible for schoolwide flexibility in the use of federal education funds. In other words,
     under the proposal, the 50% poverty threshold ordinarily required for a school to become a
     schoolwide project would not apply to Education Opportunity Zone schools. However,
     requirements pertaining to school accountability, as well as special education, health, safety, and
     civil rights, will continue to be met.

     What technical assistance will be available for Zones?
     The Department of Education will provide expert technical assistance to the Education
     Opportunity Zones through its technical assistance providers and by convening grantees to share
     information and ideas. It will also utilize technology to help districts consult with each other
     and disseminate lessons learned to urban and rural communities across the U.S.

     How will grantees be held accountable for results?
     During the negotiation of each grant award, each Zone will agree to a rigorous performance
     partnership with the Secretary of Education. The performance partnership must include specific,
     ambitious, disaggregated benchmarks in student achievement, dropout rates, and other indicators
     of success. Districts will receive additional financial support in years 4 and 5 only if they have
     demonstrated success in reaching their agreed upon benchmarks.

     Mr. Clay'S legislation provides forthe President to direct other agencies -- beyond
     Education -- to assist local schools with problems like school construction. Does the
     President's proposal include a similar feature?
     The White House and the Department of Education are beginning to consult with other federal
     agencies to determine what kinds of assistance could be offered and what sort of arrangements
     would be most appropriate.

                                      Connections to other initiatives

     How do these new Zones differ from Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities?
     The Education Opportunity Zones initiative and the EZIEC initiative support one another, but are
     distinct. Education Opportunity Zones will consist of entire school districts or consortia of
     school districts. Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities are specific neighborhoods
     or regions that mayor may not be contiguous with school districts. While both are in the spirit
     of bringing the community together behind focused efforts to address local challenges, Education
     Opportunity Zones are especially designed to address the educational needs of their communities
     and school districts, whereas the EZIEC initiative is aimed at broader community revitalization
     strategies, which can include education but also extend to economic development, community
     development, and job training. Communities with a strong EZIECeffort with a significant focus
     on education will be well-positioned to rally the community together behind the kinds of


                                                      5




     effective school reforms that will be supported by Education Opportunity Zones,

     Do Zone districts have to participate in the national tests?
     No. We are pleased that 15 major city school districts have already made a commitment to take
     part in the national tests of 4th grade reading and 8th grade math, but participation in these tests
     is voluntary. However, successful Education Opportunity Zone applicants must show that they
     have firmly integrated challenging standards and tests (which could include state, local, or
     national assessments) into their strategies for raising student achievement.

     How do Zones relate to the Comprehensive School Reform Program? Do Zones have to
     implement comprehensive school reform programs in their schools?
     These two programs are distinct, but complementary, and both are geared to help students reach
     high academic standards.

     The Education Opportunity Zones initiative distributes comparatively large grants from the
     Department of Education to a fairly limited number of competitively selected, high-poverty
     districts, The purpose of this initiative is to demonstrate that a serious approach to high
     standards, entailing accountability for students, teachers, and schools, can help raise achievement
     across an entire district, or at least within a sizable portion of a district.

      The Comprehensive School Reform program established during the last session of Congress
       provides formula funds to states which then distribute the funds competitively to a significant
       number of districts on behalf of individual schools. The purpose of the Comprehensive School
       Reform program is to get individual schools to successfully adopt tested reform models, or
     . develop new, effective models based on research. CSR funds can help school in Education
       Opportunity Zones implement proven models of reform, and can help provide additional
       resources for Zones to use for turning around failing schools. The Education Department will
       encourage states to make sure these important resources are available to school districts eligible
       to be selected as EOZ's.

     Will Education Opportunity Zones receive a preference for other initiatives, such as school
     construction funding?
     At this time, there are no plans to provide additional incentives for participation beyond in the
     Education Opportunity Zones initiative beyond the added funding and flexibility that all Zones
     will receive. However, other new initiatives will include features targeting assistance on the
     kinds of high poverty communities that the Zones are designed to assist.



                                                Process Issues

     What kind of support do you expect to receive in Congress?
     Improving public schools in our most disadvantaged communities should be a bipartisan national


                                                       6




     pnonty. Lawmakers in both parties are keen on finding tough, effective ways to address low
     achievement in some of our largest cities, and we expect this proposal to gain strong bipartisan
     support. We have been working with Congressman Bill Clay ofSt. Louis, Ranking Democrat
     on the House Education and the Workforce Committee, who has submitted urban education
     renewal legislation which has helped to shape our own proposal.

     How will the Administration solicit input from outside groups?
     Last winter and spring the Department hosted five meetings with experts in urban education to
     discuss urban needs and effective strategies for improving urban education. Many of these
     groups have participated in meetings throughout the year to offer advice on addressing urban
     education issues. Thus, the Administration's proposal already reflects more than a year of input
     from key groups committed to strengthening urban schools. Going forward, there will be many
     other opportunities for additional input as the legislation and grant competition are designed.

     When will a bill go to Congress?
     Work is underway at the Department to prepare legislative specifications, but we plan to do
     additional consultations with Congress and stakeholders in the education community before
     transmitting our proposal to the Hill.

     Do you anticipate that all districts cited as examples in your materials will be selected for
     the program?
     No. Each district cited helps illustrate one or more of the kinds of policies and activities to be
     supported under the Zones initiative, but no single district -- urban or rural -- best addresses each
     of the purposes of the program or will automatically be selected.




                                                       7




                         URBAN AND RURAL EDUCATION
             OPPORTUNITY ZONES -- EXAMPLES OF ACTIVITIES THAT COULD
                      BE SUPPORTED UNDER THE PROPOSAL
                         REVISED DRAFT -- January 25, 1998

     Student Assistance and Accountability:

          In Chicago, many students participate in the district's Lighthouse after-school
           program, which features intense reading/math instruction, social, and other enrichment
           activities, and a meal. Students in the district who perform below minimum standards
           at key transition grades (3, 6, 8 and 9) are required to participate in a seven-week
           "SummerBridge" program and pass a test before moving on to the next grade.
           Over 45,000 students were served in the SummerBridge program in 1997, and over
           144,000 students participated in some form of summer activity.

          The Long Beach school district required 1,600 third graders who had not attained
           reading proficiency by the end of the year to attend five-week tutorial sessions.

          In Cincinnati, student promotion is now based on specific standards that define what
           students must know and be able to do. The standards are designed to prepare students to
           pass the state's ninth-grade proficiency test.

          In the Halifax County, North Carolina School District, high school honor students are
           paid by the district to tutor younger students in reading one-and-a-half hours per day and
           the district hires retired teachers to work with struggling students.

           A before- and after-school tutoring program offered by the Fentress County school
            system in Jamestown, Tennessee provides approximately 300 students with long- or
            short-term assistance to address their instructional needs. The program is offered in all
            grades; mathematics and language arts are priorities for high school students.

           After determining that half of its middle grade students were reading below grade level,
            staff in the Wilkes County schools in Washington, Georgi,a made intensive reading
            instruction a priority. The district has worked to upgrade professional development in
            reading instruction and reduce class size, helping teachers work with individual students.

           In the Rogers and Holland school districts in Texas, students and teachers identify a
            project that utilizes technology as a primary research tool. Teachers create teams of 2 to
            4 students, a mentor teacher-- and an expert who is linked via technology. The approach
            connects students to information sources beyond the rural communities and gets them
            actively engaged in learning.

     Staff Effectiveness and Accountability:

           Charlotte-Mecklenburg's Benchmark Goals program gives cash awards of$750 to
    improvements from previous performance. The goals are structured so that schools have
    an incentive to raise the achievement of their lowest performing students. The program
    also focuses on goals for African American students, who historically have been
    under-achievers in the Charlotte school system, thus ensuring that schools work to close
    the achievement gap between African American and white students.

   In Cincinnati, school district. administrators' pay raises are now linked to job
    performance, with automatic cost-of-Iiving adjustments and salary rates being
    replaced by new criteria, including performance on several measures such as
    student test scores and graduation rates. The district is also preparing a system for
    providing financial rewards to schools based on student achievement, to take effect
    in 1998-99.

   In St. Paul, the school district is collaborating with the teachers' union and the University
    of Minnesota on Project 20/20 to support teachers through the National Board for
    Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) certification process. The district pays the
    application fees and the university and other partners develop and conduct professional
    support programs for the candidates.

   School districts like Los Angeles, where teachers will get a raise of 15%, are providing
    significant salary increases to reward National Board Certified Master Teachers.

   Peer review and assistance programs help beginning teachers learn to teach and
    help veterans who are having difficulty improve their teaching or leave the
    classroom without union grievances or delays. In New York City, for example,
    low-performing teachers can be assigned to an intervention program where they
    gain assistance from colleagues and administrators, and if unable to improve, are
    counseled out of the profession or removed. In Cincinnati and Toledo, which also
    have such programs, while most teachers improve their performance, roughly
    one-third of the teachers referred to intervention have left teaching by the end of
    the year, through resignation, retirement or dismissal. Columbus and Seattle also
    have aggressive peer review programs.

   In Rochester, expert, experienced teachers can be selected through a rigorous
    evaluation process as "lead teachers" and given significant salary stipends to
    become involved with peer counseling, or to take on other reform-related priorities
    such as consulting with new teachers, accepting positions in "intervention" schools,
    and developing curricula.

   New York City's Community District 2 places an unusually strong emphasis on
    providing ongoing opportunities for teachers to build skills and learn from one
    another. For example, the district enables visiting teachers to observe and practice

                                              2
      taught by another experienced teacher. District 2 registered the second highest
      standardized test scores in math and reading in the city.

     Students in the Penasco Independent Schools in New Mexico benefit from a districtwide
      plan for student success that sets standards for all district staff. The plan specifies what
      administrators, teachers, and support staff must do to reach the district's targeted goals in
      a number of areas, including academic performance, attendance, and parent involvement.
       The plan also includes benchmarks to help staff assess their progress toward the goals.
      Student performance on the New Mexico High School Competency Exam and on the
      portfolio writing assessment have increased over the last three years.

School Improvement and Accountability:

     In 1994, the San Fransisco Unified School District reconstituted Visitacion Valley Middle
      School because of its low performance on a number of measures. The school district
      hired a new principal, who then hand-picked a new staff that redesigned the school's
      structure and program, including a new commitment to a safe atmosphere and to
      fostering children's educational development. The school is now a "graduate" of the
      reconstitution process, having shown gains in student achievement since reconstitution.

     The Charlotte-Mecklenburg school system distributes to parents easy-to-read
      student learning goals at the beginning of the school year. The district then follows
      up with school report cards on student attendance and performance that are
      distributed to parents and every household in the district, and are published in the
      newspaper, in part to help inform parents' decisions about the district's magnet schools.

     In Chicago, schools are placed on probation due to continuously low student
      achievement. These schools will be targeted for aggressive intervention strategies
      by the district, such as providing intensive help and training from expert teams of
      educators, or, where necessary, replacing ineffective principals and teachers. In
      the event of persistent failure, the district may shut down and reorganize the
      schools. Seven high schools were reconstituted between the 1996-97 and 1997-98
      school years.

      Chicago also recognizes a number of exemplary schools, providing financial
      rewards of $5,000 and $10,000 to the winners to become professional development
      centers for other schools. Seventeen schools were awarded exemplary status in the
      first year.

     New York City also has a union-district negotiated process for "redesigning"
      schools identified by the state as failing. Such schools can replace approximately
      half the incumbent teaching faculty. For example, at PS 154 in Harlem, test scores

                                                3

     McCreary County, Kentucky has taken advantage of the fact that one Of its schools was
      designated as in need of assistance from one of Kentucky'S Distinguished Educators.
      The Distinguished Educator introduced the school to a variety of effective instructional
      strategies, which the county then disseminated to other schools in the district. Teachers
      have been working to align the county's curriculum with the state's standards. Schools
      develop their own improvement plans based on student achievement data, and use the
      plans to determine teachers' professional development needs. McCreary County has met
      its 1998 state accountability target a year early.

     The Los Fresnos Independent School District in Texas supplements the state assessment
      with local assessments -- administered three times each year -- to provide teachers with
      data for monitoring students' progress, and to modify tirnelines and instructional
      practices. Students who consistently perform below expectations are tutored after school
      by certified teachers, who receive Title I-funded stipends. In 1997, 84 percent of
      students tested passed all portions of the state assessment -- up from 77 percent in 1996.

Public School Choice:

     In Boston, all parents choose their child's public school, and have a wide array of options
      ranging from neighborhood schools, magnet schools, and pilot and public charter schools
      which operate under performance contracts that provide them with greater autonomy and
      accountability for results.

     The Houston Independent School District recently instituted an open choice
      program. Parents may send their children to any of the district's 258 schools
      provided the school is enrolled at 95 percent of capacity or below. The district is
      currently analyzing available space and plans to publish the information in the near
      future; parents will apply to the district transfer office to change schools. In
      addition to this choice program, the district has launched an aggressive effort to support
      in-district charter schools.

     Cambridge, Massachusetts allows every family to choose a public school for their child.
      The school district provides information on every school and has created parent centers to
      help parents learn about and choose a public school for their child. More than 90% of
      parents get their first choice of kindergarten for their child, and most get one of their top
      picks at all grade levels.

      The San Diego school district has helped parents, teachers, and principals create more
      than a dozen public charter schools that stay open only as long as they do a good job.
      These are all schools of choice, publicly accountable and open to students from around
      the school district.

                                               4
    enabling families to choose among local schools, BIA and BIA-supported boarding
    schools. Families are well connected with the schools, for example, school conferences
    draw 100 percent participation from parents.




                                           5
                   STRENGTHENING URBAN AND RURAL SCHOOLS
                         REVISED DRAFT -- January 25, 1998

       I challenge every school district to adopt high standards, to abolish social promotion, to
       move aggressively to help all students make the grade through tutoring, and summer
       schools, and to hold schools accountable for results, giving them the tools and the
       leadership and the parental involvement to do the job.
                                                          -- President Bill Clinton, October 28, 1997

HELPING RAISE ACHIEVEMENT FOR STUDENTS IN HIGH POVERTY
COMMUNITIES. President Clinton's Education Opportunity Zones initiative will strengthen
public schools and help students master the basic and advanced academic skills where the need is
the greatest: in high poverty urban and rural communities where concentrated poverty, low
expectations, too many poorly prepared teachers, and overwhelmed school systems create
significant barriers to high achievement. The Education Department will select approximately
fifty high poverty urban and rural school districts with: (I) a demonstrated commitment to use
high standards and tests of student achievement as tools to identify and provide help to students,
teachers and schools who need it; (2) a strategy to prevent students from falling behind by
ensuring quality teaching, challenging curricula, and extended learning time; (3) programs to end
social promotion and turn around failing schools; and (4) evidence of improved student
achievement. Added investments in these communities will accelerate their progress and
provide successful models of system-wide, standards-based reform for the nation. The
President's initiative will invest $200 million in FY99, and $1.5 billion over 5 years, to raise
achievement and share lessons learned with school districts around the country.

A CLEAR FOCUS ON HIGH STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY FOR RESULTS.
To be selected as Education Opportunity Zones, school districts will have to demonstrate that
they are using their existing funds effectively to raise student achievement and show how they
will address some key aspects of strong local reform efforts: - holding schools accountable for
helping students reach high academic standards, including rewarding schools that succeed and
intervening in schools that fail to make progress; - holding teachers and principals accountable
for quality, including rewarding outstanding teachers, providing help to teachers who need it, and
fairly and quickly removing ineffective teachers; - ensuring students don't fall behind, by
providing a rich curriculum, good teaching and extended learning opportunities; - ending social
promotions and requiring students to meet academic standards at key transition points in their
academic careers; and - providing students and parents with school report cards and expanded
choice within public education.

EXTRA RESOURCES TO IMPROVE TEACHING, LEARNING, AND LEADERSHIP.
School districts will use Education Opportunity Zone funds for key activities to support
standards-based, district-wide reforms such as: - providing rewards to schools that make
significant gains in student achievement; - turning around failing schools by implementing
proven reform models, or closing them down and reconstituting them; - providing extra help to
summer school programs;  building stronger partnerships between schools and parents,
businesses, and communities;  implementing sound management practices and accountability
systems;  providing' intensive professional development to teachers and principals;  helping
outstanding teachers earn master teacher certification from the National Board for Professional
Teacher Standards and giving them bonuses when they do; and  implementing programs to
identify low performing teachers, assist them to improve, and remove them if they fail to do so.

COMPETITIVE GRANTS TO SUPPORT PROMISING MODELS. Districts will be
selected as Education Opportunity Zones under a competitive, peer-review process. A mix of
large and smaller urban areas will be selected to participate, as well as rural school districts and
consortia.     Each urban Education Opportunity Zone will receive a 3-year grant of $10-25
million per year (depending upon size and proposed activities), and each rural Zone will receive
from $250,000 to $3 million (for consortia). Zones will be selected in two rounds, the first in
FY 1999, and the second in FY 2001. Successful applicants will have broad-based partnerships
to support their reforms -- including parents, teachers, local government, business and civic
groups, institutions of higher education and other key stakeholders. Successful applications will
show how the district will use all available resources -- federal, state, and local, as well as any
business or foundation funds -- to carry out its reform strategy and maintain it once these federal
funds are no longer available. Eligible districts often have substantial numbers of disabled and
limited English proficient children, and successful applications will address how these children
will be assisted to meet high standards.

REWARDS' FOR DEMONSTRATED STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT GAINS.                                       Each
Education Opportunity Zone, together with the Secretary of Education, will agree to specific,
ambitious, benchmarks for improved student achievement, lower dropout rates and other
indicators of success, for districtwide performance and specific student subgroups. Districts
may receive further support in years 4 and 5 only if they have demonstrated success in reaching
the agreed-upon benchmarks.

GREATER FLEXIBILITY IN USING OTHER FEDERAL RESOURCES. All schools in
an Education Opportunity Zone school district -- regardless of poverty level -- will become
eligible for school wide flexibility in the use of federal education funds. Requirements pertaining
to school accountability, as well as special education, health, safety, and civil rights, will continue
to be met.

ASSISTANCE TO HELP DISTRICTS FIND AND SHARE WHAT WORKS. The
Department of Education will offer technical assistance, use technology to help districts consult
with each other, and disseminate lessons learned to communities natiowide. Special attention
will be given to helping school disricts design and implement strategies for providing students
who need it with early intervention and extra help to enable them to meet promotion standards.
In addition, a national evaluation of the Education Opportunity Zones will be conducted, with the
results helping to inform the next reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act.




    BOLD ACTION TO HELP CHILDREN IN OUR CITIES AND RURAL AREAS.
    Education Opportunity Zones are part of a broader set of initiatives to help strengthen
    high-poverty urban and rural schools. President Clinton has also proposed new initiatives to
    reduce class size in the primary grades, modernize school buildings, recruit and prepare teachers
    for underserved urban <\l1d rural areas, and dramatically expand the availability and quality of
    child care and after-school learning opportunities. These and other proposals still to be
    announced will have a powerful impact on improving the prospects of children in some of our
    poorest communities.


