RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN;Julie A. Fernandes/OU;OPD/O;EOP [ OPD 1 )

CREATION DATE/TIME:26-JAN-1998 12:19:00.00

SUBJECT:   H1B visas

TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
READ: UNKNOWN

CC: Laura Emmett ( CN;Laura Emmett/OU;WHO/O;EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1
READ: UNKNOWN

TEXT:
Elena,

H1B visas are temporary work visas for specialty workers.  They allow
generally highly skilled immigrants to work in this country for up to six
years. Under current law, the annual number of H1B visas that can be
issued by the INS is capped at 65,000.

Historically, we have not used the full complement of H1B visas.  However,
the cap was reached last August for the first time.  Thus, the issue has
been presented whether the Administration would support raising the cap to
accomodate more temporary foreign high-skilled workers. The
Administration has never taken a position on raising the cap, though we
have often spoken of the need to place a strong emphasis on training
American workers to meet the demands of the high tech industry.

Though the question of the H1B cap has not been squarely addressed, there
have been some recent discussions of reforms to the temporary visa
program. A couple of years ago, there was language in legislation that
would consolidate the H1B and H2B programs (the H2B vias program is for
temporary non-agricultural workers and are generally underutilized;
approximately 30,000 of the 66,000 allotted are used every year).   Such a
consolidation would effect an increase in the number of available visas
for H1B uses. According to the INS, at the time that this language was
put forth, the Administration indicated that it was something that we
could go along with.  Also, the INS has given guidance to its adjudicators
about how to best count the usage of H1B visas for purposes of determining
whether the cap has been reached. Under this newer guidance, renewals of
H1B visas are not counted as "new" visas for cap-counting purposes.
Finally, the Department of Labor has advocated for a reduction in the
length of stay for H1B visa-holders from an maximum of 6 years to a
maximum of 3 years.

On January 12th of this year, Secretary Daley -- at a conference on the
information-technology workforce shortage in the Silicon Valley "-- stated
in his remarks that the Administration was opposed to raising the cap on
temporary visas for high-skilled workers.  In an interview with the San
Jose paper following his speech, he characterized the raising of the cap
as "politically not feasible" and stressed that industry should
concentrate on developing human capital within the U.S.   According to the
article, Silicon Valley business leaders have said that increasing the cap
on visas for skilled high-tech immigrants has become one of their top
legislative priorities this year.

The problem with over-use of H1B visas is related to a larger issue
related to employment-based legal immigration programs. According to many
,.0


sources, it takes the Department of Labor much too long (approximately two
years in many cases) to do a labor certification, which is a prerequisite
for an employment-based non-temporary visa.   Thus, employers use the H1B
as a way around that process.  If Labor's certification process were more
efficient, there would likely be less of a demand for these temporary vis
as. To that end, the CIR recommended that Labor no longer be charged with
the responsbility to do labor certifications and some (including Carnegie
Foundation) have recommended that the task be contracted out.   This
position, however, is very controversial and strongly opposed by folks at
the Department of Labor.

Leg. Affairs has been unable to locate Abraham's draft legislation on
raising the cap.  I am trying to track it down.

 Julie
'"
