 RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

 CREATOR: Julie A. Fernandes ( CN=Julie A. Fernandes/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

 CREATION DATE/TIME:26-JAN-1998 10:41:52.00

 SUBJECT:   OMB mtg. this afternoon reo EEOC reg

 TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
 READ: UNKNOWN

 CC: Laura Emmett ( CN=Laura Emmett/OU=WHO/O=EOP @ EOP [ WHO 1 )
 READ:UNKNOWN

 TEXT:
 Elena,

 As you know, this afternoon at 2pm Sally Katzen is having a meeting (that
 will include Gen Counselor Dpty Secy from various agencies) reo proposed
 EEOC federal sector complaint rule.  Sally wants you to know that this
 will be a decision meeting.

 There are several outstanding issues that Sally wants to resolve this
 afternoon.  Her strategy is to try to reach middle-ground compromises on
 each. The following outlines the current rule, the proposed rule and
 where Sally wants to try to end up.

 1.   What happens after an AJ decision?

 a.      Current
 Agency can adopt, modify or reject AJ decision.  Either the agency or the
 complainant can then appeal within the EEOC (OFO).

 b.      Proposed
 AJ decision is final.   Agency or complainant can appeal within the EEOC
 (OFO) .

 c.       Middle ground?
 Sally will likely advocate for a change in the standard of review for EEOC
 appeals.   currently, there is de novo for facts and law. The EEOC wants
 to change it to clearly erroneous on the facts.   Sally will likely propose
 substantial evidence for the facts.

 2.   Reconsideration

 a.      Current
 Agencies can file a formal motion for reconsideration after an adverse
 decision by the EEOC appeallate group.

 b.      Proposed
 No formal process.  Commission can reconsider when it believes there is a
 miscarriage of justice.

 c.      Middle ground?
 Maintain the formal motion for reconsideration, but place a high standard
 on accepting.  Commission will reconsider if they find the prior .decision
 to have been arbitrary or capricious?

 3.   Pre-complaint attorneys' fees
    "

    a.      Current
    Attorneys fees cannot be awarded for pre-complaint work

    b.      proposed
    Fees would be permitted for pre-complaint work.  EEOC would issue guidance
    to the AJs about what is reasonable and how to calculate.

    c.      Middle ground?
    Not a lot.  Push hard for agency involvement in developing guidance?

    According to OMB, both OPM and Treasury have indicated that they intend to
    seek an OLC opinion on whether EEOC has the authority to take the agency
    out of the process of reviewing AJ decisions.  According to Ellen Vargyas
    (EEOC Gen Counsel),  the EEOC does not think that OLC has the authority to
    pass on regulations that EEOC promulgates.  She has asked us (the WH) to
    try to intervene to stop the agencies from going to OLC.

    The OMB General Counsel takes the position that since OMB has the
    authority to review the regs promulgated by the EEOC, these rules should
    not be considered exempt from OLC legal review.  Under the OMB Executive
    Order, one of the parameters for their review is whether the rule is
    consistent with the applicable statute or law.   Thus, the OMB GC is in
    favor of the OLC review (if the agencies want it) prior to OMB signing
    off.   According to Ellen, the Commissioners may not want to press for
    this rule if doing so might open up the question of OLC review of their
    rules generally.  Also, Ellen has stated that she is concerned that
    referral to OLC will delay the promulgation of the rule.

    I would not recommend that we intervene to stop the agencies from going to
    OLC.  Ellen's strongest argument for not doing so is rooted in her
    assertion that an OLC opinion is irrelevant to their authority.  However,
    OMB seems clear on their authority (or that of the agencies) to seek OLC
    advise on the legality of the rule.  Also, if Ellen is right on the
    substance (that EEOC has the authority to issue this rule) an opinion from
    OLC confirming that would be helpful (considering the agency opposition) .
    However, if EEOC is without the legal authority, it would not be good for
    us to go forward.

    If we intend on backing the EEOC on their desire to avoid an OLC referral,
    OMB would like to know before the zpm meeting.  Thanks.

    Julie
.,   o·




