RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (ALL-IN-1 MAIL)

CREATOR: Ursula Sanville ( SANVILLE_U ) (OPD)

CREATION DATE/TIME:24-JAN-1997 17:59:31.64

SUBJECT: Response to NGA resolutions

TO: Elena Kagan                               KAGAN E ) Autoforward to: Remote Addresse
READ:NOT READ

CC: Patsy Fleming                             FLEMING P   (OPD)
READ:26-JAN-1997 13:03:4'6.82

TEXT:
Patsy Fleming asked me to send you the following regarding the NGA resolutions.

38.1 -- Concur.
38.2 -- Bottom of p. 43 alludes to but does not explicitly discuss concerns
about mandatory testing. Administration's position has been that routine
voluntary testing is preferred.
38.2.1 - Concur.  I checked with ONDCP regarding treatment levels -- the FY 98
budget requests an increase for treatment.  In FY 97 CDC funding for outreach to
substance abusers was increased -- the FY98 budget also proposes an increase in
outreach.
38.2.2    The language refers to the Coburn Amendment. The Administration did
n
o
ot take a position on the amendment but rather supports the PHS guidelines that
call for routine and voluntary testing for women as the best way to reduce
perinatal transmission. The issue raised (paragraph 1, p. 45) about mandatory
testing possibly discouraging women from seeking health care is legitimate. ,The
concern about low incidence states being able to meet the 50% percent required
reduction is also valid (paragraph 3, p. 45).
38.3 -- Concur.  The expressed support for research and public-private
partnerships in this section is in concert with the themes of the National AIDS
Strategy.
38.4 -- Concur with concerns regarding cost of care.
The Administration has made significant efforts to address the health care needs
of persons living with HIV/AIDS. Overall funding for the Ryan White CARE Act
(RWCA) has increased by 158% since 1993. In the proposed FY98 budget, the RWCA
titles are slated to receive a $40 million increase.
In the last year, in close coordination with State AIDS Directors, the
Administration increased ADAP funding threefold - from $52 million in FY 96 to
$167 million in FY 97. Also in the past year, the Administration submitted two
budget amendments to increase specific funding for ADAP (one for $52 million and
one for $65 million).  In the FY98 budget, Title II (which includes ADAP) is
slated to receive a $15 million increase -- States will have the option to use
this money on ADAP.
Also, it is now standard operating procedure that all Medicaid managed care
waiver applications are examined for their impact on people living with HIV if
people with disabilities are included in the waiver.
38.5 -- Concur with NGA interest in working together in implementing new
provisions of the RWCA. Administration has strongly supported RWCA and secured
significant increases for all Titles, including ADAP.   (See above.)
To ensure the most effective use of ADAP resources several efforts are underway:
        - HRSA is working with states to ensure appropriate use of ADAP funds;
        - PHS is working on developing treatment guidelines on the most
          effective use of these therapies; and
        - Through the Forum for Collaborative HIV Research (an initiative


          catalyzed through the Vice President's Office) government, industry,
          patients, and third-party payors are designing studies to assess the
          clinical effectiveness of these therapies.

If you need anything else let me know.
Jane Sanville


