  RECORD TYPE: PRESIDENTIAL   (NOTES MAIL)

  CREATOR: Michael Cohen ( CN=Michael Cohen/OU=OPD/O=EOP [ OPD 1 )

  CREATION DATE/TIME:28-JAN-1998 16:03:05.00

  SUBJECT:   Goodling vote

  TO: Elena Kagan ( CN=Elena Kagan/OU=OPD/O=EOP   @   EOP [ .OPD 1 )
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TO: Bruce N. Reed ( CN=Bruce N. Reed/OU=OPD/O=EOP @ EOP [ OPD 1
  READ: UNKNOWN

  TEXT:
  We lost the testing vote at mark-up, 23-16. The only Oem. who voted with
  Goodling was Tim Romer (Bruce--you still have your work cut out for you.)
  Major Owens, Patsy Mink and Ron Kind were not at the vote-- Owens
  certainly and Mink most likely would have joined Goodling; Kind would
  have been with us.  All of the other Oems, including members of both
  caucuses, voted against Goodling. A number of the caucus members said
  they were voting against his bill because it didn't address any of their
  concerns.

  The Republican line was that the Administration is still running ahead
  with the test. They supported that judgment with something they found on
  ED's website (which probably haadn't been updated for a while) describing
  the test development schedule, and based on the President's comments last
  night -- which apparantly had the effect on him we predicted. Not that a
  different way of talking about the tests would have altered the vote one
  bit.

  There was hardly any press there--two ed. trade journals and the York PA
  paper.  I don't think we want to do anything to give this more notice than
  it will get on its own, so we are not planning to release either a WH or
  ED statement. David Frank and Julie Green in their press office will
  respond to inquiries based on language Bruce and I discussed earlier
  today, incorporated in the draft statement below (which will not be
  distributed at all)

  Draft Statement

          TodayD,s action by Chairman Goodling and the Republican majority
  represents a violation of the agreement on voluntary national standards
  and tests reached between the Administration and Congress just a few
  months ago.  It is a partisan diversion from the urgent business of
  strengthening our public schools. While the President has asked for
  politics to stop at the schoolhouse door, Committee Republicans have
  responded by keeping the door open to politics.

           The FY1998 Approprations bill contained a bipartisan agreement --
  to which Mr. Goodling was a full participant -- to place continuing
  development of national tests in the hands of the independent, bipartisan
  National Assessment Governing Board, and to delay further Congressional
  consideration of national standards and tests until later this Spring when
  the National Academy of Science completes several Congressionally mandated
  studies.    Under NAGBSD,s leadership, the development of voluntary
  national tests is moving forward as provided for in the agreement, and we
  are on track to have the first-ever national tests in 4th grade reading
  and 8th grade math.
.



              Last night President Clinton laid out an ambitious agenda to make our
      public elementary and secondary schools the world's best by raising
      standards, raising expectations, and raising accountability.   He urged
      the Congress and the American people to join him in a bipartisan effort to
      give our students smaller classes, well-prepared and competent teachers,
      modernized school facilities, and an end to social promotions.  These
      steps will strengthen our public schools and prepare our people for the
      21st Century.

               It is very unfortuante that Mr. Goodling and the Republicans on
      this committee have chosen to respond to this challenge with a partisan
      effort to derail the development of national tests, and deny parents and
      teachers the opportunity to know if their children are mastering the
      basics. Our students deserve better than this ..

'.
